CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CEDAR FALLS, IOWA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CEDAR FALLS, IOWA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
James P. Brown 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mark Miller, Councilmember Ward #1 
Susan deBuhr, Councilmember Ward #2 
Daryl F. Kruse, Councilmember Ward #3 
Tom Blanford, Councilmember Ward #4 
Frank Darrah, Councilmember Ward #5 
Rob Green, Councilmember-at-Large 
David A. Wieland, Councilmember-at-Large 
City Council 
____________ 
Ronald S. Gaines 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Kevin Rogers 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jacqueline Danielsen 
City Clerk 
CITY GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2018 
James P. Brown Mayor Mark Miller Councilmember Ward #1 Susan deBuhr Councilmember Ward #2 John Runchey Councilmember Ward #3 Tom Blanford Councilmember Ward #4 Frank Darrah Councilmember Ward #5 Rob Green Councilmember-at-Large David A. Wieland Councilmember-at-Large Kevin Rogers City Attorney Ronald S. Gaines City Administrator Jennifer Rodenbeck Director of Finance & Business Operations Stephanie Houk Sheetz Director of Community Development Mark Ripplinger Director of Municipal Operations and Programs Jeffrey D. Olson Director of Public Safety Services/Police Chief John Bostwick Assistant Director of Public Safety Services/Fire Chief Craig Berte Assistant Police Chief Jay Robinson Library Director, resigned 9-18-18 Amy Stuenkel Co-Acting Library Director, appointed 9-20-18 Kelly Stern Co-Acting Library Director, appointed 9-20-18 Jacqueline Danielsen City Clerk Lisa L. Roeding Controller/City Treasurer Steve Bernard General Manager of Utilities  
    Art and Culture Board: Kate Brennan Hall and Matthew Wilson, Terms Expire-July 1, 2019; James Kearns, Term Expires-July 1, 2020; Jayme Renfro and Kendra Wohlert, Terms Expire-July 1, 2021; Jeremy Rosel and Mary-Sue Bartlett, Terms Expire-July 1, 2022. 
    Board of Adjustment: Mark Miller and Gerald Sorensen, Terms Expire-March 31, 2019; Sue Beach and Amy Lang, Terms Expire-March 31, 2020; Barbara Weeg, Term Expires-March 31, 2021; Jennifer Rasmussen, Term Expires-March 31, 2022; Michael Mangin, Term Expires-March 31, 2023. 
    Board of Appeals: City Council Representative Susan deBuhr, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Katy Susong, Kevin Fittro, Jason Huff and Debra Waterman-Indefinite Terms. 
    Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals: City Council Representative Susan deBuhr, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Jerry Bjerke, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Tom Stickfort, Term Expires-December 31, 2020; Ken Kagy, Term Expires-December 31, 2021; Rick Dumler, Term Expires-December 31, 2022. 
    Board of Mechanical Examiners and Appeals: City Council Representative Susan deBuhr, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Julie Gardner, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; David Krejchi, Term Expires-December 31, 2020; Jeff Thompson, Term Expires-December 31, 2021; Steve Broell, Term Expires-December 31, 2022. 
    Board of Plumbing Examiners and Appeals: City Council Representative Susan deBuhr, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Jammie Ackerson, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; John Gadow, Term Expires-December 31, 2020; Glenn Behrends, Term Expires-December 31, 2021; Todd Gebhardt, Term Expires-December 31, 2022. 
    Board of Rental Housing Appeals: MaryJane McCollum and Bruce Wingert, Terms Expire-May 1, 2019; Chris Martin and Cindy Wiles, Terms Expire-May 1, 2020; Matthew Johnson, Term Expires-May 1, 2021; Dan Berregaard and Kim Kranz, Terms Expire-May 1, 2022. 
    Civil Service Commission: Robert Frederick, Term Expires-April 6, 2020; John Clopton, Term Expires-April 5, 2021; Sue Armbrecht, Term Expires-April 4, 2022. 
    Community Center and Senior Services Board: Kristena Aasberg Potratz, Mary Baxter, and Michael Reifsteck, Terms Expire-June 30, 2019; Maureen Burum and Larry Petersen, Terms Expire-June 30, 2020; Phyllis Carter and Betty Danielson, Terms Expire-June 30, 2021. 
    Health Trust Fund Board of Trustees: Rosemary Beach and Floyd Winter, Terms Expire-December 31, 2020; Shirley Merner and Beverly Michael, Terms Expire-December 31, 2022; Roger White, Term Expires-December 31, 2024. 
    Historic Preservation Commission: Jeanine Johnson, Biff Rocha and Jeff Schlobohm, Terms Expire-March 31, 2019; Donna Bash and Julie Etheredge, Terms Expire-March 31, 2020. 
    Housing Commission: Thomas Frazier, Term Expires-December 31, 2019; Karen Morlan, Patrick Phalen and Gary Winterhof, Terms Expire-December 31, 2019, Helen Pearce, Lindsay Pieters and Don Timmerman, Terms Expire-December 31, 2020. 
    Human Rights Commission: Todd Blanford, Amy Bonebrake, Amy Bonebrake and Teri Lynn Jorgensen, Terms Expire-July 1, 2019; Willie B. Barney Jr., Spencer Luvert and Nicole Winther, Terms Expire-July 1, 2020; Susan Langan, Andrew Morse, Kei-Che Randle, and Jeffrey Zaputil, Terms Expire-July 1, 2021. 
    Library Board of Trustees: Katelyn Browne, Molly Cormaney and Cynthia Snell, Terms Expire-June 30, 2020; Gretchen Behm, James Kenyon and Evan Renfro, Terms Expire-June 30, 2022; Seth Chadwick, Michael Sulentic and Glynis Worthington, Terms Expire-June 30, 2024. 
    Metropolitan Bus Board: Michael Grillo, Term Expires-June 30, 2019; Stefanie Hartel, Term Expires-June 30, 2020; David Sturch, Term Expires-June 30, 2021; Andrew Stensland-UNI Student Body President, Standing Term. 
    Parks and Recreation Commission: Carol Lilly, Marvin Mattfeld and Leslie Nixon, Terms Expire-June 30, 2019; Erik Blanchard and Alan Stalnaker, Terms Expire-June 30, 2020; Brian Bowman and Clare Struck, Terms Expire-June 30, 2021. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission: Deb Giarusso and David Hartley, Terms Expire-November 1, 2020; Hillery Oberle, LeaAnn Saul and Brian Wingert, Terms Expire-November 1, 2021; Rochelle Adkins, Mardy Holst and Brad Leeper, Terms Expire-November 1, 2022; Kyle Larson, Term Expires-November 1, 2023. 
    Utility Board of Trustees: Pam Taylor, Term Expires-August 31, 2019; Craig Johnson, Term Expires-August 31, 2021; Richard McAlister, Term Expires-August 31, 2022; Jeff Engel, Term Expires-August 31, 2023; MaraBeth Soneson, Term Expires-August 31, 2024. 
    Visitors and Tourism Board: Amy Dutton and Doug Johnson, Terms Expire-July 1, 2019; Brent Johnson, James Newcomb and Andy Woodrick, Terms Expire-July 1, 2020; Mary Carlson, Annie Gougler and Leslie Prideaux, Terms Expire-July 1, 2021. 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2017 Code adopted on March 6, 2017, and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2017 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 1:1 CODE APPENDIX A:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX i:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Kevin Rogers, City Attorney, and Ms. Jacqueline Danielsen, City Clerk, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 2019. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2937 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CEDAR FALLS, IOWA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CEDAR FALLS, IOWA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Falls, Iowa," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 18, 2018, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $65.00, but not in excess of $625.00, or imprisonment for not in excess of 30 days, or both such a fine and such imprisonment. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 18, 2018 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
INTRODUCED: March 18, 2019 
PASSED 1 ST CONSIDERATION: March 18, 2019 
SUSPENDED 2 ND CONSIDERATION: April 1, 2019 
PASSED 3 RD CONSIDERATION: April 1, 2019 
ADOPTED: April 1, 2019 
/s/ James P. Brown 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Jacqueline Danielsen, MMC 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Revised Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1 2928  8-20-2018 Included 2929  9- 4-2018 Included 2931 10- 1-2018 Included 2937  4- 1-2019 Included Supp. No. 2 2939  5- 6-2019 Included 2940  6- 3-2019 Included 2941  6- 3-2019 Included 2942  6- 3-2019 Included 2943  6- 3-2019 Included  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections constitute and are designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Falls, Iowa," and may be so cited. 
(Code 2017, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions generally. 
    In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or repugnant to the context of the provisions: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa, and extends to its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City attorney. The term "city attorney" means the chief legal officer of the city. 
    Clerk. The term "clerk" means the clerk of the city. 
    Code, this Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    Computation of time; holidays. In computing time, the first day shall be excluded and the last included, unless the last day falls on Sunday, in which case the time prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following Monday, provided that, whenever the last day for the commencement of any action or proceedings, the filing of a pleading or motion in a pending action or proceedings or the perfecting or filing of an appeal from the decision of a court, board, commission or official falls on a Saturday, a Sunday, January 1, the third Monday in January, February 12, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4, the first Monday in September, November 11, the fourth Thursday in November, December 25, and the following Monday whenever any of such named legal holidays may fall on a Sunday, and any day appointed or recommended by the governor of the state or the President of the United States as a day of fasting or thanksgiving, the time therefor shall be extended to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday named in this definition. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Black Hawk in the State of Iowa. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them, unless it is otherwise expressed. 
    Land; real estate; real property. The term "land" and the phrases "real estate" and "real property" include lands, tenements, hereditaments and all rights thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal. 
    Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means any unlawful violation of any ordinance of the city, for which, upon conviction thereof, there is prescribed a punishment. 
    Month; year. The term "month" means a calendar month, and the term "year" means a calendar year. 
    Number. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath; affirmation; swear. The term "oath" includes affirmations in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases the term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
    Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards and commissions by title only (i.e., "council," "clerk," "the mayor," etc.), the reference shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the city. 
    Person. Unless otherwise provided by law, the term "person" means an individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt and things in action. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    State. The term "the state" means the State of Iowa. 
    Street. The term "street" means any public street, highway, boulevard, avenue, alley, parkway, public place, plaza, mall or publicly owned right-of-way or easement within the limits of the city. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
    Words and phrases. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language; technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed according to such meaning. 
    Written; in writing; signature. The terms "written" and "in writing" may include any mode of representing words or letters in general use. A signature, when required by law, must be made by the writing or markings of the person whose signature is required. If a person is unable due to a physical handicap to make a written signature or mark, that person may substitute the following in lieu of a signature required by law: 
(1)  The handicapped person's name written by another upon the request and in the presence of the handicapped person; or 
(2)  A rubber stamp reproduction of the handicapped person's name or facsimile of the actual signature when adopted by the handicapped person for all purposes requiring a signature and then only when affixed by that person or another upon request and in the handicapped person's presence. 
(Code 2017, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of catchlines, titles and notes. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type, and the titles, headings, chapter heads, section and subsection heads or titles, editor's notes, cross references and state law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this Code, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section. 
(Code 2017, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 2017, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance, after it becomes effective, does not revive an ordinance previously repealed, nor affect any rights which have accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred or any proceedings commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2017, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
    It is unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 2017, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Falls, Iowa, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(f)  If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Falls, Iowa, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section shall read as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 2017, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; penalty for scheduled violations. 
(a)  General penalty. The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a simple misdemeanor by this Code or by any technical code adopted in this Code by reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by this Code or by any technical code adopted in this Code by reference, unless another penalty is specified under subsection (b) of this section or elsewhere in this Code, is punishable by a fine of not less than $65.00, but not in excess of $625.00, or imprisonment for not in excess of 30 days, or both such a fine and such imprisonment. 
(b)  Scheduled violation. Where a violation of this Code is a scheduled violation under state law, the penalty for such violation shall be the scheduled fine for such violation under state law. 
(Code 2017, § 1-8; Ord. No. 2361, § 1, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 2693, § 1, 8-10-2009) 
State Law reference- Maximum penalty prescribed, Iowa Code § 364.3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Municipal infractions. 
(a)  Civil penalty. 
(1)  Unless another civil penalty is provided either in subsection (c) of this section or elsewhere in this Code, a municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
a.  First offense: $100.00. 
b.  Second offense: $500.00. 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
(2)  Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(3)  Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, abatement or injunctive relief. 
(b)  Civil citations. Civil citations are subject to the following: 
(1)  A city employee or an official authorized by the city to enforce the Code may issue a civil citation to a person who is alleged to have committed a municipal infraction. 
(2)  The citation may be served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  The citation may be served by publication in the manner provided by rule 60 of the Rules of Civil Procedure and subject to the conditions of rule 61 of such rules. 
(4)  Two copies of the citation shall be filed with the clerk of the district court and one copy shall be delivered to the defendant. 
(5)  The citation shall serve as notification of an allegation that a municipal infraction has been committed and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the defendant. 
b.  The name or description of the alleged infraction, attested to by the officer issuing the citation. 
c.  The location and time of the alleged infraction. 
d.  The amount of civil penalty for the violation charged and the court costs, or the alternative relief sought, or both. 
e.  The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid. 
f.  The time and place of court appearance. 
g.  A statement of the penalty for failure to appear in court. 
h.  The penalty for failure to appear in court. 
(c)  Municipal infraction. Any violation of any provision of the following portions of this Code of Ordinances, unless declared or characterized as a misdemeanor, is hereby declared to be a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in the following subsections or elsewhere in this Code, or, if not provided for in the following subsections or elsewhere in this Code, then punishable as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section: 
(1)  Chapter 3, advertising. 
(2)  Chapter 4, airport zoning. 
(3)  Chapter 6, animals, except sections 6-2 and 6-3. 
(4)  Chapter 7, buildings and building regulations, including article II, building code; article III, electrical regulations; article IV, gas regulations; article V, plumbing regulations; article VI, moving of buildings; article VII, cross-connection control containment provisions; and article VIII, International Mechanical Code, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
a.  First offense: $500.00. 
b.  Second offense: $750.00. 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
(5)  Chapter 9, fire prevention and protection. 
(6)  Chapter 10, garbage and refuse. 
(7)  Chapter 11, housing. 
(8)  Chapter 13, licenses and business regulations. 
(9)  Chapter 14, mobile homes, mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
(10)  Chapter 15, nuisances, vehicles and noise, except as follows: 
a.  Violations of article I, in general, relating to nuisances, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
1.  First offense: $500.00. 
2.  Second offense: $750.00. 
3.  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
b.  Violations of article II relating to junk vehicles: 
1.  First offense: $150.00. 
2.  Second and subsequent offenses: $300.00. 
c.  Violations of article III, noise: 
1.  First offense: $150.00. 
2.  Second and subsequent offenses: $300.00. 
(11)  Chapter 16, offenses and miscellaneous provisions except as follows: 
a.  Section 16-19, jumping from bridges, and section 16-21, prohibiting wading, water skiing or swimming in city-owned lakes and detention ponds, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
1.  First offense: $100.00. 
2.  Second and subsequent offenses: $200.00. 
b.  Violations of article IV of chapter 16, temporary state of public emergency restrictions, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
1.  First offense: $500.00. 
2.  Second offense: $750.00. 
3.  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
(12)  Chapter 17, parks and recreation. 
(13)  Chapter 19, streets and sidewalks. 
(14)  Chapter 26, zoning, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
a.  For violations of sections 26-220(g)(1) and (h)(1)d, and 26-256, the penalties shall be as follows: first offense, $100.00; and second and subsequent offenses, $500.00; and third and subsequent offenses, $1,000.00. 
b.  For all other violations of chapter 26, zoning, the civil penalties shall be as follows: first offense, $500.00; and second and subsequent offenses, $750.00, and third and subsequent offenses, $1,000.00. 
(Code 2017, § 1-9; Ord. No. 1967, § 1, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 2064, § 3, 8-8-1994; Ord. No. 2109, § 1, 6-26-1995; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 2282, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 2579, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2580, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2616, § 1, 2-26-2007; Ord. No. 2627, § 1, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 2633, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2682, § 1, 3-23-2009; Ord. No. 2685, § 1, 6-22-2009) 
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of Code. 
    The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting the dedication of, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street, alley, public way or public park in the city. 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinances. 
(6)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or special assessments, or authorizing tax fund transfers not inconsistent with this Code. 
(7)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property or any amendment thereto. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
(13)  Any ordinance declaring certain property to be a public nuisance and authorizing procedures for the demolition of such property. 
(14)  Any ordinance adopted by reference by any provision of this Code or any amendments to such ordinances. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing fire lanes on private property. 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(17)  Any ordinance respecting conveyance or acceptance of real property or easements in real property. 
(18)  Any ordinance regulating taxicabs. 
(19)  Any ordinance enacted after March 9, 1992. 
(Code 2017, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing legislation. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal adopted, described. 
    The corporation seal of the city now and hereafter to be used is hereby adopted, established and declared to be the common seal of the city and is described as follows: a disk having around the margin thereof the words "City Seal," and in the center of the face thereof the words "Cedar Falls, Iowa." 
(Code 2017, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Custody and use of city seal. 
    The city clerk shall provide for the custody of the corporate seal of the city, and cause such seal to be affixed to all deeds or other instruments conveying, encumbering or affecting real estate, releases, contracts, licenses, permits and warrants issued by the city, and such other instruments to which the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city may require the seal to be affixed, including all transcripts, orders or certificates which it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Form of government; term of mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a charter embodying the form of government existing on August 14, 1972. 
(b)  Title. This section may be cited as the Charter of the city. 
(c)  Form of government designated. The form of government of the city is the mayor-council form of government. 
(d)  Powers and duties of city officers. The council and mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city. 
(e)  Number and term of councilmembers. The council consists of two councilmembers elected at-large and one councilmember from each of five wards as established by ordinance, elected for terms of four years. 
(f)  Term of mayor. The mayor is elected for a term of two years. 
(Code 2017, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Proof of publication. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance, resolution, notice, report or other matter pertaining to city affairs is required by law or by ordinance or resolution to be published in newspapers, a printed copy thereof with proof of publication in the form required by law in the case of original notices shall be filed with the officer or person causing publication thereof to be made, and a like copy with like proof of publication shall be filed with the city clerk and be preserved by him as a part of the records of his office. No bill or account for such publication shall be allowed or paid until such copy and proof of publication have been filed as provided in this section, and the fact that they have been so filed shall be noted on such bill or account before it is allowed or paid. 
(b)  The city clerk shall permanently retain a copy of all proofs of publication referred to in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-5. - General purchasing. 
(a)  All supplies, goods and merchandise used by the city shall be purchased as provided in this section, and in no other manner. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary for the city to purchase supplies for any of the departments of the city, unless ordered by the council at a regular or special session, a written order must be first had and obtained from the director in whose department the supplies are to be used, or the director's designee, or the city administrator, before such supplies, goods and merchandise can be purchased, and all bills of such supplies when filed with the department of finance and business operations for payment shall have attached thereto the written order so given. 
(c)  Any officer or employee of the city or any other person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8, and the city shall not be liable for any goods purchased other than on such a written order. 
(Code 2017, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-6. - Filing of bills and claims against city. 
(a)  All bills against the city must first be endorsed by a majority of the committee in whose department or under whose supervision the service, labor, materials or obligations were furnished or contracted, and must be filed with the city clerk by 1:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the meeting of the council at which the claim is presented for allowance. 
(b)  No bill or claim shall be considered at a special meeting of the council except by a three-fourths vote of all members elected to the council. 
(c)  All bills and claims presented for allowance must be accompanied by a verified statement by the person claiming allowance thereof, stating that the accompanying bill is correct and a reasonable charge for the services, labor and materials furnished or the obligations contracted, and not greater than he would charge an individual in such case. The city clerk shall administer oaths in such case without charge. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply in cases of bills for fixed salaries or for fixed charges previously determined for work done or materials furnished, but the amount of work done or material furnished where the work is not routine work, or is a matter of estimate, shall be sworn to in the same manner as required in this section in respect to the amount of bills. The certificate of a majority of the administration committee or the officer under whose supervision such service, labor, materials or obligations were furnished or contracted may be accepted by the council in lieu of the verified statement referred to in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-7. - Administration committee to pass on bills and claims against city; exceptions. 
    All bills and claims against the city shall be itemized and shall not be allowed until passed upon by the administration committee, and as provided by ordinance, except the bills of city officers and others employed by the city and receiving compensation fixed by ordinance, contract or resolution. 
(Code 2017, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-8. - Form and execution of contracts. 
(a)  All contracts entered into by the city, except such as may be entered into by ordinance, shall be in writing, executed by the mayor in his official capacity, with the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto, and approved by the council, which approval shall be endorsed on the contract by the city clerk and attested by his seal and signature. 
(b)  The city shall not be bound by or liable upon any contract except those contracts entered into and executed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-9. - Deeds and releases conveying real estate. 
    All deeds and releases for the conveyance of any real estate belonging to the city shall be made in the name of the city, as party of the first part, and shall be executed by the mayor and clerk of the city in their official capacity, and the mayor and clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the city thereto, and such deed or release shall thereupon be acknowledged by the mayor and clerk for and in behalf of the city. The deed so executed and acknowledged shall be valid and effectual to convey all rights and release all claims thereby purporting to be conveyed or released. 
(Code 2017, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-10. - Franchise holders to be subject to city ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  Every individual or private corporation to whom a franchise may be granted by the city must be subject to all reasonable regulations that the council may by ordinance or resolution then or thereafter adopt in respect to the reasonable control and regulation of the plant and business for which the franchise may be granted, and the use of the streets or alleys therefor. No condition shall be contained in such franchise, or if contained shall be binding upon the city, which does or attempts to abridge, limit or interfere with the superior rights of the city in respect to such control and regulation. 
(b)  All franchises granted by the city shall be subject to the regulations of this section, which shall be a contract part of each franchise. 
(c)  The failure or refusal of any such franchise holder to obey and comply with regulations of the council may operate to terminate such franchise at the option of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-11. - Opening of bids for public improvements. 
    The city council shall, by the resolution ordering the advertising of bids for public improvements, establish the day and time that the designated officer shall conduct the meeting or hearing as required in connection with the receiving and opening of such bids and announcing the results. Such officer shall thereupon report the results of the bidding, together with a recommendation, to the council at its next meeting. 
(Code 2017, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-12. - Award of contracts for public improvements. 
    At the city council meeting at which the council receives the report and recommendation as provided in section 2-11, the city council shall, after receiving the report and recommendation, award a contract, reject all bids or defer award to a future time. The council shall also determine, if any, the number of bid securities which shall be returned. 
(Code 2017, § 2-12) 
Sec. 2-13. - Amortization period for public improvements. 
(a)  Ten-year amortization period. The period of amortization for public improvement projects for opening, establishing or grading streets or for the construction of Portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete street improvements, Portland cement concrete sidewalks, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, pedestrian underpasses and overpasses, sewage pumping stations, disposal or treatment plants, drainage conduits, channels and levees, street lighting, parking facilities and appurtenant facilities is hereby established as ten years, to be calculated commencing from the date of adoption by the council of the resolution accepting the completed public improvements. 
(b)  Three-year amortization period. The period of amortization, to be computed in the same manner as established in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby established as three years for the repair of street grading, for street surfacing with oil, gravel, oil and gravel or chloride or for the removal of diseased or dead trees. 
(c)  Amendments. In any instance where the council determines that the useful life of a public improvement should be for a different time period than established in this section, the council may so provide for such period by amendment to this section, prescribing the appropriate amortization period as may be applicable to those specific public improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 2-13) 
Secs. 2-14-2-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-45. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month unless the city council by resolution changes the dates and times of the meetings. All of said meetings shall be held at the council chamber in the city hall at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise changed by resolution of the city council. When a regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday or a day being observed as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day unless the council, by resolution, cancels or changes a regularly scheduled meeting. The council may adjourn a regular meeting to any date it may deem proper, but no business shall be transacted at any such adjourned meeting except unfinished business of the preceding meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or a majority of the members of the council. Notice thereof shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the council, and a record of the services of notice made by the clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 2-41; Ord. No. 2131, § 1, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 2805, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 2-46. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the whole number of members of the council shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. Less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-47. - Salary of members. 
    Each councilmember of the city shall receive an annual salary of $4,098.60 and after January 1, 2000 an annual salary adjustment equal to the latest calendar year annual federal consumer price index rate awarded at the start of each fiscal year. Said salary shall be payable in such manner as the council shall by motion direct. 
(Code 2017, § 2-43; Ord. No. 2085, § 1, 2-13-1995; Ord. No. 2250, § 1, 1-11-1999) 
Secs. 2-48-2-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-68. - Appointment; standing committees. 
(a)  All standing committees of the council shall be appointed by the mayor, and all special committees shall be appointed by the mayor unless specifically directed by the council. All standing committees of the council shall be appointed by the mayor annually at the first regular meeting of the council in January of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and the first person named on each committee shall be the chairperson of such committee. 
(b)  The following shall be the standing committees: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Public works. 
(3)  Community relations and planning. 
(Code 2017, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-69. - Number of members. 
(a)  The standing committees of the council shall consist of seven members each. 
(b)  All special committees of the council shall consist of five members each, unless some other number is specified by the resolution which appoints such special committee. 
(Code 2017, § 2-62; Ord. No. 2605, § 1, 10-23-2006) 
Sec. 2-70. - Distribution of information when matter referred to committee. 
    The city clerk shall forward all the papers to the appropriate committees and officers as soon as possible after the referral to a committee of the council has been made. 
(Code 2017, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-71. - Reports. 
    Standing and special committees of the council to whom references are made, in all cases, shall report in writing the state of facts, with their opinion, which opinion shall be summed up in the form of an order, resolution or recommendation, unless otherwise ordered by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-72. - Discharge of special committees. 
    On the acceptance of a final report from a special committee of the council, the committee shall be considered discharged without a vote, unless otherwise ordered. 
(Code 2017, § 2-65) 
Secs. 2-73-2-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-103. - Order of business. 
    The order of business at council meetings shall be as established by the council from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-104. - Decisions on questions relating to priority of business. 
    A question relating to the priority of business at a council meeting shall be decided by the mayor without debate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-105. - Order required when question is being put. 
    While the mayor is putting a question at a council meeting, no one shall walk across or out of the council room. 
(Code 2017, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-106. - Number of times that member may speak on question. 
    No member shall speak more than twice on one question before the council without leave of the council, nor more than once in any case until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken. 
(Code 2017, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-107. - Gaining the floor. 
    Every councilmember, previous to his speaking at a council meeting, shall address himself to the mayor, and say "Mr. Mayor," and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair. 
(Code 2017, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-108. - Recognition of speaker when two members rise at once. 
    When two or more councilmembers rise at once to speak at a council meeting, the mayor shall name the member who is to speak. 
(Code 2017, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-109. - Calling member to order. 
    A member of the council called to order while speaking at a council meeting shall immediately cease speaking and sit down unless permitted to explain. If there is no appeal, the decision of the chair shall be conclusive, but if the member appeals the decision of the chair the council shall decide the question without debate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-110. - Order required while member speaking. 
    While a councilmember is speaking at a council meeting, no member shall hold any private discourse or pass between the speaker and the chair. 
(Code 2017, § 2-88) 
Sec. 2-111. - Motions to be seconded; statement of motions. 
    No motion shall be put or debated at a council meeting unless seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the mayor before debate, and every motion shall be reduced to writing if required by the mayor or any councilmember. 
(Code 2017, § 2-89) 
Sec. 2-112. - Recording of name of member making motion. 
    In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered on the minutes of the council, the name of the member moving the resolution or motion shall be entered also. 
(Code 2017, § 2-90) 
Sec. 2-113. - Withdrawal of motion. 
    After a motion or resolution is stated by the mayor, it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the council, but may be withdrawn at any time before decision; but if any amendment has been proposed or adopted, it shall not be withdrawn without the consent of the mover of such amendment. 
(Code 2017, § 2-91) 
Sec. 2-114. - Division of question containing distinct propositions. 
    If a question in debate at a council meeting contains several distinct propositions, any member may have the question divided prior to the vote thereon when the sense of it requires such division. 
(Code 2017, § 2-92) 
Sec. 2-115. - Duty to vote; conflict of interest. 
    Each councilmember who is present when a question is stated from the chair of the council shall vote thereon unless he is directly interested in the question, in which case he shall not vote. In case any member refuses to vote when not excused, his vote shall be recorded in the negative. 
(Code 2017, § 2-93) 
Sec. 2-116. - Preferential motions. 
(a)  When a question is under debate at a council meeting, the only motions in order shall be: 
(1)  First, to adjourn. 
(2)  Second, the previous question. 
(3)  Third, to lay on the table. 
(4)  Fourth, to postpone indefinitely. 
(5)  Fifth, to adjourn to a certain day. 
(6)  Sixth, to refer. 
(7)  Seventh, to amend. 
(b)  Such motions shall be given precedence in the order arranged in this section, and the first three shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-94) 
Sec. 2-117. - Motion to adjourn. 
(a)  A motion to adjourn the council shall be in order except: 
(1)  When a member is in possession of the floor. 
(2)  While the ayes and nays are being called. 
(3)  While the members are voting. 
(4)  When adjournment was the last preceding motion. 
(5)  When it is decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
(b)  A motion to adjourn simply cannot be amended, but a motion to adjourn to a given time may be amended, and is open to debate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-95) 
Sec. 2-118. - Motion to put the previous question. 
    When the previous question before the council is moved and put, it shall be in this form: "Shall the main question be now put?" If this is carried, all proposed amendments and all further motions and debates shall be excluded, and the question put without delay. 
(Code 2017, § 2-96) 
Sec. 2-119. - Motion to table. 
    A motion to lay a question before the council on the table simply is not debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any other condition, is subject to amendment and debate. 
(Code 2017, § 2-97) 
Sec. 2-120. - Postponement of motions. 
    When a motion is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken up again during the same meeting. 
(Code 2017, § 2-98) 
Sec. 2-121. - Precedence of motions to refer to committee. 
    A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take precedence over a similar motion for a special committee. 
(Code 2017, § 2-99) 
Sec. 2-122. - Motion to amend. 
(a)  A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but a motion to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained. 
(b)  An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order. 
(Code 2017, § 2-100) 
Sec. 2-123. - Motion to strike and insert. 
    On a motion to strike out and insert, the paragraph to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be struck out and those to be inserted, and finally the paragraph as it would stand if so amended. 
(Code 2017, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-124. - Reconsideration of motion. 
(a)  A motion may be reconsidered at any time during the same meeting at which the motion was made, or at the first meeting held thereafter. A motion for reconsideration, being once made and decided in the negative, shall not be renewed before the next meeting. 
(b)  A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by the members who voted on the prevailing side, or by those who were absent and did not vote upon the motion to be reconsidered. 
(Code 2017, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-125. - Ordinances to be presented in writing. 
    All ordinances shall be presented in writing before being considered by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-126. - Two considerations before final passage; how waived. 
    A proposed ordinance or amendment must be considered and voted on for passage at two council meetings prior to the meeting at which it is to be finally passed, unless this requirement is suspended by a recorded vote of not less than three-fourths of all of the members of the council. If a proposed ordinance, amendment, or resolution fails to receive sufficient votes for passage at any consideration and vote thereon, the proposed ordinance, amendment, or resolution shall be considered defeated. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 1, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 2287, § 1, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 2-127. - Amendments to ordinances. 
    An amendment to an ordinance must specifically repeal the ordinance, or the section, subsection, paragraph, or subpart to be amended, and must set forth the ordinance, section, subsection, paragraph, or subpart as amended. 
(Code 2017, § 2-105; Ord. No. 2050, § 2, 3-14-1994) 
Sec. 2-128. - Requirement of a majority vote. 
    Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. As used in this section, the phrase "all of the members of the council" refers to all of the seats of the council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the councilmember declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest. 
(Code 2017, § 2-107; Ord. No. 2274, § 1, 8-9-1999) 
Sec. 2-129. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
    In all cases not provided for either in this division or in any rules of procedure adopted by the council, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, Tenth Edition, shall govern all points of order arising at city council meetings, but failure to comply with Robert's Rules of Order shall not affect the legality of any action of the council in any manner or to any extent. 
(Code 2017, § 2-108; Ord. No. 2900, § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 2-130. - Suspension or amendment of rules. 
    The rules set out in this division may be temporarily suspended by consent of three-fourths of the councilmembers present, but shall not be repealed, altered or amended unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the councilmembers elected. 
(Code 2017, § 2-109) 
Secs. 2-131-2-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-159. - Removal of appointed officers; nonreappointment of officers. 
(a)  Definition of appointing authority; action of appointing authority. For purposes of this section, the term "appointing authority" means the mayor and the city council. A determination, decision or vote of the appointing authority as described in this section shall mean a determination, decision or vote made upon recommendation of the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Authority to remove appointees. All persons appointed to office in the city, other than the city administrator, may be removed for just cause prior to the end of their term of office by the proper appointing authority. The city administrator may be removed as provided in section 2-215. 
(c)  Procedure. If the appointing authority determines it should consider the removal of or not reappoint a city officer, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  Removal of appointed officers. Within three days after the appointing authority has voted to consider removal of an appointed city officer, the officer shall be notified in writing by a letter personally delivered or mailed by certified mail that the appointing authority has voted to consider removal of the city officer from office. The notification shall be complete when received by the officer. The notice shall state the specific reasons to be used by the appointing authority for considering removal, which for all appointed city officers shall be for just cause. Within five days after receipt of the written notice that the appointing authority has voted to consider removal of the officer, the officer may request in writing a private hearing in executive session with the appointing authority and such other representatives as the parties deem necessary, the request to be filed with the city clerk. The appointing authority shall then hold a private hearing, unless a public hearing is required by Iowa law, within ten days of the receipt of the written request to consider the removal, at which hearing the city officer shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and arguments to the appointing authority prior to the rendering of a final decision on removal by the appointing authority. The city clerk shall give the requesting city officer written notice of the time, place and date or the private hearing. The private hearing shall not be subject to Iowa Code ch. 21 or any sections enacted in lieu thereof. The appointing authority shall meet within five days after the private hearing to determine the question of removal. The decision of the appointing authority shall be based solely on the evidence presented at the hearing or continuation thereof. When the appointing authority has reached a decision, it shall convene in open meeting and give the officer voted to be removed an opportunity to be heard regarding the removal prior to the taking of a roll call vote to determine the question of removal. The city clerk shall thereafter immediately, personally deliver or mail notice of the appointing authority's action to the officer in question. 
(2)  Nonreappointment of officers. On or before March 1 of each year, the appointing authority shall notify an appointed officer of the decision of the appointing authority to vote to consider nonreappointment. The officer shall be notified in writing by letter personally delivered or mailed by certified mail that the appointing authority has voted to consider the nonreappointment. Notification shall be complete when received by the officer in question. The notice shall state the specific reasons to be used by the appointing authority for considering nonreappointment, which for all appointed city officers shall be just cause. Within five days after receipt of the written notice that the appointing authority has voted to consider nonreappointment of the officer, the city officer may request in writing a private hearing in executive session with the appointing authority and such other representatives as the parties deem necessary, the request to be filed with the city clerk. The appointing authority shall then hold a private hearing, unless a public hearing is required by Iowa law, within ten days of receipt of the written request to consider the nonreappointment, at which hearing the officer shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and arguments to the appointing authority prior to the rendering of a final decision on nonreappointment by the appointing authority. The city clerk shall give the requesting city officer written notice of the time, place and date of the hearing. The private hearing shall not be subject to Iowa Code ch. 21 or any sections enacted in lieu thereof. The appointing authority shall meet within five days after the private hearing to determine the question of nonreappointment. The decision of the appointing authority shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact, which shall be based solely on the evidence presented at the hearing or any continuation thereof. When the appointing authority has reached a decision, it shall convene in open meeting and give the nonreappointed officer an opportunity to be heard regarding the nonreappointment prior to the taking of a roll call to determine the question of nonreappointment. The city clerk shall thereafter immediately, personally deliver or mail notice of the appointing authority's action to the officer in question. 
(d)  Appeals. A removed or nonreappointed officer may, within 30 days after notification by the appointing authority of the removal of nonreappointment, appeal to the district court in and for the county. The court may affirm the appointing authority action. The court shall reverse, modify or grant any other appropriate relief from the appointing authority's action, equitable or legal, and including declaratory relief, if substantial rights of the officer have been prejudiced because the appointing authority action is: 
(1)  In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions. 
(2)  In excess of the statutory authority of the appointing authority. 
(3)  In violation of appointing authority policy or rule. 
(4)  Made upon unlawful procedure. 
(5)  Affected by other error of law. 
(6)  Unsupported by substantial evidence in the record made before the appointing authority when that record is reviewed as a whole. 
(7)  Unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious, or characterized by an abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
(Code 2017, § 2-126; Ord. No. 2305, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 2447, § 1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2824, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-160. - Removal of elected officers-Charge, complaint or petition. 
(a)  When it is sought to remove an elected officer of the city under the provisions of Iowa Code § 66.29 and the laws amendatory thereto, a written charge, complaint or petition shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The charge, complaint or petition to remove an elected city officer shall be filed upon the relation of the council or any five or more qualified electors of the city. When filed upon relation of the council, the city attorney, or any attorney-at-law employed by the council, shall prepare such charge, complaint or petition upon the information furnished. 
(c)  The charge, complaint or petition to remove an elected city officer shall be entitled in the name of the city against the officer sought to be removed, who shall be named as defendant, and it shall be verified except when filed upon the relation of the council. 
(d)  The charge, complaint or petition to remove an elected city officer shall state the charges against the accused, and may be amended from time to time. Affidavits may be attached to or filed with the charge, complaint or petition, or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 2017, § 2-127) 
Sec. 2-161. - Removal of elected officers-Attorney to prosecute in removal proceedings. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney, or any attorney-at-law employed by the council, to appear and prosecute in the proceeding to remove a city officer when the officer sought to be removed is one other than the city attorney. If the proceeding is brought to remove the city attorney, the council shall appoint an attorney-at-law to appear and prosecute the proceeding. 
(Code 2017, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-162. - Removal of elected officers-Answer by defendant. 
    The defendant sought to be removed from city office may, at any time prior to the time fixed for hearing, file an answer in writing, which answer shall be verified. In case an answer is not so filed, the hearing shall not be delayed, but shall proceed at the time fixed. 
(Code 2017, § 2-129) 
Sec. 2-163. - Removal of elected officers-Time and place of hearing; notice to defendant. 
    When the charge, complaint or petition to remove an elected city officer is filed, the officer receiving the charge, complaint or petition shall immediately mark the charge, complaint or petition as filed, with a notation showing the time of filing, and within two days thereafter shall fix a time and place for the hearing on such charge, complaint or petition and give notice thereof to the defendant and to the council. The time for the hearing shall be fixed not earlier than ten days nor later than 30 days after such filing, though reasonable continuances may be given for such causes as the council deems meritorious. The notice to the defendants shall apprise them of the fact that such charge, complaint or petition has been filed, of the time and place fixed for the hearing and of their right to appear and defend. It shall have attached thereto a copy of the charge, complaint or petition. Service of the notice may be made upon the defendants by delivering the notice to the defendants, or, in case delivery cannot be personally made, the notice may be left at the residence or usual place of abode of the defendant with some adult member of the family. In case service cannot be made, the notice shall be mailed to the defendant by registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the defendant. 
(Code 2017, § 2-130) 
Sec. 2-164. - Removal of elected officers-Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Generally. At the time fixed for the hearing provided for in section 2-163, the council shall convene in regular session or special session, as the case may be, and hear the evidence in support of the charge, complaint or petition, and the evidence offered in resistance thereto. The president of the council shall administer an oath to all witnesses offered for examination. 
(b)  Representation by counsel. At the hearing, the city shall be represented by the city attorney, or some attorney-at-law appointed by the council, and the defendants shall have the right to be represented by counsel if they so arrange and desire. 
(c)  Authority to subpoena witnesses; recording of evidence. Witnesses may be subpoenaed in proceedings to remove an elected city officer on behalf of the city, by the chief of police, and a shorthand reporter may, at the discretion of the city or on behalf of the defendants, be authorized to report the evidence. 
(Code 2017, § 2-131) 
Sec. 2-165. - Removal of elected officers-Action by council. 
    If, after the hearing provided for in section 2-164, the council shall find, by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected thereto, that the defendants should be removed from office, it shall forthwith make an order of removal, which order must be passed by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the council, and the vacancy created shall be filled as provided by law; provided that no person shall be twice removed by the council for the same offense. 
(Code 2017, § 2-132) 
Secs. 2-166-2-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-184. - Office created. 
    The office of full-time mayor of the city is hereby established. 
(Code 2017, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-185. - Location of office. 
    The office of the mayor shall be located in the city hall. 
(Code 2017, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-186. - Salary. 
    The full time mayor of the city shall receive an annual salary of $61,817.60 and after January 1, 2000 an annual salary adjustment equal to the latest calendar year annual federal consumer price index rate awarded at the start of each fiscal year. In addition, the mayor shall also receive the same insurance benefits provided to all appointed officers of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-154; Ord. No. 1957, § 1, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. 2047, § 1, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 2250, § 2, 1-11-1999) 
Sec. 2-187. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and, within the limits of the corporation, shall have all the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorders. He shall be the chief executive officer thereof, and it shall be his duty to enforce all regulations and ordinances; and he may, upon view, arrest anyone guilty of a violation thereof, or of any crime under the laws of the state. The mayor shall, upon information supported by affidavit, issue process for the arrest of any person charged with violating any ordinance of the corporation; and shall supervise the conduct of all corporate officers, examine into the grounds of complaint made against them, and cause all neglect or violation of duty to be corrected, or report the neglect or violation of duty to the proper tribunal, that it may be dealt with as provided by law. 
(b)  Specific powers and duties. 
(1)  The mayor shall supervise all departments of the city and give direction to the department heads concerning the functions of the departments. The mayor shall have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments and their records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time. 
(2)  The mayor shall act as presiding officer at all regular and special council meetings. The mayor pro tem shall serve in this capacity in the mayor's absence. 
(3)  The mayor may sign, veto or take no action on any ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the council. If the mayor vetoes a measure, the mayor must explain the reason for such veto to the council. The council may repass a measure over the mayor's veto by a two-thirds majority of the councilmembers. 
(4)  The mayor shall make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during the officer's absence. 
(5)  The mayor shall represent the city in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The mayor shall not represent the city where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law or ordinance. 
(6)  The mayor shall, whenever authorized by the council, sign all deeds and contracts on behalf of the city. 
(7)  The mayor shall make such oral or written reports to the city council at the first meeting of every month as referred. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments and recommendations suitable for council action. 
(8)  The mayor shall annually prepare and submit to the council an itemized budget of revenues and expenditures. 
(9)  Immediately after taking office, the mayor shall designate one member of the city council as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall be vice-president of the council. Except for the limitations otherwise provided in this section, the mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor in cases of absence or inability of the mayor to perform his duties. In the exercise of the duties of the mayor's office, the mayor pro tempore shall not have power to employ or discharge from employment officers or employees that the mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge. The mayor pro tempore shall have the right to veto as a member of the council. 
(10)  The mayor shall, upon order of the city council, secure for the city specialized and professional services not already available to the city. In executing the order of the city council, the mayor shall conduct himself in accordance with city ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(11)  The mayor may appoint an administrative assistant to assist in matters of administration and supervision as budgeted by the city council. 
(12)  The mayor shall sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer. 
(13)  The mayor shall order, in writing, the removal, at public expense, of any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable. 
(c)  Additional duties. In addition to the duties enumerated in this division, the mayor shall perform such other duties compatible with the nature of his office as the council may, from time to time, require, and as are required by law and conferred upon him by statute. 
(d)  Duties in connection with elections. 
(1)  The mayor shall perform such duties in connection with the holding of the city or ward elections and registrations therefor as are prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(2)  The mayor shall cause at least ten days' notice of elections and of all questions to be submitted to the voters of the city by issuing a proclamation and stating therein the place of holding the election in each ward by the council, the questions to be submitted, and all of the officers to be elected at such election in the city or wards by the qualified voters thereof. The mayor shall cause a copy of the proclamation and notice to be published at least ten days prior to the election in one issue of a daily newspaper of general circulation published in the English language in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-155) 
Secs. 2-188-2-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-213. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city the position of city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-171; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-214. - Appointment. 
    The city administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for an indefinite term. The administer shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of this appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of the city or state, but during the administrator's tenure of office, shall reside within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-172; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-215. - Removal from position. 
    The city council may remove the city administrator at any time without cause by a majority vote of its members. If requested by the city administrator, a name clearing public hearing shall be granted by the council within 30 days following notice of removal, as provided by Iowa Code § 372.15. During the interim, the council may suspend the administrator from duty, but shall continue the administrator's salary and, if the removal becomes final, shall pay the respective severance benefit negotiated within the administrator's contract or the severance granted to other city employees under city council adopted personnel policies. 
(Code 2017, § 2-173; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-216. - City council policy guidance. 
    The city council shall annually adopt broad goals, objectives and program performance measures to guide the city administrator in the development of an annual operating budget, capital improvements program and administration of city projects and programs. 
(Code 2017, § 2-174; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-217. - Supervision and evaluation. 
    The mayor shall supervise the city administrator and the mayor shall prepare an annual performance evaluation of the city administrator. Said evaluation shall be available for review by the council. The city administrator may request a closed meeting with the city council to discuss performance annually, as provided by state statute. 
(Code 2017, § 2-175; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-218. - Power and duties. 
    The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer (CAO) of the city, responsible to the mayor and city council for the management of all city affairs placed in the administrator's charge by city ordinance. The city administrator shall: 
(1)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Code or by law; 
(2)  Appoint and suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Code, except as otherwise provided by law, this Code or personnel policies adopted by the city council. The city administrator may authorize any administrative officer subject to the administrator's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings. The city administrator shall have the right to take part in discussion but shall not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this Code, resolutions, ordinances and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city administrator or by officers subject to the administrator's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Recommend to the mayor and council such measures as the administrator may deem necessary for good efficient government and the general welfare of the city; 
(6)  Have general supervision and direction of the administration of the following departments, offices, classifications, and services and be directly responsible to the mayor and council for the proper function of same: 
a.  Department of finance and business operations; 
b.  Department of public works; 
c.  Department of community development; 
d.  Department of public safety services; 
e.  Budget and capital improvements preparation and operation; 
f.  Purchasing, contracts and agreements as approved by council; 
g.  Administrative policies and procedures; 
h.  Personnel policies and procedures; 
i.  Labor agreements; 
j.  City legal representation and the prosecution of all code violations; 
k.  Risk management policies, procedures and claims resolution; 
l.  Economic development policies and procedures; 
m.  All others as directed by council. 
(7)  Supervise the performance of all contracts for work and services to be done for the city except as specified otherwise in said construction or service program involved; 
(8)  Maintain an accounting of all obligations, agreements, commitments, and contractual franchises involving the city and report to the mayor and council any deviations from the exact terms as specified; 
(9)  Be authorized to direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials, supplies, capital outlay, and services for all departments of the city that have been budgeted and appropriated by a resolution of the council and enforce a program to determine that such purchases are received and are of the quality and character called for in the order; 
(10)  Require the taking of bids on all matters deemed advisable as required by law, or as directed by the council; 
(11)  Have the power to hire, suspend, or discharge any employee over which the manager has, by this article, authority to appoint or employ, subject to civil service provisions and Iowa Code ch. 20 and city council concurrence where necessary; 
(12)  Have the authority to employ any person for emergency purposes as deemed necessary for the welfare of the city, but in no case shall said employment be extended after the first council meeting following the date of employment, unless otherwise approved by vote of the council; 
(13)  Supervise and manage all buildings, structures, and land under the jurisdiction of the council and shall also be charged with the care and preservation of all city-owned equipment, tools, machinery, appliances, supplies, and commodities under the control of employees or departments over which the city administrator has, by this division, specific authority; 
(14)  Have the power to appoint, employ, transfer, promote, reclassify, recommend a rate of pay, discipline, or discharge all persons to city service, subject to civil service provisions and Iowa Code ch. 20 unless such power specifically assigned by law to another appointing authority; 
(15)  Review and comment on personnel actions made by the police and fire chiefs to the mayor and city council; 
(16)  Develop, administer, and enforce personnel rules and regulations for employees under the authority delegated to the office of city administrator; 
(17)  At all times, be responsible for the maintenance of accurate and current records of all affairs of the departments under the administrator's jurisdiction, and in a form acceptable by the council. Copies of such reports shall be available for public inspection; 
(18)  Assist the council committees in the execution of their reviews, investigations, reports and assignments, and perform in compliance with their directives; provided, same is not in conflict with established procedure governed by this division or not in conflict with existing city ordinances; 
(19)  Perform duties and have direct authority on all matters delegated by council action; 
(20)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital improvements program to the mayor for review based upon approved city council goals; implement the final budget as approved by city council; 
(21)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(22)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning operations; 
(23)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
(24)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city and facilitate the work of the city council in developing policy; 
(25)  Provide staff support services for the mayor and councilmembers; 
(26)  Assist the council to develop long-term goals for the city and strategies to implement these goals; 
(27)  Encourage and provide staff support for regional and intergovernmental cooperation; 
(28)  Implement partnerships endorsed by the mayor and council that develop good public policy and the building of a sense of community; 
(29)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Code, state statute or may be required by the city council; and 
(30)  Cooperate with, and give assistance requested by, the Sartori Memorial Hospital, Inc., board of directors, the board of trustees of the city public library, the city utilities board of trustees, or any other administrative agency, board, commission or committee of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-176; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2941, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-219. - Emergencies. 
(a)  The administrator shall exercise all powers and authorities granted and outlined by the city's multi-hazard emergency operations plan. 
(b)  In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstance creating a public emergency, the city administrator may make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but the administrator shall file promptly with council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Code 2017, § 2-177; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-220. - Bond. 
    The city administrator shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of all the administrator's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-178; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-221. - Compensation. 
    The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time within the city's annual payroll resolution. 
(Code 2017, § 2-179; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-222. - Appointments. 
    The city administrator shall recommend the appointment of all department directors to the mayor for city council approval. The city administrator shall participate in making recommendations to the mayor, for city council approval, for appointment of the police chief, as provided in sections 2-948 and 2-949, for appointment of the fire chief, as provided in sections 2-978 and 2-979, and for appointment of the city clerk, as provided in section 2-308(b)(2). 
(Code 2017, § 2-180; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-223. - Vacancy and acting city administrator. 
    In the event of the absence or inability of the city administrator to perform the duties of the city administrator's office, the city administrator shall appoint an acting city administrator, or if unable to do so or for any reason, including those periods of time when the council has not appointed a city administrator, the mayor shall appoint one of the department directors as the acting city administrator. This appointee shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-181; Ord. No. 2824, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-224-2-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY INVESTMENTS 

Sec. 2-255. - Function created; appointment; annual evaluation. 
    City investment and depository responsibilities with respect to city functions are delegated and assigned specifically to the finance and information systems divisions. The director of finance and business operations shall be responsible for the coordination of the investment and depository functions and shall file an annual evaluation of activities and transactions with the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-191; Ord. No. 2728, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-256. - Powers and duties; bond. 
    Investment and depository functions shall be performed in conformance with the laws of the state. Before entering into the duties, in addition to the oath or affirmation, each officer shall execute a bond in the form and conditions prescribed by state law and by ordinance of the council. Such bond shall be filed with the director of finance and business operations. Upon execution of the bond, the investment and depository duties shall be assigned as follows: 
(1)  The controller/city treasurer shall collect, receive and safely keep all money due and belonging to the city, and for any sum of money so received shall execute duplicate receipts, one of which shall be delivered to the person from whom such sum may be received, and the other kept by the finance division. The controller/city treasurer shall keep true and correct accounts with each fund established by the council, of all receipts into and disbursements from the treasury. 
(2)  The controller/city treasurer shall, with the approval of the council as to the place and amount of deposit, by resolution entered on record, deposit all city funds, in any bank in the city to which the funds belong. 
(3)  The controller/city treasurer shall draw from the county treasurer all funds belonging to the city. 
(4)  The controller/city treasurer shall make reports to the council monthly, or more often if required, giving a full and detailed statement under oath of all the receipts and expenditures during the preceding month. Annually the controller/city treasurer shall make a report of the entire year's proceedings, including the state of the treasury. 
(5)  The controller/city treasurer shall keep a full and complete record of all outstanding bonds, and their numbers, denominations, dates, rates of interest and maturity, and report the record to the mayor and council annually. 
(6)  The controller/city treasurer shall keep a record of the indebtedness of the city, showing the liens, assessments and judgments outstanding against the city, and report the record to the council annually. At the request of the council or mayor, the controller/city treasurer shall communicate to the council any notice of pending assessments, judgments or claims of which the controller/city treasurer is advised. 
(7)  The controller/city treasurer shall keep a computerized register with a description of all checks written. 
(8)  The controller/city treasurer shall pay money from the treasury only on checks drawn on him by, and signed by, the controller/city treasurer, countersigned by the mayor and director of finance and business operations and sealed with the city seal. 
(9)  At the expiration of the controller/city treasurer's term of office, he shall deliver all official papers, books, monies and property belonging to the city to his successors. 
(10)  The information services manager shall be responsible for the electronic communications with the banking system on a daily basis and internal computer security of access to investment data. 
(11)  When there is an accumulation in the treasury and there are no outstanding checks, the controller/city treasurer shall invest the funds in compliance with the city's investment policy. 
(12)  The controller/city treasurer shall safely keep all invested funds. 
(13)  When the controller/city treasurer determines that there are not or will not be sufficient funds on hand to pay legal obligations of a fund, the controller/city treasurer may request to the city council a short term loan payable to a bank or other business entity authorized by law to loan money in an amount legally available and believed to be sufficient to cover the anticipated deficiency. 
(Code 2017, § 2-192; Ord. No. 2728, § 2, 2-14-2011) 
Secs. 2-257-2-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-276. - Members moving from city; absence from meetings. 
    The permanent removal from the city of any member of a board or commission wherein the members are appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, or the absence from three consecutive regular meetings or five meetings within one year by a member of any of such boards or commissions, except in case of sickness or temporary absence from the city, without due explanation, shall render the member's office vacant. 
(Code 2017, § 2-211) 
Sec. 2-277. - Information to be provided to mayor and council. 
    The following boards and commissions of the city, together with any other boards or commissions of the city established by the city council from time to time, shall provide the mayor and the city council with the following available information as to notice and agenda of official meetings, minutes of all official meetings, financial information and reports, as the information is provided to the following boards and commissions: 
(1)  Housing commission. 
(2)  Board of trustees of the city utilities. 
(3)  Health trust fund board of trustees. 
(4)  Library board of trustees. 
(5)  Parks and recreation commission. 
(6)  Planning and zoning commission. 
(7)  Arts and culture board. 
(8)  Civil service commission. 
(9)  Human rights commission. 
(10)  Board of electrical appeals. 
(11)  Board of plumbing appeals. 
(12)  Board of mechanical appeals. 
(13)  Board of adjustment. 
(14)  Board of appeals. 
(15)  Visitors and tourism board. 
(16)  Community center and senior services board. 
(17)  Historic preservation commission. 
(18)  Board of rental housing appeals. 
(Code 2017, § 2-212; Ord. No. 2672, § 1, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 2824, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-278-2-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-303. - Applicability of division; conformance with state law. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to the members of the police operations division and fire operations division and shall be in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 2017, § 2-231) 
Sec. 2-304. - Created. 
    A civil service commission is hereby created under and in accordance with the provisions of Iowa Code ch. 400. 
(Code 2017, § 2-232) 
Sec. 2-305. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
    The civil service commissioners shall be citizens of the state and eligible electors of the city and shall not, while on the commission, hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust. 
(Code 2017, § 2-233) 
Sec. 2-306. - Appointment of commissioners; term of office. 
    The terms of current civil service commissioners shall be terminated April 6, 1998. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint three civil service commissioners who shall hold office, one until the first Monday in April of the second year thereafter, one until the first Monday in April of the third year thereafter, and one until the first Monday in April of the fourth year after such appointment, whose successors shall be appointed for a term of four years. 
(Code 2017, § 2-234; Ord. No. 2229, § 1, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 2-307. - Compensation of commissioners. 
    The civil service commissioners shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2017, § 2-235) 
Sec. 2-308. - Chairman; clerk. 
    The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. The city clerk or a designee of the city clerk shall be clerk of the commission. 
(Code 2017, § 2-236; Ord. No. 2229, § 2, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 2-309. - Meeting room and equipment; personnel. 
    The council shall provide suitable rooms in which the civil service commission may hold its meetings, and supply the commission with all necessary equipment and personnel to enable it to properly perform its duties. 
(Code 2017, § 2-237) 
Sec. 2-310. - Record of meetings; personnel records. 
    The civil service commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee, which record shall be permanent and kept up to date. 
(Code 2017, § 2-238) 
Sec. 2-311. - Examinations. 
(a)  Examinations for positions in the police operations division and fire operations division shall be applicable to and required of all applicants in accordance with the state civil service law, Iowa Code ch. 400. 
(b)  The civil service commission shall conduct examinations in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state relative thereto, and for the purpose of determining the qualifications of applicants for positions under civil service, and shall duly certify to the council a list of the qualified persons as set forth in Iowa Code ch. 400. 
(Code 2017, § 2-239) 
Secs. 2-312-2-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-341. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement, and perpetuation of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance; 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance; 
(3)  Stabilize and improve property values; 
(4)  Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past; 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided; 
(6)  Strengthen the economy of the city; and 
(7)  Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-256; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-342. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the city historic preservation commission, as established in this division. 
    Historic district means an area which contains a significant portion of sites including archaeological sites, buildings, structures, objects and/or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and which: 
(1)  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
(2)  Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; 
(3)  Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials, or combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area; 
(4)  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
(5)  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
    Historic landmark means a site including archaeological sites, object, structure or building which: 
(1)  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
(2)  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
(3)  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represents a work of a master, or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
(4)  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
(Code 2017, § 2-257; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-343. - Cedar Falls historic preservation commission. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five members who shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the city, and who shall be age 18 years or over. 
(b)  All members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate. 
(c)  The original appointments to the historic preservation commission shall be as follows: three persons for a term of two years each, and two persons for a term of three years each. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of three years (except for vacancies), so as to stagger the terms of the members. 
(d)  The position of any member of the historic preservation commission shall automatically become vacant if the member moves permanently from the city, or if the member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, with approval of the city council. A new member shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 
(e)  Members may serve for more than one term, and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor. 
(f)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(g)  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(h)  The commission shall elect a chairperson who shall preside over all commission meetings, and shall elect a secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the commission's proceedings. 
(i)  The commission shall meet at least three times a year. 
(j)  The commission shall operate under the auspices of the city department of community development. The director of the department of community development or his designee shall serve as clerk for the commission and shall attend all meetings. 
(k)  The city shall provide suitable rooms in which the commission may hold its meetings. 
(Code 2017, § 2-258; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-344. - Powers of the commission. 
(a)  The commission may conduct studies for the identification and designation of historic districts and landmarks meeting the definitions established by this division. The commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from any person, group, or association. The commission shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use. 
(b)  The commission may make a recommendation to the state historic preservation office for the listing of a historic district or landmark in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon. 
(c)  The commission may investigate and recommend to the city council the adoption of ordinances designating historic landmarks and historic districts if they qualify as defined herein. 
(d)  The commission may provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the city council. 
(e)  The commission may promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction. 
(f)  Other powers. In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the commission may, with prior city council approval: 
(1)  Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation in the name and on behalf of the city. 
(2)  Acquire by purchase, bequest, or donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with historic properties in the name and on behalf of the city. 
(3)  Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property in the name and on behalf of the city. 
(4)  Lease, sell, and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property in the name and on behalf of the city. 
(5)  Contract, with the prior approval of the city council, with the state or the federal government or other organizations in the name and on behalf of the city. 
(6)  Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation. 
(Code 2017, § 2-259; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Secs. 2-345-2-361. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CEDAR FALLS HEALTH TRUST FUND AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-362. - Establishment of health trust fund. 
    There is hereby established a trust fund of the city which shall be known as "The Cedar Falls Health Trust Fund." This trust fund shall consist of all of the following property: 
(1)  All cash, accounts receivable, and all other intangible personal property of Sartori Memorial Hospital in existence as of the close of business of said hospital on December 30, 1996; 
(2)  All other property, whether tangible or intangible, real, personal, or mixed property, of whatever kind and description and wherever situated, which may now or hereafter belong to Sartori Memorial Hospital, or to the city on behalf of Sartori Memorial Hospital, except for the Sartori hospital building and grounds located at 515 College Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa, and except for those assets of Sartori Memorial Hospital which were sold and conveyed to Sartori Memorial Hospital, Inc., an Iowa non-stock, nonprofit corporation, pursuant to the asset purchase agreement approved by the city council by Resolution No. 10,797 and Resolution No. 10,798 adopted on December 16, 1996; 
(3)  All sums payable to the city pursuant to the lease between the city, as landlord, and Sartori Memorial Hospital, Inc., an Iowa non-stock, nonprofit corporation, as tenant, approved by the city council by the foregoing resolutions adopted on December 16, 1996, which are in excess of the amounts necessary to pay the installments of income and principal of the $6,395,000.00 in aggregate principal amount of general obligation bonds series 1992 dated April 1, 1992, the proceeds of which were used to make improvements to Sartori Memorial Hospital; and 
(4)  Any sums which may now or which may at any time hereafter be properly payable to the city itself or to the city for the benefit of Sartori Memorial Hospital, from either income or principal of the trust now being administered in the matter of the trusteeship of Sartori Memorial Hospital, Cedar Falls, Iowa, under the Will of J. Frank Belz, deceased, Iowa District Court for Black Hawk County Probate No. 15102. 
(Code 2017, § 2-260; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-363. - Title. 
    There is hereby established an administrative agency of the city which shall be known as "The Board of Trustees of the Cedar Falls Health Trust Fund." 
(Code 2017, § 2-261; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-364. - Membership; appointment of members. 
    The health trust fund board of trustees shall consist of six members. All board members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. In addition to the six appointed members, the director of the city department of administrative services and the chairperson of the Sartori Health Care Foundation shall each be an ex-officio, non-voting, advisory member of the board of trustees. 
(Code 2017, § 2-262; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-365. - Qualifications of members. 
    All of the members of the health trust fund board of trustees shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the city, and shall be age 18 years or over. 
(Code 2017, § 2-263; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-366. - Term of office. 
    The appointments to the health trust fund board of trustees shall be for a term of six years (except for vacancies), consisting of two appointments every two years, so as to stagger the terms of the members. 
(Code 2017, § 2-264; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-367. - Vacancies. 
    The position of any member of the health trust fund board of trustees shall automatically become vacant if the member moves permanently from the city, or if the member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, with approval of the council. The new board member shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 2017, § 2-265; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-368. - Compensation. 
    Members of the health trust fund board of trustees shall not receive any compensation for their services. 
(Code 2017, § 2-266; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-369. - Powers and duties. 
    The health trust fund board of trustees shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To meet and elect from its members a president, a vice-president and a secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary from time to time. The city finance manager shall serve as treasurer of the health trust fund board of trustees, but shall not be a member of the board. 
(2)  To have supervision and management of the city health trust fund established in this division, provided, however, that the trust funds shall be invested by the city finance manager in accordance with the provisions of Iowa Code chs. 12B and 12C, and shall be subject to the control of the city council. 
(3)  To prepare an annual report to the city council on or before October 1 of each fiscal year, consisting of the following information: 
a.  The amount of the principal of the trust fund on hand as of the preceding June 30; 
b.  The amount of income generated by the trust fund for the fiscal year ended on the preceding June 30; 
c.  The amount of income expended for health or health-related purposes within the city by the trust fund for the fiscal year ended on the preceding June 30, as approved by the city council; 
d.  The amount of income expended for administrative purposes, if any, by the trust fund for the fiscal year ended on the preceding June 30, as approved by the city council; 
e.  A proposed budget for the fiscal year beginning on the following July 1, detailing: 
1.  Any recommendations for the expenditure of income of the trust fund for health or health-related purposes within the city, including an explanation of the amount and the health or health-related purpose or purposes for the recommended expenditure of such trust funds; 
2.  Any recommendations for the expenditure of income of the trust fund for administrative purposes, including an explanation of the amount and the purpose for the recommended expenditure of such trust funds; and 
3.  A recommendation as to what amounts shall constitute income and what amounts shall constitute principal, based upon generally accepted accounting principles; and 
(4)  To keep a record of its proceedings; 
(5)  To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to such property in the name of the city; and to supervise and manage said property as part of the trust fund created under this division. 
(Code 2017, § 2-267; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-370. - Limitation on powers. 
(a)  The health trust fund board of trustees shall not expend any sums from principal for any purposes whatsoever at any time, except as specifically provided in section 2-371 or 2-373. 
(b)  The health trust fund board of trustees shall not expend any sums from income except as follows: 
(1)  For health or health-related purposes within the city, and for administrative expenses, but only on approval thereof by the city council as part of the council's regular budget; 
(2)  As provided for in section 2-371; and 
(3)  As provided for in section 2-373(c). 
(Code 2017, § 2-268; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997; Ord. No. 2573, § 1, 4-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-371. - Expenditure of trust funds for general obligation bond payments. 
    The income and principal of the trust funds may be expended to prevent a default on payment of $6,395,000.00 in aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds Series 1992 dated April 1, 1992, the proceeds of which were used to make improvements to Sartori Memorial Hospital, but only with prior city council approval. 
(Code 2017, § 2-269; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-372. - City council budget. 
    The annual report of the health trust fund board of trustees shall be submitted to the city council as soon as possible after October 1 of each year. The council shall approve any proposed expenditure of income of the trust fund, as may be recommended by the health trust fund board of trustees in its annual report, as the council deems appropriate. Any such expenditures shall be made part of the council's annual budget for the fiscal year which commences on July 1 following the receipt of the annual report of the health trust fund board of trustees. 
(Code 2017, § 2-270; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997) 
Sec. 2-373. - Continuation and preservation of trust fund. 
(a)  Except as provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the principal and unexpended income of the city health trust fund shall be held in trust, and shall be preserved and maintained as a separate trust fund of the city, for as long as the Sartori Hospital building and grounds, located at 515 College Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa, are leased to an entity which is operating a hospital or health care facility at that location. 
(b)  The principal of the city health trust fund may be expended for purposes of discharging the obligations of the city pursuant to the terms of a lease entered into between the city and Covenant Medical Center, Inc., an Iowa non-stock, non-profit corporation, which lease provides for the construction of a building at the Pinnacle Prairie Business Center North Medical Complex near Greenhill Road and South Main Street in Cedar Falls, Iowa, which building will house a paramedic ambulance service to be operated by Sartori Memorial Hospital, Inc., an Iowa non-stock, non-profit corporation, and a potential future city satellite police station and fire station, as follows: 
(1)  For purposes of paying rent in an amount not to exceed the sum of $825,200.00, on terms set forth in said lease, for the city's use of a portion of said building; and 
(2)  For purposes of providing funds to enable the city to pay the purchase price in connection with the exercise of the city's option to purchase the building and the land associated with the building, all on the terms stated in said lease; 
all pursuant to the terms of the lease, which was approved by the city council of the city by Resolution No. 14,963, adopted on February 27, 2006. 
(c)  At such time as the Sartori Hospital building and grounds are no longer leased to an entity which is operating a hospital or health care facility at that location, and if the council at such time determines that the city shall again operate a community hospital or health care facility, the principal and unexpended income of such trust fund may be expended for purposes directly in support of reestablishment and operation of such a community hospital or health care facility. At such time as the Sartori Hospital building grounds are no longer leased to an entity which is operating a hospital or health care facility at that location, and if the council at such time determines that the city shall not then reestablish and operate a community hospital or health care facility, then such trust fund shall continue to be retained under the provisions of this division, or shall be utilized for such municipal purpose or purposes as are then authorized by state law for the expenditure of city funds, and as may be determined by such council at such time. 
(Code 2017, § 2-271; Ord. No. 2174, § 2, 1-27-1997; Ord. No. 2573, § 2, 4-24-2006) 
Secs. 2-374-2-404. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-405. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the creation and appointment of a city library board of trustees, and to specify that board's powers and duties. 
(Code 2017, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-406. - Membership; appointment of members. 
    The board of trustees of the city public library consists of nine members. All board members are to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-277) 
Sec. 2-407. - Qualifications of members. 
    All of the members of the library board of trustees shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the city, and shall be over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 2017, § 2-278) 
Sec. 2-408. - Term of office. 
    All appointments to the library board of trustees shall be for six years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number of members, as near as possible, to stagger the terms. 
(Code 2017, § 2-279) 
Sec. 2-409. - Vacancies. 
    The position of any trustee of the board of library trustees shall be vacant if he moves permanently from the city or if he is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with approval of the council, and the new trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 2017, § 2-280) 
Sec. 2-410. - Compensation. 
    Trustees of the library board of trustees shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(Code 2017, § 2-281) 
Sec. 2-411. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of library trustees shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary. The city treasurer shall serve as board treasurer, but shall not be a member of the board. 
(2)  To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its appurtenances and fixtures, and the rooms containing the library. 
(3)  To direct and control all the affairs of the library. 
(4)  To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that, prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting in favor thereof. 
(5)  To remove, by a two-thirds vote of the board, the librarian, and provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of Iowa Code ch. 35C. 
(6)  To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the board. 
(7)  To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to fix charges therefor. 
(8)  To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with ordinances of the city and other law, for the care, use, government and management of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations. 
(9)  To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library purposes by the council, and of all monies available by gift or otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies belonging to the library, including fines and rentals collected, under the rules of the board. 
(10)  To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to such property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of such property; and to expend the funds received by it from such gifts for the improvement of the library. 
(11)  To keep a record of its proceedings. 
(12)  To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the city by action against the city council. 
(13)  To have authority to make agreements with the local county historical association, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature, and pay for the receptacles and materials out of funds allocated for library purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 2-282) 
Sec. 2-412. - Contracts for use of library. 
(a)  Authority of board. The board of library trustees may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school, corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township or county, or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by their respective residents. 
(b)  Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. 
(Code 2017, § 2-283) 
Sec. 2-413. - Nonresident use of library. 
    The board of library trustees may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one or more of the following ways: 
(1)  By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city, or upon payment of a special nonresident library fee. 
(2)  By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents. 
(3)  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents. 
(4)  By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library materials to nonresidents. 
(Code 2017, § 2-284) 
Sec. 2-414. - Library account. 
    All money appropriated by the council from the general fund for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for the library. Expenditures shall be paid only by order of the board, signed by its president and secretary. The warrant writing officer is the city finance officer/auditor. 
(Code 2017, § 2-285) 
Sec. 2-415. - Annual report. 
    The board of library trustees shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close of the municipal fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number of books circulated, the amount of fines collected and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further information as required by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-286) 
Sec. 2-416. - Return of library materials. 
(a)  If a person fails to return library material for two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the library materials, the failure to return said materials is a violation of this Code. However, the library shall make a reasonable attempt to reclaim the library materials; a reasonable attempt shall include the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such library material is overdue and that legal action will be taken. 
(b)  The director of the library, and the director's designee, shall have authority to issue citations for any violations referenced in this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, library materials include books, plates, pictures, photographs, engravings, paintings, drawings, maps, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, broadsides, manuscripts, documents, letters, public records, microforms, sound recordings, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes, electronic data processing records, artifacts, and written or printed materials regardless of physical form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of the library. 
(Code 2017, § 2-287; Ord. No. 2251, § 1, 1-25-1999) 
Secs. 2-417-2-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - UTILITIES BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-446. - Title of utilities board. 
    A board of trustees is and has been established to operate the city electric, gas and water utilities. In addition, said board of trustees is now established to operate the city communication utility. The title of the utilities board shall be the board of trustees of the municipal electric, gas, water, and communication utilities of the city (hereinafter "board of trustees"). 
(Code 2017, § 2-295; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993; Ord. No. 2072, § 1, 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 2-447. - Membership; appointment of member. 
    A board of trustees of the utilities shall consist of five members. All said trustees shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-296; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993; Ord. No. 2123, § 1, 11-13-1995) 
Sec. 2-448. - Qualifications of members. 
    All of the members of the board of trustees shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the city, and shall be over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 2017, § 2-297; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 2-449. - Term of office. 
    All appointments to the utilities board of trustees shall be for six years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence August 31. Said appointments shall be made for staggered six-year terms with one term expiring each year. 
(Code 2017, § 2-298; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993; Ord. No. 2123, § 2, 11-13-1995) 
Sec. 2-450. - Vacancies. 
    The position of any trustee of the board of trustees shall be vacant if he moves permanently from the city. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the approval of the council, and the newly appointed trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 2017, § 2-299; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 2-451. - Compensation. 
    Trustees of the board of trustees shall each receive the sum of $50.00 per month as compensation from each of the water, electric, gas and communication utilities. 
(Code 2017, § 2-300; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 7-23-2012) 
Sec. 2-452. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The utility board may be a party to legal action. The board of trustees may exercise all powers of the city in relation to each city utility it administers, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special assessment bonds. 
(2)  The title to all property of a city utility or combined utility system must be held in the name of the city, but the utility board has all the powers and authorities of the city with respect to the acquisition by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, lease, sale, or other disposition of such property, and the management, control, and operation of the same, subject to the requirements, terms, covenants, conditions, and provisions of any resolutions authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds, pledge orders, or other obligations which are payable from the revenues of the city utility or combined utility system, and which are then outstanding. 
(3)  The board shall make to the council a detailed annual report, including a complete financial statement. 
(4)  Immediately following a regular or special meeting of a utility board, the secretary shall prepare a condensed statement of the proceedings of the board and cause the statement to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement must include a list of all claims allowed, showing the name of the person or firm making the claim, the reason for the claim, and the amount of the claim. If the reason for the claims is the same, two or more claims made by the same vendor, supplier, or claimant may be consolidated if the number of claims consolidated and the total consolidated claim amount are listed in the statement. However, the utility board shall provide at its office upon request an unconsolidated list of all claims allowed. Salary claims must show the gross amount of the claim except that salaries paid to persons regularly employed by the utility, for services regularly performed by them, must be published once annually showing the gross amount of the salary. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall control revenues allocated to each utility it administers and all monies derived from the operation of each utility, the sale of utility property, interest on investments, or from any other source related to each utility. All city utility monies received must be held in a separate utility fund, with a separate account or accounts for each utility. 
(c)  None of the utilities shall provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to the city or its agencies, as provided in Iowa Code § 384.91. 
(d)  If the city has exercised a right to an easement on property before January 1, 1950, for the establishment of water, sewer, gas or power lines, then the city has acquired the right to exercise a continuing easement on that property to the extent necessary for repair and maintenance of those lines. 
(Code 2017, § 2-301; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 6-14-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Iowa Code §§ 388.4-388.6, 388.8. 
Secs. 2-453-2-472. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-473. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city the department of finance and business operations. The administration of the department shall be integrated into and made a part of the regular city administration and shall be coordinated with all other departments. 
(Code 2017, § 2-306; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-474. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the finance and business operations department to provide a full range of support services for all city departments, the city administrator, the mayor and the city council. These services shall include: 
(1)  Financial management encompassing accounting, budgeting, payroll, debt management, check issuance, auditing, investment, capital asset management, and completion of required financial reports and records. 
(2)  Public records management encompassing the maintenance of official city council minutes, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, deeds, licenses, permits, registry books, assessments, elections, appointments of city officers and public notices. 
(3)  Personnel management encompassing the maintenance of employee records, employee salary and benefit administration, employee relations programs, personnel policies, personnel task management accounting, labor relations and the administration of civil service, civil rights and equal opportunity regulations and standards. 
(4)  Risk management encompassing the securing of adequate insurance coverage and the provision of safety programs, and workers' compensation administration. 
(5)  Information systems encompassing the operation and maintenance of the city's communications systems and mainframe computer, fileservers, network infrastructure, personal computers and all related peripheral equipment provided to individual departments. 
(6)  Acting as legal counsel to all city offices, boards and commissions, exclusive of autonomous administrative agencies and boards established by the city council with the authority to retain legal counsel. It is the duty of legal counsel to prepare all ordinances, prosecute all actions which are violations of city ordinances, defend or prosecute all suits and actions brought and pending in any court in the state or United States to which the city is a party, prepare all city contracts, and act as the city legal agent for any bonds or legal instruments when directed by the city council. 
(7)  Cable television system encompassing the production of video programming for city government, educational and local origination channels and facilitating playback of video programs on the public access channel. 
(8)  Performing as the city purchasing agent. 
(9)  Administrative management encompassing the development, coordination and implementation of administrative policies and procedures prescribed by the city administrator, mayor and city council to ensure that all legislative actions are completed by the appropriate department. 
(Code 2017, § 2-307; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-475. - Director of finance and business operations-Generally. 
(a)  Appointment. The director of finance and business operations shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator. The city administrator shall recommend this appointment to the mayor for city council approval. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The director of finance and business operations shall be the chief finance officer (CFO) of the city and shall supervise, direct and manage the conduct of the following divisions: 
a.  Public records. 
b.  Financial services. 
c.  Legal services. 
d.  Information systems. 
The director of finance and business operations shall also supervise, direct, manage and act as liaison to, the library and community center/senior services division. 
(2)  The director is empowered to exert supervisory and management control over each division and is empowered to appoint a controller/city treasurer, and information systems manager, and a city attorney and to recommend to the city administrator, city council, and mayor a city clerk for yearly appointment as division heads. Each division head is individually charged by the director to carry out all of the statutory duties mandated by federal, state and local regulations of his or her division. The director is responsible for the establishment of broad policies related to departmental conduct, procedures and operations, and the formation of programs which provide the citizens of the city, the city administrator, the mayor, the city council and each department with a full range of support services. The director peremptorily may suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate for any lawful reason. 
(3)  The director shall be responsible for the preparation and administration of the departmental work program and budgets to ensure that all statutory and subsidiary programs are implemented by the division responsible. 
(4)  The director shall perform all other duties assigned by the city administrator, mayor, and city council and shall be under the direct administrative supervision of the city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-308; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-476. - Director of finance and business operations-Duties relative to boards, commissions and committees. 
    The director of finance and business operations or his designee shall meet with and furnish assistance and information to the following commissions, boards, committees and other organizations when necessary: 
(1)  Mayor's budget review committee. 
(2)  Utilities board of trustees. 
(3)  Health trust fund board of trustees. 
(4)  Civil service commission. 
(5)  Human rights commission. 
(6)  Library board of trustees. 
(7)  Community center and senior services board. 
(8)  Sartori Memorial Hospital, Inc., board of directors. 
(9)  County attorney. 
(10)  Northeast Iowa Area Agency on Aging. 
(11)  Any applicable federal and state agencies, including, but not limited to, the state civil rights commission, the state department of management, the state auditor, state attorney general, the state public employment relations board, the state public employment retirement system board, the municipal fire and police retirement system board, the state department of revenue, Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 
(Code 2017, § 2-309; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-477. - Acting director of finance and business operations. 
    Whenever the director of finance and business operations is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the city administrator has not appointed a director of finance and business operations, the director of finance and business operations or city administrator shall appoint one of the division heads as the acting director of finance and business operations. This designee shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the director. 
(Code 2017, § 2-310; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-478. - Authority of council. 
    All final authority over the administration and policy of the department of finance and business operations shall be retained and exercised by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-311; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-479-2-509. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINANCIAL SERVICES DIVISION 

Sec. 2-510. - Created. 
    The financial services division of the department of finance and business operations is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-331; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-511. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the financial services division of the department of finance and business operations to provide a comprehensive financial management program and a full range of personnel services which conforms with federal, state and local regulations. 
(Code 2017, § 2-332; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-512. - Controller/city treasurer. 
(a)  Appointment. A controller/city treasurer shall be appointed by the director of finance and business operations and shall be directly responsible to the director of finance and business operations. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Duties. The controller/city treasurer shall supervise, direct and manage the financial services division. The controller/city treasurer's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the financial services division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division for each fiscal year, the report to be filed with the finance and business operations director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the financial services division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the financial services division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of finance and business operations. 
(5)  Providing, in conjunction with the legal division, a comprehensive personnel management and relations program which: 
a.  Maintains official employee evaluation, discipline and employment records. 
b.  Administers employee benefit programs, including IPERS, FICA, sick leave, vacation, savings program, life insurance, and health insurance benefits. 
c.  Coordinates all employment application procedures, including advertising, screening, civil service testing, interviews, department selection and employee orientation. 
d.  Coordinates all employee training and education assistance requests for the mayor and city council. 
e.  Maintains and updates annually the city's official job description and pay plan in compliance with city council action. 
f.  Functions as the city's representative during all labor relations, civil service, human rights, equal employment opportunity and workers' compensation hearings, meetings or bargaining sessions. 
g.  Administers the city's risk management program by evaluating the city's risk and loss exposure and recommending treatment of such exposure, including, but not limited to, recommending the purchase of insurance to the city council and implementing safety programs and loss control programs which reduce the risk exposures for all municipal operations. 
h.  Administers unemployment insurance benefits. 
i.  Serves as the administrator of the city personnel policy and collective bargaining agreements. 
j.  Manages city employment programs endorsed by the city council, including workfare, work release and work restitution programs. 
k.  Maintains and updates annually the city's statement of policy on personnel and procedures in compliance with city council action. 
l.  Processes all employee grievances through the prescribed procedures in the city's statement of policy on personnel and procedures or labor agreements. 
m.  Administers city administrative policies, risk management policies, and administers accounting policies and procedures. 
(6)  Issuing payment on the treasury for all money duly ordered paid therefrom by the council, but he shall not draw any such payments except upon the vote of the council. Such payments shall be attested by the required three signatures. The controller/city treasurer shall maintain financial records that account for the check number, date, amount, and payee for each payment issued. The controller/city treasurer shall provide a listing of payments to be approved to the council committee prior to the council meeting. The controller/city treasurer shall also provide a listing of payments made prior to the council meeting as allowed for under the city's purchasing manual. 
(7)  Managing the purchasing program for the city. The controller/city treasurer or his designee shall function as the purchasing agent for all purchases made by the city. All city departments shall furnish the agent with purchase specifications and may attach to their purchase request bids and such other information as they may deem helpful to the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall: 
a.  Make no purchases where the amount involved does not exceed $200.00 without having first secured the approval of the chargeable department head to the proposed purchase. If the approval of a department head cannot be secured, authorization by any two members of the administration committee shall be sufficient to authorize the proposed purchase by such agent. 
b.  Make an emergency purchase, if deemed necessary by the purchasing agent and the purchase exceeds the sum of $200.00, however, the agent may make such purchase provided the agent first obtains the approval of two members of the administration committee. 
c.  Ensure that all bills covering purchases made by the purchasing agent be subject to final approval or disapproval by the council when submitted for payment. 
d.  Require and file bids on all purchases made for the city by the agent, except in special cases where authorization by the council to purchase without bids has first been secured or where small purchases or emergency purchases are involved. 
e.  Generally award purchases to the lowest responsible bidder. When the lowest bid is not used, the reason therefor shall be plainly noted in detail on the requisition. Purchases shall be consolidated whenever possible in order to foster favorable bids. 
f.  Make a careful check of all bills covering purchases to ascertain that the written approval of the chairman of the administration committee, the chairperson of the department chargeable with the purchase and one other councilmember has been duly endorsed thereon, and that the bill has been duly approved by the council. 
g.  Prepare for the city administrator's consideration a preliminary budget by January 1 of each year for the coming fiscal year. 
h.  Coordinate the investment of idle funds to ensure that the city obtains the most attractive yet financially sound investment benefits available. 
i.  Prepare and monitor the city's capital improvements program to ensure that the program offers long-term financial stability, including the issuance of long-term debt. 
(Code 2017, § 2-333; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-513. - Acting controller/city treasurer. 
    Whenever the controller/city treasurer is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the director of finance and business operations has not appointed a controller/city treasurer, the controller/city treasurer or the director of finance and business operations shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the controller/city treasurer. 
(Code 2017, § 2-334; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-514-2-534. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INFORMATION SYSTEMS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-535. - Created. 
    The information systems division of the department of finance and business operations for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-351; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-536. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the information systems division of the department of finance and business operations to provide support services to the city administrator, mayor, the city council and all departments in the form of printing, communications and computer services. It shall also produce video programming for Cedar Falls government, educational and local origination channels and to facilitate the playback of video programs on the public access channel. 
(Code 2017, § 2-352; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-537. - Information systems manager. 
(a)  Appointment. An information systems manager shall be appointed by the director of finance and business operations and shall be directly responsible to the director of finance and business operations. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Duties. The information systems manager shall supervise, direct and manage the information systems division. The information systems manager's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the information systems division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division for each fiscal year, the report to be filed with the finance and business operations director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the information systems division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the information systems division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Providing computer maintenance and operations support to all departments through the city mainframe computer, fileservers, network infrastructure, personal computers and all related peripheral equipment. 
(5)  Coordinating the purchase and usage of all computer hardware and software in compliance with administrative policy to ensure system integrity. 
(6)  Managing the city's communications system, including voice mail system, telecommunications and computer communications. 
(7)  Coordinating a training program which provides employees with the type of education necessary for the functions performed. 
(8)  Coordinating the purchase and usage of video production equipment. 
(9)  Managing the city's government, educational, local origination and public access channels. 
(10)  Coordinating the production of video programs for the government access channel with all city departments. 
(11)  Coordinating the production of video programs for the government and educational access channels with institutions and community organizations outside of the city's operation. 
(12)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of finance and business operations. 
(13)  Maintaining and operating police computer and video systems. 
(14)  Maintaining official city maps and keeping the maps in a correct and up-to-date fashion showing new additions, streets, alleys, avenues, public squares, public buildings, bridges, streams and other pertinent objects. The collection of maps shall include, but not be limited to, the city street, plat, zoning, thoroughfare, sewer and ward and precinct maps. 
(Code 2017, § 2-353; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-538. - Acting information systems manager. 
    Whenever the information systems manager is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the director of finance and business operations has not appointed an information systems manager, the information systems manager or the director of finance and business operations shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the information systems manager. 
(Code 2017, § 2-354; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-539-2-569. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC RECORDS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-570. - Created. 
    The public records division of the department of finance and business operations for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-371; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-571. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the public records division of the department of finance and business operations to provide a comprehensive management program for all public records which conforms with federal, state and local regulations. 
(Code 2017, § 2-372; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-572. - City clerk. 
(a)  Appointment. A city clerk shall be appointed by the city council upon recommendation of the director of finance and business operations. The finance and business operations director shall be responsible for the daily supervision of the city clerk and the personnel file and annual review of the city clerk's performance for review by the city administrator, mayor and city council. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures and section 2-159. 
(b)  Duties. The city clerk shall supervise, direct and manage the public records division. The city clerk's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the public records division within the parameters of the departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division to the finance and business operations director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the public records division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the public records division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of finance and business operations. 
(5)  Functioning as the city clerk for all public records management for the city. The duties of the city clerk and his designee shall include: 
a.  Attending all meetings of the council and furnishing the mayor with an abstract of all unfinished business; making an accurate record of the proceedings, rules and ordinances adopted by the council, which shall at all reasonable times be open to the public; issuing all notices of special meetings of the council when called, as provided by law; notifying all committees of their appointment and of the business referred to them; notifying all officers of their election; and performing such other duties as may be by law, ordinance or resolution required of him. 
b.  Preparing, following a regular or special meeting of the council, a condensed statement of the proceedings of the council, including the total expenditure from each municipal fund, and causing the statement to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts, and the statement shall show the gross amount of the claim. 
c.  Maintaining custody of, and keeping in his office, all bylaws, ordinances, records, papers and official documents belonging to the city, proceedings of the council and all returns of assessments and elections and appointments of city officers. The city clerk shall not allow any papers or documents to be taken from his office without the consent of the council. 
d.  Keeping all ordinances passed by the council at length in a book kept for that purpose, and properly indexing the book. It shall be the special duty of the clerk to see that all ordinances are properly and correctly published in the official paper of the city. Immediately following the record of each ordinance, the clerk shall append a certificate stating therein the time and manner of the publication thereof. 
e.  Keeping a book of deeds and contracts executed by or in favor of the city and properly indexing the book. 
f.  Keeping a register of all licenses and permits granted by the city, noting the time when issued, the person to whom issued and the date of the expiration of the licenses and permits, and filing and preserving in his office all petitions, remonstrances and other papers presented to the council. 
g.  Preserving and keeping all registry books, alphabetical lists and other papers pertaining to the voting registration until destroyed, as provided by law. The clerk shall, upon application of the registrars, deliver such registry books, alphabetical lists and pool books prior to their first meeting for each election. 
h.  Furnishing to any officer or other person requiring the record, paper or document a certified copy of any record, paper or document on file in his office. When such copy is furnished to any person other than a city officer, the clerk shall be entitled to receive the same fees as are allowed county officers for like services. 
i.  Preparing all certificates of assessments for sidewalks, sewers and other public improvements. The clerk shall promptly certify to the county auditor, as provided by law, all assessments and taxes of every kind and nature levied by the council which are required to be so certified. 
j.  Procuring all necessary books and stationery for the use of the council and city officers. 
k.  Being clerk of the civil service commission for the city and performing such duties as are required of the commission's clerk by law. 
l.  Upon entering the duties of the city clerk, in addition to the oath or affirmation, executing a bond in the form and conditions prescribed by state law and by ordinance of the council. Such bond shall be filed with the mayor. 
m.  Maintaining the seal of the city clerk, consisting of a disk having around its margin the words "City Clerk, Iowa," and within a circle on the face thereof the words "Cedar Falls." 
n.  Being responsible for administration and enforcement of parking meters and other parking facilities, as provided in section 2-574. 
o.  Supervising the clerical pool. 
(6)  Submitting to the council, at the end of each fiscal year, a copy of the annual report filed with the state auditor as required by the laws of the state. Upon approval of the report by the council, it shall be published in at least two newspapers of general circulation or in one if no other is published in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 2-373; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-573. - Acting city clerk. 
    Whenever the city clerk is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the finance and business operations director has not appointed a city clerk, the city clerk or finance and business operations director shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 2-374; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-574. - Parking enforcement and administration section. 
(a)  The parking enforcement and administration section of the public records division of the department of finance and business operations for the city is hereby created. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the parking enforcement and administration section of the public records division to provide a full range of parking enforcement and administration services dealing with parking meters and other parking facilities, and related parking enforcement provisions. 
(c)  The duties of the parking enforcement and administration section shall be as follows: 
(1)  To provide for enforcement and collection of all parking metered locations and other parking facilities, and repair of equipment. 
(2)  Subject to the approval of the council, the city clerk shall appoint parking attendants on a full-time or part-time basis, to be compensated from parking enforcement and administration section funds. 
(3)  To maintain all parking meter and other parking facilities and related administration records, and handle all parking receipts and disbursements. 
(4)  To enforce and administer all of the provisions of division 2, parking meters and other parking facilities, of article IV, stopping, standing and parking, of chapter 23, traffic and motor vehicles, and any other duties and responsibilities assigned to said section by the director of finance and business operations or the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-375; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-575-2-596. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LEGAL SERVICES DIVISION 

Sec. 2-597. - Created. 
    The legal services division of the department of finance and business operations for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-391; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-598. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the legal services division of the department of finance and business operations to provide legal counsel to the city and all of its entities. 
(Code 2017, § 2-392; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-599. - Appointment, powers and duties of city attorney. 
(a)  Appointment; supervision. A city attorney shall be appointed by the director of finance and business operations and shall be responsible to such director. The finance and business operations director shall be responsible for the daily supervision of the city attorney and file an annual evaluation of the city attorney's performance for review by the city administrator, mayor, and city council. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures and section 2-159. 
(b)  Duties. The city attorney shall supervise, direct and manage the legal services division. The city attorney's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the legal services division within the parameters of the departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division to the finance and business operations director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the legal services division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the legal services division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the departmental policy. 
(4)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of finance and business operations. 
(5)  Providing, in conjunction with the financial services division, a comprehensive personnel management and relations program which includes: Providing risk management and safety program services to all city departments. 
a.  Functions as the city's representative during all labor relations, civil service, human rights, equal employment opportunity and workers' compensation hearings, meetings or bargaining sessions. 
b.  Administers the city's risk management program by evaluating the city's risk and loss exposure and recommending treatment of such exposure, including, but not limited to, recommending the purchase of insurance to the city council and implementing safety programs and loss control programs which reduce the risk exposures for all municipal operations. 
c.  Administers unemployment insurance benefits. 
d.  Manages city employment programs endorsed by the city council, including workfare, work release and work restitution programs. 
e.  Maintains and updates annually the city's statement of policy on personnel and procedures in compliance with city council action. 
f.  Processes all employee grievances through the prescribed procedures in the city's statement of policy on personnel and procedures or labor agreements. 
g.  Maintains official employee evaluation, discipline and employment records. 
h.  Administers employee benefit programs, including IPERS, FICA, sick leave, vacation, savings program, life insurance, and health insurance benefits. 
i.  Serves as the administrator of the city personnel policy and collective bargaining agreements. 
j.  Coordinates all employment application procedures, including advertising, screening, civil service testing, interviews, department selection and employee orientation. 
k.  Coordinates all employee training and education assistance requests for the mayor and city council. 
l.  Maintains and updates annually the city's official job description and pay plan in compliance with city council action. 
m.  Administers city administrative policies, risk management policies, and administers accounting policies and procedures. 
(6)  On or before January 1, after the adjournment of any general assembly, preparing and presenting to the council for passage such ordinances as may be required to amend existing ordinances or to repeal existing ordinances on account of laws enacted by the general assembly, or such ordinances as may be necessary or which the city attorney shall think proper in view of the laws enacted by the general assembly amending existing statutes or creating new statutes applicable to cities. 
(7)  Acting as legal advisor and counsel for the city and all officers of the city, including all boards and commissions of the city, except autonomous administrative boards of trustees; giving his opinion upon questions of law arising out of any matters pertaining to the interests of the city whenever requested by the mayor or council or other officers of the city; giving legal advice to any of the city officers concerning their official duties when required to do so; and giving legal advice and assistance, as may be required, to all committees of the council and, when requested, giving his opinion in writing, which shall be filed and preserved among the records. 
(8)  Prosecuting all suits for violation of the city ordinances, except as otherwise provided. 
(9)  Prosecuting or defending all suits and actions to be brought and pending in any court in the state or United States to which the city is a party or in which, in the opinion of the council, the interests of the city are brought into controversy, or in which the official acts of any of its officers, servants or agents are involved, and taking appeals in such cases as the interests of the city require or whenever directed by the council to do so. 
(10)  When directed to do so by the council or proper officers of the city, including all boards and commissions of the city except the various utility boards of trustees, preparing drafts for contracts, ordinances, condemnation proceedings and forms of any other legal papers which may be required for the use of the city or its officers in the discharge of their duties. 
(11)  Signing the name of the city to bonds and papers of whatever kind necessary in legal proceedings for the prosecution of any suit in court, when directed to do so by the council. 
(12)  Attending all regular meetings of the council and special meetings thereof when notified to do so; attending meetings of the committees of the council when notified by the chairman to do so; and attending meetings of all boards and commissions of the city, except autonomous administrative boards of trustees, when notified by such boards and commissions. 
(Code 2017, § 2-393; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-600. - Appointment and duties of additional city attorneys; employment of associate counsel. 
    The city attorney may appoint additional attorneys upon approval of the director of finance and business operations and city administrator. The attorneys shall prosecute all actions for violations of city ordinances or assist the city attorney in the prosecution thereof, as well as other duties, as assigned by the city attorney. In any case which may arise, associate counsel shall not be employed at the expense of the city, unless such employment shall be authorized by resolution of the council or the board whose department is affected. The director of finance and business operations may hire additional attorneys for special legal representation on a contract basis or hourly basis, based upon existing city administrative policies. 
(Code 2017, § 2-394; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-601. - Acting city attorney. 
    Whenever the city attorney is out of the city, or is unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the director of finance and business operations has not appointed a city attorney, the assistant city attorney shall serve as designee and exercise all the powers and duties of the city attorney. 
(Code 2017, § 2-395; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-602. - Compensation of attorney and assistant attorney; allowance for office expenses. 
    The salary and allowance for the office expenses of the city attorney and assistant city attorney shall be established annually by resolution by the council; provided, however, that the salary of the attorney shall not include payment for services of the attorney for the prosecution or defense of suits and actions in any courts of the state or United States or before any agency or commission of the state or the federal government, except for prosecutions for violations of city ordinances in magistrate's court. 
(Code 2017, § 2-396; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-603-2-622. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LIAISON LIBRARY AND COMMUNITY CENTER/SENIOR SERVICES SECTION 

Sec. 2-623. - Library liaison. 
    The finance and business operations director shall act as the liaison to the library board of trustees. As part of this liaison relationship, the library director shall provide updates of the library operations to the director of finance and business operations and work with the director of finance and business operations in managing the community center/senior services section. 
(Code 2017, § 2-416; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-624. - Community center/senior services section. 
(a)  The community center/senior services section of the department of finance and business operations for the city is hereby created. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the community center/senior services section of the department of finance and business operations to provide services and programs for the senior citizens of the city and a location for community gatherings, special events, and group meetings which encourage social, recreational, and business interaction of citizens of the city. 
(c)  The section shall have the power to operate and maintain the city community center, in compliance with the operations and programming policy prescribed by the community center and senior services board, the library director, the director of finance and business operations, and the city council. 
(d)  The library director shall manage the community center/senior services section and shall be responsible for assigning staff to the library and the community center facilities as deemed necessary. 
(e)  The library director shall make an annual report of the activities of this section for each fiscal year and the report shall be filed with the finance and business operations director. 
(f)  The library director shall attend the meetings of the community center and senior services board and provide full and complete records of all proceedings. 
(Code 2017, § 2-417; Ord. No. 2825, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-625-2-651. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-652. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city the department of community development. The administration of the department shall be integrated into and made a part of the regular city administration, and shall be coordinated with all other departments. 
(Code 2017, § 2-436; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-653. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the community development department to plan, coordinate and assist in the safe and efficient development of the city by the public and private sectors. Duties shall include: 
(1)  Professional planning services encompassing supervision of planning, architectural and landscape architectural consultants; zoning administration; capital improvements programming; subdivision design; and comprehensive planning including population projections, economic forecasts, land use planning and other special long range studies. 
(2)  Building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical inspection services for all construction types. 
(3)  Economic development coordination and assistance which expands the city's employment and tax base in a safe and efficient manner. 
(4)  Grantsmanship activities for all city departments and programs, including interstate substitution, community development block grants, federal or state rent assistance programs, federal or state rehabilitation programs and federal or state conservation programs. 
(5)  Operation and maintenance of public drainageways, storm sewers, catchbasins, dams, flood control properties and stormwater detention facilities. 
(6)  Operation and maintenance of other public structures, programs or facilities specifically assigned by the city administrator, mayor or city council. 
(7)  Adherence to the city's landlord accountability code (chapter 11, article II, division 5), maintenance and nuisance codes, and all other code-related enforcement. 
(Code 2017, § 2-437; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-654. - Director of community development-Generally. 
(a)  Appointment. The director of community development shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator. The city administrator shall recommend this appointment to the mayor for city council approval. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The director of community development shall supervise, direct and manage the conduct of the following divisions: 
a.  Planning and community services. 
b.  Visitors and tourism/cultural programs. 
c.  Inspection services. 
d.  Recreation and community programs. 
(2)  The director is empowered to exert supervisory and management control over each division and is empowered to appoint a planning and community services manager, building official, visitors and tourism/cultural programs manager and recreation and community programs manager to serve as division heads. The division heads are individually charged by the director to carry out all of the statutory duties mandated by federal, state and local regulations of their respective divisions. The director is responsible for the establishment of broad policies related to departmental conduct, procedures and operations, and the formation of programs which provide the citizens of the city with a full range of developmental services. The director may peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate under his or her direction for any lawful reason. 
(3)  The director shall be responsible for the preparation and administration of the departmental work program and budgets to ensure that all statutory and subsidiary programs are implemented by the division responsible. All purchases initiated by any division for any operation or program shall be approved by the director prior to submission to the city council for payment. 
(4)  The director shall perform all duties assigned by the city administrator, mayor and city council and shall be under the direct administrative supervision of the city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-438; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1. 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-655. - Director of community development-Duties relative to boards, commissions and committees. 
    The director of community development or the director's designee shall meet regularly with and furnish such assistance and information to the following commissions, boards, committees and other organizations when necessary: 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Board of adjustment. 
(3)  Housing commission. 
(4)  Plumbing examiners, electrical examiners and board of appeals. 
(5)  Metropolitan transportation board. 
(6)  Waterloo airport zoning commission. 
(7)  Historic preservation commission. 
(8)  Iowa Northland regional council of governments. 
(9)  Cedar Valley partnership. 
(10)  City neighborhood organizations (such as Community Main Street, College Hill Partnership, Overman Park Neighborhood Association, and Northern Cedar Falls Neighborhood Association). 
(11)  Board of rental housing appeals. 
(12)  Waterloo airport commission. 
(13)  Art and culture board. 
(14)  Visitors and tourism board. 
(15)  Island Park Beach House board. 
(16)  Any applicable federal and state agencies, such as the state department of natural resources, the state economic development authority, the state department of transportation, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the United States Federal Emergency Management Administration, and the United States Federal Housing Authority. 
(Code 2017, § 2-439; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-656. - Acting director of community development. 
    Whenever the director of community development is out of the city or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the city administrator has not appointed a director of community development, the director of community development or city administrator shall appoint one of the division heads as the acting director of community development. This designee shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the director. 
(Code 2017, § 2-440; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-657. - Authority of council. 
    All final authority over the administration and policy of the department of community development shall be retained and exercised by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-441; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-658-2-687. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND COMMUNITY SERVICES DIVISION 

Sec. 2-688. - Created. 
    The planning and community services division of the department of community development for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-461; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-689. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the planning and community services division of the department of community development to provide a full range of professional planning services for all city departments, public projects and citizens of the city. 
(b)  The division shall have the power to coordinate all long-range plans developed by any public entity in the city. 
(c)  It shall also be the duty of this division to coordinate municipal economic development and housing programs. 
(Code 2017, § 2-462; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-690. - Planning and community services manager. 
(a)  Appointment. A planning and community services manager shall be appointed by the director of community development and shall be directly responsible to the director of community development. The planning and community services manager shall act as the city planner and the city zoning administrator. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Duties. The planning and community services manager shall supervise, direct and manage the planning and community services division, composed of the planning, economic development, and community development sections. The manager's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the planning and community services division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division for each year, the report to be filed with the community development director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the planning and community services division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the planning and community services division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of community development. 
(5)  Working with federal, state and adjoining local governments in implementing the city's economic development and community development programs. 
(6)  Supervising and coordinating development and implementation of the city's comprehensive plan, subdivision and zoning ordinances, including the necessary research, analysis, plan preparation, design, program development and writing and editing of reports; supervising and coordinating development and implementation of the city's community development, economic development and redevelopment plans, including marketing, business development and financial assistance, and coordinating with other departments and agencies regarding the city's housing programs. 
(7)  Preparing and administering the division's work program and budget after consultation with the planning and zoning commission, assigning staff, determining schedules and reviewing progress on the work program. 
(8)  Working on economic development matters in cooperation with the city administrator, mayor, city council and metropolitan economic development committees, and appearing, either in person or by agent, before the council and committees. 
(9)  Administering the community development block grant program, including serving as contract compliance officer, monitoring outside contracted services to other departments and agencies and procuring and managing all necessary state and federal grants. 
(10)  Supervising, coordinating and reviewing work performed by professional consulting firms retained for planning, development and redevelopment studies. 
(11)  Supervising and coordinating analysis of the city's physical and socioeconomic characteristics and direct land use, population and economic forecasts. 
(12)  Acting as technical advisor on planning and development matters to the city administrator, mayor, city council and planning and zoning commission, and appealing, either in person or by agent before the council and commission to report or advise on major planning and community development projects, significant economic, housing, land use and population study findings, and new planning and development techniques being utilized in other communities. 
(13)  Working with all city departments in matters relating to planning and community development programs. 
(14)  Reviewing all public projects undertaken by city departments, special districts, the county and other governmental agencies to ensure they are compatible with city plans. 
(15)  Aiding the planning and zoning commission and city council in the development of the capital improvements program and other long-term financial plans. 
(16)  Preparing educational and informational materials; consulting with developers, public officials and citizens on planning and development matters; and coordinating and reviewing work performed by professional consulting firms retained for planning and development studies. 
(17)  Supervising and having jurisdiction over the conduct of the zoning administrator and the enforcement of all zoning regulations enacted by the city. 
(18)  Coordinating metropolitan planning efforts related to transportation, economic development and other related activities with all other affected entities. 
(19)  Serving as the city representative on the metropolitan transportation board. 
(20)  Providing staff support to the city board of adjustment, city planning and zoning commission, housing commission and board of rental housing appeals. 
(21)  Supervising and managing the city's housing programs, including rental assistance, rental rehabilitation, moderate rehabilitation, emergency repairs, housing rehabilitation, housing vouchers and others as these become available. 
(Code 2017, § 2-463; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-691. - Acting planning and community services manager. 
    Whenever the planning and community services manager is out of the city, or is unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the director of community development has not appointed a planning and community services manager, the planning and community services manager or the director of community development shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all powers and duties of the planning and community services manager. 
(Code 2017, § 2-464; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-692-2-714. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VISITORS AND TOURISM/CULTURAL PROGRAMS DIVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 3, 2019, moved the previous Art. VI, Div. 3 to Art. VII, Div. 3. The former Art. VI, Div. 3 pertained to Engineering Services. 

Sec. 2-715. - Created. 
    The visitors and tourism/cultural programs division of the department of community development for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-581; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-716. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division of the department of community development to provide visitors and tourism programs and services for the visitors and tourists to the city that promote overnight lodging, purchase of goods and services from city businesses, and promote special events, festivals, and attractions in the city; and to provide cultural programs for the citizens of the city, including fine arts, performing arts, spectator arts and crafts. 
(b)  The division shall have the power to operate and maintain the visitors and tourism/cultural programs services offices, in compliance with the operations and programming policy prescribed by the city visitors and tourism board, the director of community development, and the city council; and to operate and maintain the James and Meryl Hearst Art and Culture Center, in compliance with the operations and programming policy prescribed by the city art and culture board, the director of community development, and the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-582; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-717. - Manager. 
(a)  Appointment. A visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager shall be appointed by the director of community development. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager shall supervise, direct and manage the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division. The manager's powers and duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To promulgate orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division within the parameters of city, departmental, visitors and tourism board policies, and art and culture board policies. 
(2)  To make an annual report of the activities of the division for each fiscal year, to be filed with the community development director, the visitors and tourism board, the art and culture board, and the city council. 
(3)  To assign the personnel of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division, and to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with city and departmental policies, visitors and tourism board policies, and art and culture board policies. 
(4)  To perform or cause to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of community development. 
(5)  To manage the visitors and tourism offices, programs and projects in accord with operations and programming policies established by the city visitors and tourism board, the director of community development, and the city council; and to manage the James and Meryl Hearst Art and Culture Center, in compliance with operations and programming policies established by the city art and culture board, the director of community development, and the city council. 
(6)  To implement a full range of visitors and tourism programs for the city within the financial constraints and program offerings recommended by the visitors and tourism board and authorized by the city council. 
(7)  To implement a full range of art and cultural programs for the city within the financial constraints and program offerings recommended by the art and culture board and authorized by the city council. 
(8)  To maintain for the city visitors and tourism board and for the art and culture board: 
a.  Full and complete records of all proceedings. 
b.  Full and complete records of all receipts and disbursements in conjunction with the financial services division. 
c.  Full and complete records of all donations, devices and bequests received and disbursed, or placed in special accounts in conjunction with the financial services division. 
d.  An inventory of all pictures, paintings, statues, relics, books, papers, journals, supplies, equipment, and other property held by the division in the city's name in conjunction with the financial services division. 
(Code 2017, § 2-583; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-718. - Acting manager. 
    Whenever the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager is out of the city or is unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the director of community development has not appointed a visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager, the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager or the director of community development shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager. 
(Code 2017, § 2-584; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-719-2-741. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION SERVICES DIVISION 

Sec. 2-742. - Created. 
    The inspection services division of the department of community development for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-501; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-743. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the inspection services division of the department of community development to provide for the inspection of all construction for its compliance with state, federal and local regulations. 
(Code 2017, § 2-502; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-744. - Building official. 
(a)  Appointment. A building official shall be appointed by the director of community development and shall be directly responsible to the director of community development. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Duties. The building official shall supervise, direct and manage the inspection services division. The building official's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the inspection services division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division for each year, the report to be filed with the community development director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the inspection services division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the inspection services division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Supervising and having jurisdiction over the conduct of the plumbing inspector, electrical inspector, building inspector and mechanical inspector of the city. 
(5)  Enforcing the International Residential Code, the International Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, and Uniform Mechanical Code in the form adopted by the city council as they relate to construction activity within the city. 
(6)  Coordinating enforcement activities with the department of public safety for all construction affected by the housing code, life safety code and minimum housing quality standards. 
(7)  Supervising the city's code enforcement program. 
(8)  Supervising the design and construction of all city buildings and other structures. 
(9)  Managing and supervising the city's stormwater management program in conjunction with the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 2-503; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-745. - Acting building official. 
    Whenever the building official is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the city council has not appointed a building official, the building official or director of community development shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the building official. 
(Code 2017, § 2-504; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-746-2-777. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RECREATION AND COMMUNITY PROGRAMS DIVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 3, 2019, moved the previous Art. VI, Div. 5 to Art. VII, Div. 4. The former Art. VI, Div. 5 pertained to Water Reclamation. 

Sec. 2-778. - Created. 
    The recreation and community programs division of the department of community development for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-601; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-779. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the recreation and community programs division of the department of community development to provide active and passive leisure services for the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The division shall have the power to operate the city's recreation centers, swimming pools, recreational facilities and golf courses, and their associated programs. 
(Code 2017, § 2-602; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-780. - Manager. 
(a)  Appointment. A recreation and community programs division manager shall be appointed by the director of community development and shall be directly responsible to the director of community development. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The recreation and community programs division manager shall supervise, direct and manage the recreation and community programs division, which is composed of the aquatic, golf, and recreation sections. The manager's powers and duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To promulgate orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the recreation and community programs division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  To make an annual report of the activities of the division for each year, to be filed with the community development director. 
(3)  To assign the personnel of the recreation and community programs division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the recreation and community programs division, and to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  To oversee the contract with the golf pro in conjunction with the operations and maintenance manager. 
(5)  To provide a full range of active and passive recreational programs, available to all age groups, which provides social, educational and competitive enrichment to the participants. 
(6)  To maintain and operate the city's recreational center and public swimming pools. 
(7)  To provide a full range of aquatic programs, available to all age groups, which are coordinated with the public school system and private clubs to provide social, educational and competitive enrichment to all participants. 
(8)  To perform or cause to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of community development. 
(9)  To supervise the work and performance of all private concessionaires or private recreation service contractors authorized by the city council to have operation rights to city recreational facilities. 
(Code 2017, § 2-603; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-781. - Acting manager. 
    Whenever the recreation and community programs division manager is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the community development director has not appointed a recreation and community programs division manager, the recreation and community programs division manager or the community development director shall appoint a designee who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the recreation and community programs division manager. 
(Code 2017, § 2-604; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-782-2-807. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, § 2, adopted June 3, 2019, renamed the former Art. VII, as set out herein. The former Art. VII. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2017, §§ 2-541-2-546; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-808. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city the department of public works. The administration of the department shall be integrated into and made a part of the regular city administration, and shall be coordinated with all other departments. 
(Code 2017, § 2-541; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-809. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the public works department to provide, operate and maintain: 
(1)  Public streets, bridges, parking lots, sidewalks and rights-of-way, exclusive of class I medians and sidewalks, including those maintained by private property owners in accordance with city ordinance. 
(2)  Collection and disposal of residentially generated refuse, commercial refuse collection and disposal specifically contracted by a commercial establishment and the city, and the operation of the city's refuse transfer station. 
(3)  City motor pool operations for all departments, including maintenance, purchase or lease of all motorized licensed vehicles and special equipment not specifically assigned to a department. 
(4)  All public buildings under city ownership except those controlled by Sartori Hospital or the city utilities. 
(5)  Traffic signs, signals and pavement markings. 
(6)  Other public structures, programs or facilities specifically assigned by the mayor or city council. 
(7)  Professional civil engineering services encompassing supervision of engineering consultants; establishment of street grades and benchmarks; maintenance of field notes for all improvements installed; design of public improvements including the preparation of costs, plans and specifications; inspection of all public improvements constructed; and maintenance of official city maps, profiles, papers, books and surveys. 
(8)  Public grounds maintenance in city parks, city golf courses, riverfront land, street medians and any other public lands assigned by the mayor and city council. 
(9)  All trees and shrubs in public places, and enforce all city regulations related to vegetation control within the city. 
(10)  Cemeteries, including interments and the keeping of all pertinent records. 
(11)  Water reclamation. 
(12)  Operation and maintenance of public sanitary sewage collection and disposal facilities, including lift stations, force mains, treatment plants, sewer lines, manholes, detention basins and public septic tanks. 
(Code 2017, § 2-542; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-810. - Director of public works-Generally. 
(a)  Appointment. The director of public works shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator. The city administrator shall recommend this appointment to the mayor for city council approval. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The director of public works shall supervise, direct and manage the conduct of the following divisions and sections: 
a.  Operations and maintenance. 
b.  Engineering services. 
c.  Water reclamation. 
(2)  The director is empowered to exert supervisory and management control over each division and is empowered to appoint a city engineer, operations and maintenance manager, and a water reclamation manager. The managers are individually charged by the director to carry out all of the statutory duties mandated by federal, state and local regulations affecting their respective divisions. The director is responsible for the establishment of broad policies related to departmental employee conduct, procedures, operations and the formation of programs which maintain and operate public facilities and structures assigned to the department. The director may peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate under his or her direction for any lawful reason. 
(3)  The director shall be responsible for the preparation and administration of the departmental work program and budgets to ensure that all statutory and subsidiary programs are implemented by the division responsible. All purchases initiated by any division for any operation or program shall be approved by the director prior to submission to the city council for payment. 
(4)  The director shall perform all other duties assigned by the city administrator, mayor and city council and shall be under the direct administrative supervision of the city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-543; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-811. - Director of public works-Duties relative to boards and commissions. 
    The director or designee shall meet regularly with and furnish such assistance and information to the following commissions, boards, committees and other organizations when necessary: 
(1)  Parks and recreation commission. 
(2)  County solid waste management commission. 
(3)  Big Woods Lake Park and campground boards. 
(4)  Joint governance committee for the UNI demonstration area. 
(5)  Any applicable federal and state agencies. 
(Code 2017, § 2-544; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-812. - Acting director of public works. 
    Whenever the director of public works is out of the city, or is unable to act for any reason, including those periods of time when the city administrator has not appointed a director of public works, the director of public works or city administrator shall designate an acting director. The acting director shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the director. 
(Code 2017, § 2-545; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-813. - Authority of council. 
    All final authority over the administration and policy of the department of public shall be retained and exercised by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-546; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-814-2-834. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE DIVISION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, § 2, adopted June 3, 2019, renamed the former Art. VII, Div. 2, as set out herein. The former Art. VII, Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2017, §§ 2-566-2-571; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014. 

Sec. 2-835. - Created. 
    The operations and maintenance division of the department of public works for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-566; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-836. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the operations and maintenance division of the department of public works to construct, maintain and repair all streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers; provide for refuse collection and disposal; maintain public buildings, maintain municipal vehicles and equipment, and provide public grounds maintenance in city parks, city golf courses, public riverfront land, class I street medians and rights-of-way and city-owned cemeteries, and public arboriculture. 
(Code 2017, § 2-567; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-837. - Manager of operations and maintenance. 
(a)  Appointment. The manager of operations and maintenance shall be appointed by and shall be directly responsible to the director of public works. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Duties. The manager of operations and maintenance shall supervise, direct and manage the operations and maintenance division, composed of the refuse, street, traffic operations, public buildings, vehicle maintenance, parks, cemetery, and golf course maintenance sections. The manager's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Providing for the repair of all streets, sidewalks, bridges and parking lots to ensure that they are kept in a reasonably safe condition. 
(2)  Inspecting all sewers in operation in the city at frequent and regular intervals in a systematic manner to ensure that all parts of the system and its appurtenances are kept in working order. In case of any defect in the operation of any sewer due to stoppage or break, repairs shall be made without delay. 
(3)  Providing for the safe and sanitary collection and disposal of all residentially generated refuse and for the disposal of all refuse generated by private individuals or commercial enterprises who contract with the city for disposal. 
(4)  Maintaining all designated city vehicles and equipment through a central vehicle and equipment pool. 
(5)  Providing for snow removal, ice control and leaf collection on public streets. 
(6)  Operating and maintaining all public traffic signals. 
(7)  Providing and maintaining, in conformance with city ordinances and chapter 23, all traffic signs and pavement markings. 
(8)  Maintaining all public buildings assigned to the division, including janitorial activity. 
(9)  Designing all city parks and public landscaping in association with the needs of the director of public works and other public entities. 
(10)  Coordinating the city pesticide application program in conformance with state and federal regulations. 
(11)  Supervising the maintenance, compilation and preservation of accurate cemetery interment and lot sales records through supervision of the cemetery section. 
(12)  Coordinating the care and maintenance of all city arboricultural needs in conformance to city ordinance by serving as the city arborist, delegating specific duties to the arborist section. 
(13)  Managing all public grounds, including parks, cemeteries, golf courses, class I street rights-of-way and medians, public driveways, storm sewers, catchbasins, dams, flood control properties, and stormwater detention basins, riverfront lands and other property assigned by the mayor and city council. 
(14)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the operations and maintenance division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(15)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division to the public works director. 
(16)  Assigning the personnel of the operations and maintenance division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(17)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of public works. 
(c)  Powers. The manager of operations and maintenance shall have power to appoint, if necessary, supervisors for the following sections: streets, traffic, refuse, cemetery, parks, golf, and buildings. 
(Code 2017, § 2-568; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-838. - Acting manager of operations and maintenance. 
    Whenever the operations and maintenance division manager is out of the city, or is unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the public works director has not appointed an operations and maintenance manager, the manager of operations and maintenance or the public works director shall appoint an acting manager who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the manager of operations and maintenance. 
(Code 2017, § 2-569; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-839. - Authority to impose restrictions on vehicle weight or temporarily close streets. 
(a)  Whenever any street within the city, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions, may be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced, the operations and maintenance manager shall, without direction from the council, for a period not to exceed 90 days, prohibit the operation of vehicles or impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated on any such street, and shall erect or cause to be erected and maintain signs giving notice of such restrictions at each end or portion of the street affected. 
(b)  Whenever signs are erected giving notice of such closures, no person shall disobey the restriction stated on such signs. 
(Code 2017, § 2-570; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-840. - Report of cost of improvements when cost charged to abutting property. 
    In case any improvement is ordered by the council, and the cost thereof is to be charged to the abutting property, the operations and maintenance manager shall make an itemized report of the cost of such improvement to the council within ten days after completion of the improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 2-571; Ord. No. 2825, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-841-2-862. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENGINEERING SERVICES DIVISION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 3, 2019, moved the previous Art. VII, Div. 3 to Art. VI, Div. 3. The former Art, VII. Div. 3 pertained to Visitors and Tourism/Cultural Programs. 

Sec. 2-863. - Created. 
    The engineering services division of the department of public works for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-481; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-864. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the engineering services division of the department of public works to provide a full range of professional engineering services for all city departments and public projects. 
(b)  The division shall have the power to design, inspect, survey and map all city infrastructures. 
(Code 2017, § 2-482; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-865. - City engineer. 
(a)  Appointment. A city engineer shall be appointed by the public works director and shall be directly responsible to the director of public works. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Qualifications. The person appointed to the office of city engineer shall be a professional civil engineer licensed by the state and fully qualified to practice within the state. One hundred and eighty days shall be provided from the date of appointment to qualify as provided by law. 
(c)  Duties. The city engineer shall supervise, direct and manage the engineering services division. The city engineer's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the engineering services division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division to the public works director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the engineering services division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the engineering services division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of public works. 
(5)  Being in full charge of all public improvements ordered by the city council and preparing estimates of costs, plans and specifications and presenting such information to the council for approval, and supervising the construction of such improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications and, upon completion, preparing a final report for the council giving in detail the itemized final costs and other pertinent facts of such improvements. 
(6)  Making all necessary surveys of streets, alleys, avenues and public squares, and other surveys when required by the council, showing the lines, dimensions, names of streets, lots and blocks and other pertinent facts. 
(7)  Taking the necessary levels and measurements of all streets, alleys or avenues where the measurements have not already been done, for the purpose of establishing street grades, and preparing the necessary profiles and drawings showing the existing surface and the grades proposed and submitting the proposed grades to the council for approval and proper establishment of the grades by ordinance. 
(8)  Creating a system so that notes of all surveys, levels, grades and other field work are kept in field notebooks. The notebooks shall be numbered in regular order and the notes entered in them in a manner which ensures that the work can be readily made out, and which shows in which part of the city the work has been done, giving the name of the street, number of the lot and block and exact location of lines or grades or whatever else pertains to the field work, that they may be clearly located on the ground. All calculations relating to the notes and surveys shall appear on the pages of the field books. 
(9)  Requiring that benchmarks are to be placed upon some solid and secure point readily reached from the adjoining streets which identify the levels and grades. These reference marks shall preserve the survey of the streets, blocks and lots, in a clear description made in field books. 
(10)  Assist with maintaining official city maps and keeping the maps in a correct and up-to-date fashion showing new additions, streets, alleys, avenues, public squares, public buildings, bridges, streams and other pertinent objects. 
(11)  Preserving in the office all field notes, maps, plans, profiles, papers, books, writings, and records, and arranging and indexing the records in a manner which allows ready reference. All field books kept by the engineer and all necessary blanks for records, maps and plans used by the city engineer in the discharge of the official duties shall be furnished at the expense of the city, and such books, records and files shall be the exclusive property of the city, and at the expiration of the term of office or the resignation or removal of the city engineer he shall turn over the books, records and files to his successor, or to some person duly authorized to receive the books, records and files for the city. 
(12)  Carefully entering all construction data of all public improvements into the permanent office records. Such records shall include the location of extensions of sewer lines, streets and other public improvements. 
(13)  Reviewing all proposed subdivisions submitted for approval to the city planning and zoning commission and the council and examining such subdivisions carefully as to their compliance with good engineering practices and to the subdivision regulations, and informing the commission and the council in writing as to the findings and compliance with the subdivision regulations. 
(14)  Coordinating the design, inspection and construction of all road and street projects with the state, federal and local government authorities and the respective professional design and inspection consultants and contractors. 
(15)  Managing and supervising the city's stormwater management program in conjunction with inspection services. 
(16)  Supervising the design and construction of all city infrastructure, including wastewater treatment facilities, force mains, levees, and lift stations. 
(Code 2017, § 2-483; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-866. - Acting city engineer. 
    Whenever the city engineer is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the public works director has not appointed a city engineer, the city engineer or director of public works shall appoint a designee who is qualified to exercise all the powers and duties of the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 2-484; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-867-2-873. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER RECLAMATION DIVISION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2940, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 3, 2019, moved the previous Art. VII, Div. 4 to Art. VI, Div. 5. The former Art. VII, Div. 4 pertained to Recreation and Community Programs. 

Sec. 2-874. - Created. 
    The water reclamation division of the department of public works for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-521; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-875. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the water reclamation division of the department of public works to provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of sewage collected by public facilities. 
(Code 2017, § 2-522; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-876. - Water reclamation manager. 
(a)  Appointment. A manager of water reclamation shall be appointed by and shall be directly responsible to the director of public works. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all statutory civil service procedures. The manager will also serve as the superintendent of water reclamation. 
(b)  Duties. The manager of water reclamation shall supervise, direct and manage the water reclamation division. The manager's duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Promulgating orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the water reclamation division within the parameters of departmental policy. 
(2)  Making an annual report of the activities of the division to the public works director. 
(3)  Assigning the personnel of the water reclamation division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the water reclamation division, and prescribing rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(4)  Operating and maintaining all public sewage treatment and pumping facilities, including septic tanks, lift stations, detention basins and the main plant, in conformance with state discharge permits and federal regulations. 
(5)  Performing or causing to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of public works. 
(Code 2017, § 2-523; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-877. - Acting manager of water reclamation. 
    Whenever the water reclamation manager is out of the city, or is unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the public works director has not appointed a water reclamation manager, the manager of water reclamation or the public works director shall appoint an acting manager who shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the manager of water reclamation. 
(Code 2017, § 2-524; Ord. No. 2825, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2940, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 2-878-2-915. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-916. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city the department of public safety services. The department of public safety services shall consist of two divisions: police operations and fire operations. The administration of the department shall be integrated into and made a part of the regular city administration and shall be coordinated with all other city departments. 
(Code 2017, § 2-626; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-917. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the public safety services department to provide the citizens of Cedar Falls with police and fire protection by preserving the public peace and protecting life and property. 
(Code 2017, § 2-627; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-918. - Director of public safety services-Generally. 
(a)  Appointment. The director of public safety services shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator. The city administrator shall recommend this appointment to the mayor for city council approval. Such appointment shall be in accordance with all applicable statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The director of public safety services shall supervise, direct and manage the conduct of the following divisions: 
a.  Police operations. 
b.  Fire operations. 
(2)  The director is empowered to exert supervisory and management control over each division. The director may also serve as either the police chief or the fire chief. The director is empowered to recommend for appointment to the city administrator, and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval, either a deputy director of police operations (police chief) or a deputy director of fire operations (fire chief), who are individually charged by the director to carry out all of the statutory duties mandated by federal, state and local regulations of his or her respective division. 
(3)  The director is responsible for the establishment of broad policies related to departmental conduct, procedures and operations, and the formation of programs which provide the citizens of the city with police and fire protection. Said policies and programs shall provide the latitude for each division chief to respond rapidly and effectively during emergencies within the scope of federal, state and local regulations. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the director to cause the enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city of which the department takes cognizance. The director shall also be responsible for the control, direction, efficiency, and internal affairs of the department of public safety services and shall have the power and authority to establish and assign programs within the department as is deemed necessary to carry out the functions, objectives and goals of said department mandated by the city council, state or federal government of said department and to proscribe rules, regulations, policies and procedures for the conduct and management of that department as deemed necessary to implement said programs. The director may peremptorily suspend, demote, or discharge any subordinate appointed by the director for any lawful reason. 
(5)  The director shall perform all other duties assigned by the city administrator, mayor, and city council and shall be under the direct administrative supervision of the city administrator. 
(Code 2017, § 2-628; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-919. - Director of public safety services-Duties relative to boards, commissions and committees. 
    The director of public safety services or his designee shall meet with and furnish assistance and information to the following boards, commissions, committees and other organizations when necessary: 
(1)  County Emergency Management Commission. 
(2)  County Consolidated Dispatch Communications Center Board. 
(3)  County E911 Board. 
(4)  County Criminal Justice Information Systems Board. 
(5)  County Board of Health. 
(6)  Cedar Bend Humane Society. 
(7)  Any applicable federal and state agencies, such as Federal Bureau of Investigation, state department of public safety, state division of criminal investigations, University of Northern Iowa Department of Public Safety, and the United States Department of Homeland Security. 
(Code 2017, § 2-629; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-920. - Acting director of public safety services. 
    Whenever the director of public safety services is out of the city, or unable to act on account of sickness or for any other reason, including those periods of time when the city administrator has not appointed a director of public safety services, the director of public safety services or city administrator shall appoint one of the division heads as the acting director of public safety services. This designee shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the director. 
(Code 2017, § 2-630; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-921. - Authority of city council. 
    All final authority over the administration and policy of the department of public safety services shall be retained and exercised by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 2-631; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-922-2-945. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE OPERATIONS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-946. - Created. 
    The police operations division of the department of public safety services for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-641; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-947. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police operations division of the department of public safety services to preserve the public peace and enforce all state laws, city ordinances and orders of the city council, the execution of which devolves upon the public safety services department. 
(b)  The police operations division shall have the power to arrest all persons in the city found to be in the act of violating any state law, city ordinance, aiding or abetting in any violation, or where a public offense has in fact been committed and said division has reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed such public offense. 
(Code 2017, § 2-642; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-948. - Police chief. 
(a)  Appointment. If the director of the public safety services department is not the appointed police chief, a deputy director of police operations, also known as the police chief, shall be recommended for appointment by the director of public safety services to the city administrator, and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval. Said deputy director of police operations shall be directly responsible to the director of public safety services. If the director of the public safety services department is the appointed police chief, said director shall manage the police operations division, and shall be directly responsible to the city administrator. All appointments of deputy directors shall be in accordance with all applicable statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The police chief shall supervise, direct and manage the police operations division. The duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To manage and direct uniform patrol, investigation and police support service functions to cause the enforcement of all the laws of this state and all ordinances of this city of which the public safety services department must take cognizance within the purview of the division's responsibilities. 
(2)  To promulgate orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the police operations division within the parameters of that department's policy. 
(3)  To make an annual report of the activities of the division which shall be filed with the director. 
(4)  To assign the personnel of the police operations division as deemed necessary to carry out the functions of the police operations division, and to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(5)  To provide and coordinate training programs for the police operations division related to the division's specialized functions. 
(6)  To maintain accurate and complete records for the police operations division in accordance with federal, state and local regulations. 
(7)  To provide a coordinated community relations program which educates the general public with regard to crime prevention. 
(8)  To prepare a police operations division budget for the public safety services director's review and approval for the city administrator's, mayor's and city council's consideration. 
(9)  To provide for enforcement of all parking metered locations and repair of equipment. 
(10)  To peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate for neglect of duty, disobedience, misconduct, or failure to properly perform the person's duty in accordance with law and the department's policy. 
(11)  To perform or cause to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of public safety services. 
(12)  To make all appointments or promotions for positions in the police operations division as provided by state statute. 
(Code 2017, § 2-643; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-949. - Police department; acting chief in absence of the police chief. 
(a)  Temporary absence of police chief. Whenever the chief shall be out of the city or otherwise temporarily unable to act for any reason, the chief shall designate an acting chief. In the event of the death or incapacity of the chief, the director of public safety services, or if said director is also the police chief, then the city administrator, shall designate an acting chief. Any such appointment under this subsection shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days, until the chief returns or is again able to act, or until appointment of an acting chief under subsection (b) of this section, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Vacancy in position of police chief. Whenever there is a vacancy in the position of police chief due to the death, resignation or removal of the police chief, an acting chief shall be recommended for appointment by the director of public safety services to the city administrator (or if said director is also the police chief, then shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator), and by the city administrator to the mayor, for the city council approval, to serve until a new police chief is appointed as provided in this Code. Such appointment shall be for a period not to exceed 180 days, or until a new police chief is appointed, whichever occurs first. If a new chief has not been appointed as provided in this Code by the expiration of said 180 day period, the same or a different person shall be recommended for appointment as acting chief by the director of public safety services to the city administrator, or if said director is also the police chief, then by the city administrator, and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval, which appointment shall also be for a period not to exceed 180 days, or until a new police chief is appointed, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Powers of acting police chief. The acting chief appointed under this section shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties of the police chief. 
(Code 2017, § 2-644; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-950. - Duty to assist fire operations division. 
    It shall be the duty of the members of the police operations division to aid and assist the fire operations division by immediately giving alarms when informed by the public or police operations division personnel in case of fire, catastrophic and/or natural disaster and clearing the streets and grounds in the immediate vicinity so that members of the fire operations division may perform their duties. 
(Code 2017, § 2-645; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-951. - Removal of police chief. 
    The police chief, including an acting police chief appointed under section 2-949, whose temporary appointment has not yet terminated as provided in that section, may be removed from the position of chief or acting chief as provided in section 2-159, and in all other respects only in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 2017, § 2-646; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-952-2-975. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE OPERATIONS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-976. - Created. 
    The fire operations division of the department of public safety services for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 2-651; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-977. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire operations division of the department of public safety services to provide for the protection of life and property in the case of fire, catastrophic and/or natural disaster for the city and all areas under mutual aid agreements approved by the city council. 
(b)  The division shall have the power to prevent the loss of life and property when a fire or catastrophe occurs by confining, suppressing, extinguishing, neutralizing, removing or causing to be removed the source of the life or property threatening occurrence. 
(Code 2017, § 2-652; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-978. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Appointment. If the director of the public safety services department is not the appointed fire chief, a deputy director of fire operations, also known as the fire chief, shall be recommended for appointment by the director of public safety services to the city administrator, and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval. Said deputy director of fire operations shall be directly responsible to the director of public safety services. If the director of the public safety services department is the appointed fire chief, said director shall manage the fire operations division, and shall be directly responsible to the city administrator. All appointments of deputy directors shall be in accordance with all applicable statutory civil service procedures. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The fire chief shall supervise, direct and manage the fire operations division. The duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To promulgate orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the fire operations division within the parameters of that department's policy. 
(2)  To keep a record of all fires, emergency responses or disaster assistance calls that occur during the fiscal year and file the same with the public safety services director. 
(3)  To maintain records of all hazardous materials stored, processed and utilized by private and public entities in accordance with federal and state regulations. 
(4)  To assign the personnel of the fire operations division, as deemed necessary to carry out its functions; and to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and management of the division consistent with the department's policies. 
(5)  To peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any subordinate for neglect of duty, disobedience, misconduct, or failure to properly perform the person's duty in accordance with law and the department's policy. 
(6)  To provide and coordinate training programs for the fire operations division related to the division's specialized functions. 
(7)  To maintain accurate and complete records for the fire operations division in accordance with federal, state and local regulations. 
(8)  To provide a coordinated community relations program which educates the general public with regard to fire prevention and hazardous materials storage, handling and disposal. 
(9)  To provide inspection and prevention programs which enforce the International Fire Code and Minimum Rental Housing Code. 
(10)  To prepare a fire operations division budget for the public safety services director's review and approval for the city administrator's, mayor's and city council's annual consideration. 
(11)  To perform or cause to be performed any other duties as directed by the director of public safety services. 
(12)  To make all appointments or promotions for positions in the fire operations division as provided by state statute. 
(13)  To administer the city's rental housing inspections program, including the Section 8 housing program, and commercial property inspections program. 
(Code 2017, § 2-653; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 2-979. - Fire department; acting chief in absence of the fire chief. 
(a)  Temporary absence of fire chief. Whenever the chief shall be out of the city or otherwise temporarily unable to act for any reason, the chief shall designate an acting chief. In the event of the death or incapacity of the chief, the director of public safety services, or if said director is also the fire chief, then the city administrator, shall designate an acting chief. Any such appointment under this subsection shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days, until the chief returns or is again able to act, or until appointment of an acting chief under subsection (b) of this section, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Vacancy in position of fire chief. Whenever there is a vacancy in the position of fire chief due to the death, resignation or removal of the fire chief, an acting chief shall be recommended for appointment by the director of public safety services to the city administrator (or if said director is also the fire chief, then shall be recommended for appointment by the city administrator), and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval, to serve until a new fire chief is appointed as provided in this Code. Such appointment shall be for a period not to exceed 180 days, or until a new fire chief is appointed, whichever occurs first. If a new chief has not been appointed as provided in this Code by the expiration of said 180 day period, the same or a different person shall be recommended for appointment by the director of public safety services to the city administrator, or if said director is also the fire chief, then by the city administrator, and by the city administrator to the mayor, for city council approval, which appointment shall also be for a period not to exceed 180 days, or until a new fire chief is appointed, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Powers of acting fire chief. The acting chief appointed under this section shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties of the fire chief. 
(Code 2017, § 2-654; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-980. - Removal of fire chief. 
    The fire chief, including an acting fire chief appointed under section 2-979, whose temporary appointment has not yet terminated as provided in that section, may be removed from the position of chief or acting chief as provided in section 2-159, and in all other respects only in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 2017, § 2-655; Ord. No. 2825, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-981-2-1003. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BONDS 

Sec. 2-1004. - Proof of ownership, indemnity bond required in case of loss. 
    In the event of claim made for payment of the principal of or interest on bonds issued by the city, the council shall be provided with satisfactory evidence of proof of ownership and of loss of the bonds or coupons, and shall require the filing with the council of a satisfactory indemnity bond with a surety acceptable to the council, indemnifying the city if any or all of the original bonds or coupons are inadvertently paid or presented for payment by a bona fide holder in due course. 
(Code 2017, § 2-661; Ord. No. 2825, § 5, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-1005. - Duplicate bonds and coupons. 
(a)  Upon receipt of proof of ownership and loss and filing of the indemnity bond as provided in this article, the treasurer is authorized to proceed with the printing of duplicate bonds or coupons, and shall charge for the issuance of the duplicate bonds and coupons any amount sufficient to reimburse the city for the actual expense incurred by it in connection with the issuance thereof. The city officials designated to execute bonds and coupons are authorized to execute the duplicate bonds and coupons in the same manner as provided with respect to the original bonds. 
(b)  Duplicate bonds and coupons of like tenor, amount, date and maturity shall be deemed to be issued in lieu of and in substitution for each of the bonds or coupons so numbered of the original issue, and shall be so noted on the books of the city kept for that purpose. 
(Code 2017, § 2-662; Ord. No. 2825, § 5, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-1006. - Enforcement of indemnity bond when original bond or coupon inadvertently paid. 
    If any or all of the original bonds or coupons shall be inadvertently or for any reason paid by the city and are presented for payment by a bona fide holder in due course, or if the city shall incur any expense or liability by reason of refusing to honor the original bonds or coupons, the indemnity bond filed pursuant to this article shall be immediately enforced. 
(Code 2017, § 2-663; Ord. No. 2825, § 5, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 2-1007. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the replacement of any bond or coupon where the terms of issuance provide otherwise. 
(Code 2017, § 2-664; Ord. No. 2825, § 5, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 2-1008-2-1027. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-1028-2-1052. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN CEDAR FALLS SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 2-1053. - Created; purpose. 
    There is hereby created in the city a self-supported municipal improvement district as defined in Iowa Code ch. 386 (referred to in this article as "the Act"), the name of which district shall be the "Downtown Cedar Falls Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District" (sometimes referred to in this article as the "district"), the purposes of which district are the undertaking of actions and the design and construction of any and all improvements authorized by the Act, and the performance of administration, redevelopment and revitalization of the district, as authorized by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-676, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-1054. - Boundaries. 
    The district shall include all property within the following described boundaries: 
That part of Section 12, Township 89 North, Range 14 West of the Fifth P.M. in the city described as beginning on the centerline of Franklin Street at its intersection with the southerly bank of the Cedar River; thence southerly along said centerline of Franklin Street to the centerline of 6th Street; thence easterly along said centerline of 6th Street to the centerline of Clay Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Clay Street to the centerline of 7th Street; thence easterly along said centerline of 7th Street to the former westerly right-of-way line of the former Chicago and North Western Transportation Company; thence northerly along said former westerly right-of-way line to the centerline of 4th Street; thence easterly along said centerline of 4th Street to the westerly bank of the Cedar River; thence northerly and westerly along the westerly and southerly bank of the Cedar River to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-677, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-1055. - Benefit determined; location in C-1, C-2, C-3, and M-2 zoning districts. 
    It is found and determined that the owners of all of the property within the district have a present and potential benefit from the condition, development and maintenance of the district and that all of the property within the district is related by virtue of its location within the C-1, C-2, C-3, or M-2 zoning districts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-678, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-1056. - Operation fund created; purpose. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code § 386.8, there is established and created a self-supported improvement district operation fund, which shall be known as the "Downtown Cedar Falls Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District Operation Fund" (and which is referred to in this article as the "operation fund"), for which operation fund the city may certify taxes (the "operation tax") each year commencing with the levy of taxes for collection in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2017, and continuing through the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, for the purpose of paying such expenses of the district as are authorized by the Act, including, but not limited to, the administrative expenses of the district and part or all of the maintenance expenses of improvements or self-liquidating improvements, as defined by the Act, for a period of five years. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-679, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-1057. - Operation tax. 
    The operation tax levied in any one year, as provided in section 2-1056, shall be at a rate not to exceed $5.83 per $1,000.00 of taxable value of the property within the district. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-680, 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-1058. - Copies on file. 
    The city clerk shall cause a copy of the ordinance codified in this article to be filed in the office of the county recorder and in the office of the county treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2894, § 2-681, 2-20-2017) 
Secs. 2-1059-2-1084. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLEGE HILL SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 2-1085. - Created; purpose. 
    The "College Hill Self-Supporting Municipal Improvement District" (hereinafter referred to as the "district") is hereby established and created in accordance with Iowa Code ch. 386 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), the purposes of which shall include those set forth in section 2-1088. 
(Code 2017, § 2-685; Ord. No. 2838, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1086. - Boundaries. 
(a)  The proposed district includes contiguous property wholly within the boundaries of the city, and is comprised only of real property zoned for commercial or industrial uses, and property within any duly designated historic district, specifically excluding property zoned as residential property, unless the residential property is within a duly designated historic district. The proposed boundaries of the district are as follows: (All references to streets and street intersections refer to the centerline or center point of the public right-of-way.) 
(b)  That part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 14 and the Southwest Quarter of Section 13, Township 89 North, Range 14 West of Fifth P.M. in the city. Beginning at the Southeast (SE) corner "Campus Addition Cedar Falls, Black Hawk County, Iowa", point also being the intersection of East (E) line of said addition and centerline of West Twenty-third Street; thence West along said centerline of West Twenty-third Street, to the East line of the West nine inches of Lot 5, Campus Addition, extended South (S) to said centerline of West Twenty-third Street; thence North (N) along said extended East (E) to point on South (S) line of North 24.75 feet of said Lot 5, point being 57 feet West (W) of East line said Lot 5; thence deflect West to Southwest corner Lot 31 said Campus Addition; thence deflect North along East line of Lot 31 said Campus Addition to Southwest corner of Lot 1 of "Arthur P. Cotton's Addition Cedar Falls, Black Hawk County, Iowa"; thence deflect left to West line of Lot 1 Arthur P. Cotton's Addition; thence deflect North along said West line extended and continuing North along the West line of Lot 28 Arthur P. Cotton's Addition to Northwest corner said Lot 28; thence deflect West, along North line of Lot 27 Arthur P. Cotton's Addition to point 408.2 feet west of Southeast corner of Lot 43 of "Auditor Rainbow's Plat No. 3, Black Hawk County, Iowa"; thence deflecting North 86.2 feet as platted in said Auditor Rainbow's Plat No. 3; thence deflecting West 68.8 feet to point lying in Lot 41, which is seven feet East of the West line of Lot 16 in "Sunnyside Addition Black Hawk County, Iowa"; thence deflecting North to point on South line Lot 16 Sunnyside Addition, seven feet West of West line said Lot 16; thence West seven feet to Southwest corner said lot 16; thence deflect North along West line said Lot 16 to point in said West line Lot 16, 100 feet South of Southerly right-of-way of West Twentieth Street; thence deflect West 25 feet to point in West line Lot 15, said Sunnyside Addition, 100 feet South of Southerly right-of-way of West Twentieth Street; thence deflect North 100 feet to Southerly right-of-way of West Twentieth Street; thence continue North on West line Lot 15 extended to centerline of West Twentieth Street; thence deflect East along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of College Street; thence deflecting North from said intersection North to intersection with the extended centerline of West Twentieth Street as established through "Railroad Addition Black Hawk County, Iowa" and a portion of the unplatted Southwest Quarter of Section 13, Township 89 North, Range 14 West of Fifth P.M. in the city, Black Hawk County, Iowa lying East of the Easterly right-of-way of College Street; thence East along centerline of said Twentieth Street to point where the West line of Lot 8 of Block 13 Railroad Addition would intersect if extended North; thence deflect to the right along said extended West line of Lot 8 of Block 13 Railroad Addition continuing along West lines of Lots 5, 6, and 7, and the extension South of the West line of said Lot 5 to its intersection with centerline of Twenty-first Street; thence East on said centerline to a point which would intersect with the extension of said line, 82.5 feet West of the East line of Lot 1 of Block 36 Railroad Addition if extended North, point also being the North line said Block 36; thence continue South along said line 66 feet to North line of "Normal Plat Black Hawk County, Iowa"; thence deflect West along said North line Normal Plat to point 116 feet East of West line said Normal Plat (point also being the East right-of-way line of College Street); thence deflect South 132 feet to point on North line of Lot 3 Normal Plat which is 115.18 feet East of West line said Normal Plat (said West line also being the East right-of-way line of College Street); thence deflect East to point 132 feet more or less from West line said Normal Plat; thence deflect South to South line of Lot 4 said Normal Plat (point also being North line of Twenty-second Street); thence continue South 33 feet to centerline of said Twenty-second Street; thence deflect East to centerline of Olive Street as laid out in "Normal Addition Black Hawk County, Iowa"; thence deflect South along centerline said Olive Street to point which would intersect the South line of vacated West Twenty-third Street, if extended East to centerline of Olive Street; thence deflect West along South right-of-way line of said Twenty-third Street to West line said Normal Plat (point also being the East right-of-way line of College Street); thence continue West along said extended right-of-way line to East line of Campus Addition; thence deflect South along said East addition line to Southeast Corner Campus Addition the point of beginning. 
(Code 2017, § 2-686; Ord. No. 2838, § 2, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1087. - Findings. 
    It is found and determined that the above-described property meets the relationship and benefits requirements of Iowa Code § 386.3(1)(c). Specifically, the district is to be comprised of property related in some manner, including, but not limited to, present or potential use, physical location, condition, relationship to an area, or relationship to present or potential commercial or other activity in an area, so as to be benefited in any manner, including, but not limited to, a benefit from present or potential use of enjoyment of the property, by the condition, development or maintenance of the district or of any improvement or self-liquidating improvement of the district, or be comprised of property the owners of which have a present or potential benefit from the condition, development or maintenance of the district or of any improvement or self-liquidating improvement of the district. 
(Code 2017, § 2-687; Ord. No. 2838, § 3, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1088. - Funding; purpose. 
    The purpose for the creation of the district and the imposition of a tax thereunder is to provide funding for the administrative expenses of the district to pay for the services of the College Hill Partnership, which develops and encourages retail businesses by way of promotion, development, growth, and organization, and which shall serve as an operation tax. Administrative expenses include, but are not limited to, administrative personnel salaries, a separate administrative office, planning costs including consultation fees, engineering fees, architectural fees, legal fees, and all other expenses reasonably associated with the administration of the district and the fulfilling of the purposes of the district. Parcels of property which are assessed as residential property for property tax purposes are exempt from the tax levied, except residential properties within a duly designated historic district. 
(Code 2017, § 2-688; Ord. No. 2838, § 4, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1089. - Tax levies. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to levy taxes pursuant to Iowa Code § 386.8 for operations. 
(b)  The maximum rate of tax to be imposed upon property in the district for operations shall be $2.75 per $1,000.00 of net taxable valuation per year, commencing with the levy for tax collection in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2015, and continuing for four additional years. All monies collected pursuant thereto shall be deposited into the College Hill Self-Supported Municipal Improvements District Fund, for the purposes outlined herein. 
(Code 2017, § 2-689; Ord. No. 2838, § 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1090. - No maintenance expenses. 
    Taxes levied for the district shall not be used for the purpose of paying maintenance expenses of improvements of self-liquidating improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 2-690; Ord. No. 2838, § 6, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1091. - Duration. 
    The district shall continue for a period of five fiscal years as indicated in section 2-1089 unless dissolved pursuant to Iowa Code § 386.5 prior to that time. 
(Code 2017, § 2-691; Ord. No. 2838, § 7, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 2-1092. - Improvements not authorized. 
    There is no authorization for any specific improvements or self-liquidating improvements to be accomplished at this time, but that such authorization may be hereafter accomplished at a later date pursuant to those provisions of Iowa Code §§ 386.6-386.13. 
(Code 2017, § 2-692; Ord. No. 2838, § 8, 3-16-2015) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - License for posting or distribution of advertising material. 
(a)  Required; fee; issuance. 
(1)  No person, as owner, agent, servant or employee, shall post or distribute any advertising, any advertising bill, poster or printed or illustrated matter, any samples or any advertising matter of any kind within the limits of the city without first making application for a license at the office of the city clerk, paying the fee therefor and procuring the license. 
(2)  The fee for a license required by this section shall be as established by resolution from time to time. The licenses shall be issued in like form and manner as other licenses. 
(b)  Employment of assistants. The holder of a yearly distributor's license under this section shall be entitled to employ as many assistants as necessary. Such assistants shall be furnished with a suitable badge or emblem showing their employer, and such assistants shall not need a license to distribute. 
(c)  Exemption. Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to require a license from persons required by law to sell or advertise for sale real or personal property under due process of law. 
(Code 2017, § 3-1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Distribution of advertising materials not to create nuisance or litter. 
    The distribution of advertising material shall be made in such a manner as not to create a nuisance, and no licensed billposter or distributor or any other person shall scatter or deposit any such bills or material upon or in the streets, sidewalks or public grounds of the city, nor throw the advertising material into yards of private buildings or halls of public buildings. 
(Code 2017, § 3-2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Posting bills on utility poles, fences, etc. 
    No person shall paste, nail, tack or fasten in any other way any bill or other thing for the purpose of advertising any entertainment or property for sale, or any other kind of advertising matter, upon any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole or any other pole or lamppost, fire hydrant, fence, structure or building erected upon or along any of the streets of the city without first obtaining the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 3-3) 
Sec. 3-4. - Placing advertising material in or on vehicles. 
    No advertising bills, posters, printed or illustrated matter, patent medicines, samples or advertising matter of any kind or character shall be placed in or on any vehicle parked upon the public streets except in a manner that will prevent same from being blown about or scattered by the elements. 
(Code 2017, § 3-4) 
Sec. 3-5. - Distribution of advertisements within place of business. 
    Retailers or local societies or theaters may hand bills and advertisements to persons within their place of business, but shall refrain from scattering, placing or depositing the bills and advertisements upon or in or along the public walks, streets or public grounds of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 3-5) 
Sec. 3-6. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 3-6; Ord. No. 2064, § 4, 8-8-1994) 
Secs. 3-7-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS 

Sec. 3-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the sign ordinance of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 3-31) 
Sec. 3-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved plastics means only those slow-burning plastics such as cellulose acetate or methyl methacrylate or other plastics of no greater combustibility than as approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as of May 26, 1987, for sign use. 
    Incombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five minutes, and which will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature, as specified in the edition of the International Building Code in effect in the city. 
    Nonstructural trim means the molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing, cutouts or letters and walkways which are attached to the sign structure. 
    Sign means an identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign relating only to uses of the premises on which the sign is located or products sold or services offered on the premises on which the sign is located, or indicating the name or address of a building or the occupants or management of a building on the premises where the sign is located. (See Sign, off-premises. ) 
    Sign, banner, means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. 
    Sign, billboard, means a sign structure designed for the posting of changeable graphics or reading matter advertising a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, directional, means a sign designed for the purpose of assisting traffic control, which is located on private property and limited to no more than four feet in height and no more than six square feet in area. 
    Sign, flag, means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights, columns, pylons or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or wall. This term shall also apply to those signs having their framework permanently embedded in the ground. 
    Sign, home occupation, means a sign or nameplate limited to the display of the occupant and the name of the home occupation. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be nonilluminated, shall be affixed to the main structure or visible through a window and shall be limited to one in number per home. 
    Sign, monumental, means an identification device permanently embedded in the ground, upon which is affixed only the name and symbol of a particular neighborhood, subdivision or commercial or industrial development. 
    Sign, off-premises, means a sign displaying or drawing attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, pennant, means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Sign, portable, means a sign intended for changeable copy, designed to be moved or readily capable of being moved from place to place, which is not permanently affixed to the ground or any other structure. Portable signs are not permitted unless specifically authorized for temporary use by the city council. 
    Sign, roof, means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building, which is wholly or partially supported by the building. 
    Sign, temporary, means a sign or advertising device intended to be displayed for a limited time period, typically identifying construction, community or civic projects, show homes or other special events on a temporary basis. A temporary sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. 
    Sign, wall, means a sign, other than a roof sign, which is supported by a building or wall. Such a sign shall not project beyond the peak of the building or wall more than one-third of the sign's longest dimension. Signs surpassing this peak projection shall be designated as roof signs. 
a.  Canopy wall sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. 
b.  Fascia wall sign means a single-faced building or wall sign which is parallel to its supporting wall and does not extend more than 18 inches from a building or wall. 
c.  Mural wall sign means a one-dimensional graphic illustration or presentation that is painted or otherwise applied to a building, wall or facade. 
d.  Projecting wall sign means a sign which is attached to and projects more than 18 inches from the face or wall of a building. 
    Sign area means that area within a line including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characteristics or delineations, or within a line including the outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign, whichever line includes the larger area. When the irregularity of a sign shape warrants, such area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign. The support for the sign background, whether it be columns, pylons or a building or part thereof, shall not be included in the sign area. Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of sign area. 
    Sign structure means the supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign. 
(Code 2017, § 3-32) 
Sec. 3-33. - Compliance with article. 
    No sign shall be constructed, erected, re-erected or altered except as provided by this article. 
(Code 2017, § 3-33) 
Sec. 3-34. - Effective date of license fee, bond and insurance requirements. 
    All regulations contained in this article regarding license fees, bonds of sign contractors, or insurance or certificates of liability of sign owners shall become effective when such fees, bonds or certificates of liability next become due or when new licenses, bonds or certificates of liability are required after June 16, 1970. 
(Code 2017, § 3-34) 
Sec. 3-35. - Applicability of article in newly annexed areas. 
    All existing signs in newly annexed areas shall conform to the provisions of this article within one year after annexation, except signs in violation of sections 3-34 and 3-49. 
(Code 2017, § 3-35) 
Sec. 3-36. - Enforcement of article. 
    The city planner is hereby designated and ordered to enforce this article. In case any sign or sign structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, moved, converted or maintained in violation of this article, the city planner, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city to prevent such unlawful erection, moving, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation. 
(Code 2017, § 3-36) 
Sec. 3-37. - Appeals. 
    Any person who has been ordered by the city planner to incur any expense for the alteration or removal of any sign, or any person whose application for a permit for a sign has been denied, may appeal to the council by serving a written notice of appeal upon the city planner by personal service or certified mail within 20 days after the date of the order of removal or the denial of the application for a permit. Upon being served by the written notice, the city planner shall immediately transmit the notice of the appeal to the council. 
(Code 2017, § 3-37) 
Sec. 3-38. - Inspection. 
    All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city planner, and such signs may be reinspected at his discretion. 
(Code 2017, § 3-38) 
Sec. 3-39. - Valuation of signs. 
    Whenever the city planner is required to place a valuation on any sign, the valuation shall include all foundations, signs, sign structures, electric wiring, piping and lights and all the erection costs. 
(Code 2017, § 3-39) 
Sec. 3-40. - Permit required. 
    No sign shall be constructed, erected, re-erected or altered until a permit for the sign has been issued by the city planner. 
(Code 2017, § 3-40) 
Sec. 3-41. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for a sign permit required in section 3-40 shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the city planner. 
(b)  The application shall contain the location of the proposed sign structure by street and number, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. 
(c)  The city planner may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information, as well as such information necessary to ensure compliance with this article. An application for a sign permit for a sign over eight feet in height must be accompanied by a set of plans with all engineering calculations included. 
(Code 2017, § 3-41) 
Sec. 3-42. - Exemptions from permit requirement. 
    The following shall not require a sign permit; however, the exemption from obtaining a permit shall not relieve the owner of a sign from the responsibility of erecting and maintaining such sign and from compliance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Servicing, painting, repairing or cleaning of an existing sign or the change of the advertising copy or message on a sign, unless a larger structural change is made. 
(2)  Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. One such nonilluminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in size, shall be permitted on each premises. 
(3)  Address signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes, showing only the numerical address and occupants of the premises upon which the sign is situated. One such nonilluminated sign shall be permitted per address. 
(4)  Home occupation signs. 
(5)  Traffic, regulatory and other municipal signs erected upon the direction of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 3-42) 
Sec. 3-43. - Permit fees. 
    There shall be a minimum fee of an amount set annually by resolution by the city council for all signs. 
(Code 2017, § 3-43; Ord. No. 2067, § 1, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 3-44. - Penalty for installation without permit. 
    If any person shall fail to obtain a permit required by this article before the installation of a sign, the permit fee shall be double the amount of the regular fee, or the person shall be required to remove the sign if it is not installed as required by this article. 
(Code 2017, § 3-44) 
Sec. 3-45. - Permit number tag. 
    After a sign permit required by this article is issued, each sign erected, constructed or maintained shall be plainly marked with a permit number tag furnished at the time the permit is issued. The tag shall be placed in such a manner as to be plainly visible from the traveled portion of the street, and the location of the tag on the sign is to be noted on the sign permit. 
(Code 2017, § 3-45) 
Sec. 3-46. - Painter's or erector's license. 
(a)  Required; fee; renewal. 
(1)  Painter's license. Any person desiring to engage in the act of drawing, painting or posting a sign on any existing building or billboard or signboard surface subject to the provisions of this article must first obtain a painter's license from the city clerk. Such license shall be limited to the drawing, painting or posting of signs only. The license fee shall be in the amount established annually by resolution by the city council, subject of the exceptions as contained in subsection (a)(2) of this section and said license fee shall be payable annually on January 1 of each year. 
(2)  Erector's license. Any person engaging in the act of painting, erecting, maintaining, repairing, servicing, installing or removing signs, billboards or signboards, regardless of size or weight, must first apply to the city for an erector's license. The erector's license provided for in this subsection shall be in lieu of the painter's license contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section. The license fee for the first year shall be in the amount established annually by resolution by the city council. Renewals shall be made on or before January 1 of each year, and the cost of such renewal, shall be in the amount established annually by resolution by the city council. 
(b)  Exemptions. No license required in subsection (a) of this section shall be required for the following: 
(1)  A sign erected by an owner on his property which is exempt from a certificate of liability. 
(2)  Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. One such nonilluminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in size, shall be permitted on each premises. 
(3)  Address signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes showing only the numerical address and occupants of the premises upon which the sign is situated. One such nonilluminated sign shall be permitted per address. 
(4)  Home occupation signs. 
(5)  Traffic, regulatory and other municipal signs erected upon direction of the city council. 
(c)  Bond. An applicant for an erector's license, at the time of applying for such license, shall execute and file with his application a surety and performance bond, signed by sureties to be approved by the city council and in the amount established annually by resolution by the city council. The terms of such bond shall guarantee full compliance by the principal with all ordinances of this city regulating and licensing such operation and shall guarantee the payment of any fines or penalties which may be assessed to the extent of the face amount of the bond. 
(Code 2017, § 3-46; Ord. No. 2067, § 2, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 3-47. - Maintenance. 
    All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation and working order. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. Premises surrounding signs shall be maintained in a clean and inoffensive condition and kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. The city planner may order the removal of any signs that are not maintained in accordance with this section, and the cost assessed against the property where such signs are located. 
(Code 2017, § 3-48) 
Sec. 3-48. - Display of erector's name. 
    The name of the erector of all signs subject to the regulations of this article must appear visibly on such signs. 
(Code 2017, § 3-49) 
Sec. 3-49. - Removal on vacation of property. 
    Within 30 days after the vacation of property by an owner or tenant for which a sign subject to the provisions of this article has been erected, such sign shall be removed or obliterated, and the city planner shall be notified in writing of its removal. If, after 30 days, this section has not been complied with, the city planner shall notify the owner on whose property the sign has been erected and allow him an additional period of ten days to comply with this section. If this section has not been complied with at the end of the ten days, the city planner shall have the sign removed, and the cost shall be assessed to the property. 
(Code 2017, § 3-50) 
Sec. 3-50. - Posting on city property; encroachment on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print or in any way affix any picture, bill, sign, signboard, poster or advertising material on any post, utility pole, fire escape, hydrant, curb, sidewalk, tree, lamppost or other structure of any kind on, or so as to overhang or protrude over, any property owned by the city, without first obtaining the express consent of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 3-51) 
Sec. 3-51. - Anchoring and supports. 
(a)  Generally. Signs, sign structures and appendages shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(b)  Wind resistance. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over the footing may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(c)  Calculation of wind load. For the purpose of design, wind pressure shall be taken upon the gross area of the vertical projection of all signs and sign structures at not less than 20 pounds per square foot for those portions less than 40 feet above the ground and at not less than 30 pounds per square foot for those portions more than 40 feet above the ground. In calculating wind pressure on curved surfaces such as cylindrical or spherical signs or sign structures, this pressure shall be assumed to act on six-tenths of the projected area. In all open frame signs or sign structures, the area used in computing wind pressure shall be 11/2 times the net area of the framing members exposed to the wind. 
(d)  Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete or steel members shall conform to the requirements of an approved testing agent. The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. 
(e)  Supports. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 3-52) 
Sec. 3-52. - Fastenings. 
    Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied. All building fastenings must be of galvanized or noncorrosive materials. 
(Code 2017, § 3-53) 
Sec. 3-53. - Construction of columns. 
    No sign column shall be constructed in such a way as to allow an individual to climb thereon without the benefit of a ladder. 
(Code 2017, § 3-54) 
Sec. 3-54. - Use of combustible material. 
(a)  All signs and sign structures erected in fire zone no. 1 shall have structural members of incombustible materials. 
(b)  Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this article, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Combination signs, roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs and signs on marquees shall be constructed of incombustible materials, except nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastics or any combination thereof. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs. 
(Code 2017, § 3-55) 
Sec. 3-55. - Fireproof retainers for plastic sign faces. 
    In primary fire zones, plastic sign faces must have a fireproof separating retainer every 250 square feet. 
(Code 2017, § 3-56) 
Sec. 3-56. - Proximity to electric conductors. 
    Signs subject to this article shall not be located with less than eight feet horizontal or eight feet vertical clearance from overhead electric conductors which are energized. 
(Code 2017, § 3-57) 
Sec. 3-57. - Obstruction of fire escapes or standpipes. 
    No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or support will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape exit or standpipe. 
(Code 2017, § 3-58) 
Sec. 3-58. - Clearance above right-of-way. 
(a)  No sign, other than fascia/mural wall, traffic, regulatory or other municipal sign, shall project over or upon public rights-of-way unless specific approval is granted for such sign by the city council. For those signs which are permitted to encroach over or upon public rights-of-way, minimum clearance heights shall be adhered to as follows: 
(1)  Vehicular ways: 14 feet. 
(2)  Pedestrian ways: ten feet. 
(b)  The council shall have the authority to require greater heights when conditions so warrant. 
(Code 2017, § 3-59) 
Sec. 3-59. - Compliance with electrical code. 
    All signs regulated by this article which contain electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the edition of the National Electrical Code in use in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 3-60) 
Sec. 3-60. - Statement of power consumption. 
    Electric signs must bear a statement of power consumption. 
(Code 2017, § 3-61) 
Sec. 3-61. - Securing of roof signs. 
    Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frame of the building over which they are constructed and erected. 
(Code 2017, § 3-62) 
Sec. 3-62. - Access passage to roof signs. 
(a)  Passage, clear of all obstructions, shall be left under or around and immediately adjacent to all roof signs exceeding a height of four feet above the roof. Such passages shall not be less than three feet wide and four feet high and shall be at parapet or roof level. 
(b)  Such passage or access opening shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Minimum number: One passage for each roof sign upon a building. 
(2)  Horizontal extension: One passage for every 50 lineal feet of horizontal roof sign extension. 
(3)  Proximity to walls: One passage within 20 feet of walls and parapets when roof signs are at right angles to a face of the building. 
(Code 2017, § 3-63) 
Sec. 3-63. - Support of temporary cloth signs. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, every temporary cloth sign shall be supported and attached with wire rope of one-quarter-inch minimum diameter. No strings, fiber rope or wood slats shall be permitted for support or anchorage purposes. Cloth signs and panels shall be perforated over at least ten percent of their area to reduce wind resistance. 
(b)  Temporary cloth signs over private property not exceeding 60 square feet in size shall be supported and attached with wire rope meeting the requirements of the second sentence of section 3-51(d). 
(Code 2017, § 3-64) 
Sec. 3-64. - Political signs. 
    Any person who desires to post political signs within the city limits shall first obtain a temporary sign permit. All of such signs must be removed within one week after the election which the signs refer to. A political sign shall not be attached to any city property, nor shall any such political sign be posted on the premises of any polling place or within 300 feet of any outside door of any building affording access to any room where the polls are held, or any outside door of any building to any hallway, corridor, stairway or other means of reaching the room where the polls are held, except that this prohibition shall not apply to the posting of signs on private property not a polling place. 
(Code 2017, § 3-65) 
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT ZONING 

Sec. 4-1. - Introduction. 
    This chapter shall regulate and restrict the height of structures, objects, and growth of natural vegetation, as well as land uses; otherwise regulating the use of property, within the vicinity of the Waterloo Regional Airport. Creation of appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof, as well as providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones is vested in this chapter. The Waterloo Regional Airport Land Use and Height Zoning Maps are incorporated into and made part of this chapter. This chapter also provides for the enforcement of this chapter, the recognition of board of adjustment; and imposition of penalties related to the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-1, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-2. - Authority. 
    Iowa Code § 329.3, Airport Zoning, empowers local municipalities to zone airports including height restrictions and land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-2, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-3. - Statement of purpose and findings. 
(a)  The Waterloo Regional Airport (hereafter referred to as "the airport") is acknowledged as an essential public facility to the state and the local community. The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and poses a potential concern to the surrounding communities served by the airport. 
(b)  There shall be no creation or establishment of a hazard that endangers the public health, safety, welfare, and impact an individual's quality of life, nor prevent the safe movement of aircraft at the airport. For the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of airport hazards. 
(c)  The prevention of airport hazards shall be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by proper exercise of the police power. The prevention of new airport hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards, are considered to be a public purpose for which this city, the City of Waterloo, and the county may raise and expend public funds, as an incident to the operation of airports, to acquire or property interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-3, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-4. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-4, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-5. - Applicability. 
    This chapter encompasses a general area around the airport. Specific dimensions associated with the zoning boundary are shown in the airport land use and height zoning maps. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-5, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air traffic (FAA FAR sec. 1.1) means aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface, exclusive of loading ramps and parking areas. 
    Airport (FAA FAR sec. 152.3) means any areas of land or water that is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft. Any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings, other airport facilities, or rights-of-way; and all airport buildings and facilities located on the areas specified in this definition. 
    Airport elevation (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means the highest point on an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level. 
    Airport environs means the land use and people in the areas surrounding an airport which can be directly affected by the operation of the airport. 
    Airport hazard (FAA FAR sec. 152.3) means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near a public airport that obstruct the airspace required for the flight of aircraft landing or taking off at the airport; or is otherwise hazardous to aircraft landing or taking off at the airport. 
    Airport layout plan (ALP) (FAA FAR sec. 152.3) means the plan of an airport showing the layout of existing and proposed airport facilities. 
    Airport overlay zones means a zone intended to place additional land use conditions on land impacted by the airport while retaining the existing underlying zone. The FAR part 77 surfaces and RPZs have been combined to create five airport overlay zones. The five specific zones create a comprehensive area focused on maintaining compatible land use around airports. 
(1)  Zone A is intended to provide a clear area that is free of aboveground obstructions and structures. This Zone is closest to the individual runway ends. 
(2)  Zone B is a critical overlay surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport. The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway. 
(3)  Zone C includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend 1,050 feet from the edge of the primary surface. 
(4)  Zone D is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at an individual airport. 
(5)  Zone E is the outermost zone of the overlay areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations. The zone begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface. 
    Airport reference code (ARC) means an FAA coding system used to relate airport design criteria to the operational and physical characteristics of the airplanes intended to operate at the airport. 
    Airport reference point (ARP) (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means the latitude and longitude of the approximate center of the airport. 
    Airport zoning permit means allowing new development or alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use. 
    Airside means that portion of the airport facility where aircraft movements take place, airline operations areas, and areas that directly serve the aircraft, such as taxiway, runway, maintenance and fueling areas. 
    Airspace means the space lying above the earth or above a certain area of land or water that is necessary to conduct aviation operations. 
    Approach and runway protection zone map means the approach and runway protection zone map is compiled from the criteria in FAR part 77, "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace." It shows the area affected by the airport overlay zoning ordinance and includes the layout of runways, airport boundaries, elevations, and area topography. Applicable height limitation areas are shown in detail. 
    Approach slopes (FAA part 77) means the ratios of horizontal to vertical distance indicating the degree of indication of the approach surface. The various ratios include: 
(1)  20:1-For all utility and visual runways extended from the primary surface a distance of 5,000 feet. 
(2)  34:1-For all non-precision instrument runways extended from the primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet. 
(3)  50:1/40:1-For all precision instrument runways extending from the primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet at an approach slope of 50:1 and an additional 40,000 feet beyond this at a 40:1 approach slope. 
    Approach surface (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in this chapter. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Aviation easement means a grant of a property interest in land over which a right of unobstructed flight in the airspace is established. 
    Building codes means codes, either local or state, that control the functional and structural aspects of buildings and/or structures. Local ordinances typically require proposed buildings to comply with zoning requirements before building permits can be issued under the building codes. 
    Commercial uses means a use category including land uses or activities involving the production, processing, manufacturing, or sale of goods or services for financial gain, including uses that provide merchandise to the general public. Accessory uses may include offices, storage, food service, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees and parking. 
    Compatibility means the degree to which land uses or types of development can coexist or integrate. 
    Easement (FAA AC 5020-1) means the legal right of one party to use a portion of the total rights in real estate owned by another party. This may include the right of passage over, on, or below property; certain air rights above the property, including view rights; and the rights to any specified form of development or activity, as well as any other legal rights in the property that may be specified in the easement document. 
    Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) means a federal agency charged with regulating air commerce to promote its safety and development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic control, air navigation; and promoting the development of a national system of airports. 
    Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) means regulations established and administered by the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related activities. 
(1)  FAR part 36 (FAA FAR sec. 36.1); Regulation establishing noise standards for the civil aviation fleet. 
(2)  FAR part 91 (FAA FAR sec. 91.1); Regulation pertaining to air traffic and general operating rules, including operating noise limits. 
(3)  FAR part 150 (FAA FAR sec. 150.1); Regulation pertaining to airport noise compatibility planning. 
(4)  FAR part 161 (FAA FAR sec. 161.1); Regulation pertaining to notice and approval of airport noise and access restrictions. 
(5)  FAR part 77 (FAA FAR sec. 77.1); Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, part 77: 
a.  Establishes standards for determining obstructions in navigable airspace; 
b.  Defines the requirements for notice to the FAA administrator of certain proposed construction or alteration; 
c.  Provides for aeronautical studies of obstructions to air navigation to determine their effect on the safe and efficient use of airspace; 
d.  Provides for public hearings on the hazardous effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and 
e.  Provides for establishing antenna farm areas. 
    General aviation airport means any airport that is not an air carrier or a military facility. 
    Height. Height is utilized for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the official airport land use and height zoning map; height shall be measured as the highest point of a structure, tree, or other object of natural growth, measured from the mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Hold harmless agreement means an agreement which holds airport sponsors or jurisdictions harmless for alleged damages resulting from airport operations. Such agreements are recorded in deeds or permits as a condition of approval of a regulatory land use decision. 
    Imaginary surfaces (FAA FAR part 77.25) means those areas established in relation to the airport and to each runway consistent with FAR part 77 in which any object extending above these imaginary surface, by definition, is an obstruction. 
(1)  Transitional surface. The transitional surface extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extend at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
(2)  Horizontal surface. The horizontal surface is a horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(3)  Conical surface. The conical surface extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance 4,000 feet. 
(4)  Approach surface. The approach surface is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the runway primary surface. The approach slope of a runway is a ratio of 20:1, 34:1, or 50:1, depending on the approach type. The length of the approach surface varies from 5,000 to 50,000 feet and also depends upon the approach type. 
    Incompatible land use (FAA FAR sec. 150.7) means the use of land which is normally incompatible with the aircraft and airport operations (such as, but not limited to, homes, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, and libraries). 
    Industrial, wholesale trade, and storage uses means a use category including the following use types: 
(1)  Industrial development or uses involved in the research, design, manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manmade, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or customers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales (typically ten percent or less of the total gross floor area). Relatively few customers come to the site. 
(2)  Industrial, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and warehouse/storage uses including uses that produce goods from raw or finished materials, uses that distribute goods in large quantities to primarily wholesale customers, or provide for storage or warehousing of goods, either in enclosed buildings or outdoors. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking, and storage. 
    Itinerant operation (FAA AC 150/5325-4B) means takeoff or landing operations of airplanes going from one airport to another airport that involves a trip of at least 20 miles. Local operations are excluded. 
    Land use compatibility means the coexistence of land uses surrounding the airport with airport-related activities. 
    Lighting and marking of hazards to air navigation means installation of appropriate lighting fixtures, painted markings or other devices to such objects or structures that constitute hazards to air navigation. 
    Mitigation means the avoidance, minimization, reduction, elimination or compensation for adverse environmental effects of a proposed action. 
    Navigation aids (NAVAID) means any facility used by an aircraft for guiding or controlling flight in the air or the landing or takeoff of an aircraft. 
    Navigable airspace means the airspace above minimum altitude for safe flight, and includes the airspace needed to ensure safety in takeoff and landing of aircraft. 
    Noise exposure contours means the lines drawn around a noise source indicating constant energy levels of noise exposure. For this chapter, day-night average sound levels (DNL), which averages noise level over a 24-hour period of time, will be used as the measure to describe community exposure to noise. 
    Noise impact means a condition that exists when the noise levels that occur in an area exceed a level identified as appropriate for the activities in that area. 
    Noise sensitive area (FAA AC 91-36D) means an area where noise interferes with normal activities associated with the area's use. Examples of noise-sensitive areas include residential, educational, health, and religious structures and sites, and parks, recreational areas (including areas with wilderness characteristics), wildlife refuges, and cultural and historical sites where a quiet setting is a generally recognized feature or attribute. 
    Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, tree, or use of land that is inconsistent with the provisions of the local land use or airport master plans. 
    Object (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means and includes, but is not limited to, aboveground structures, NAVAIDs, people, equipment, vehicles, natural growth, terrain, and parked aircraft. 
    Obstacle free zone (OFZ) (FAA 150/5300-13) means the airspace below 150 feet above the established airport elevation and along the runway and extended runway centerline that is required to be clear of all objects, except for the frangible visual NAVAIDs that need to be located in the OFZ because of their function, in order to provide clearance protection for the aircraft landing or taking off from the runway, and for missed approaches. 
    Obstruction (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height, specific to its geographic location relative to the runway/airport. 
    Off-airport property means property that is beyond the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor. 
    On-airport property means property that is within the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor. 
    Overlay zone means a mapped zone that imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
    Primary surface (FAA AC 150/5190-4A) means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in FAR part 77. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Primary runway (FAA AC 150/5325-4B general definition) means the runway used for the majority of airport operations. Large, high-activity airports may operate two or more parallel primary runways. 
    Public assembly use means a structure or outdoor facility where concentrations of people gather for purposes such as deliberation, education, shopping, business, entertainment, amusement, sporting events, or similar activities, but excluding air shows. The term "public assembly use" does not include places where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as parking lots and bus stops, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan. 
    Public use airport (FAA AC 150/5190-6) means either a publicly owned airport or a privately owned airport open for public use. 
    Residential and accommodation uses means a use category that includes the following use types: 
(1)  Residential uses that provide living accommodations, including sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitary facilities, to one or more persons, and where tenancies typically last longer than 30 days. 
(2)  Accommodation uses characterized by visitor-serving facilities that provide temporary lodging in guest rooms or guest units, for compensation, and with an average length of stay of less than 30 days. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities for the exclusive use of guests, limited storage, restaurants, bars, meeting facilities, and offices. 
    Runway protection zone (RPZ) (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means an area off the runway end designed to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground. 
    Runway safety area (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means a defined surface surrounding the runway prepared or suitable for reducing the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an overshoot, or excursion from the runway. 
    Structure means any object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines, including the poles or other structures supporting the same. 
    Utility runway means a utility runway constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds gross weight or less. 
    Variance means an authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land that is prohibited by a zoning ordinance. A lawful exception from specific zoning ordinance standards and regulations predicated on the practical difficulties and/or unnecessary hardships on the petitioner being required to comply with those regulations and standards from which an exemption or exception is sought. 
    Visual approach means an approach to an airport conducted with visual reference to the terrain. 
    Visual runway (FAA AC 150/5300-13) means a runway without an existing or planned straight-in instrument approach procedure. 
    Visual flight rules (VFR) (FAA FAR sec. 170.3) means rules that govern the procedures for conducting flight under visual conditions. The term "VFR" is also used in the United States to indicate weather conditions that are equal to or greater than minimum VFR requirements. In addition, the term "VFR" is used by pilots and controllers to indicate the type of flight plan. 
    Wetland means land on which water covers the soil or is present either at or near the surface of the soil or within the root zone, all year or for varying periods of time during the year, including during the growing season. (FAA AC 150/5200-33A.) Wetlands provide a variety of functions and can be regulated by local, state, and federal laws. Normally, wetlands are attractive to many types of wildlife, including many which rank high on the list of hazardous wildlife species. 
    Wildlife attractants means any human-made structure, land-use practice, or human-made or natural geographic feature that can attract or sustain hazardous wildlife within the landing or departure airspace or the airport's air operations area. These attractants include, but are not limited to, architectural features, landscaping, waste disposal sites, wastewater treatment facilities, agricultural or aquaculture activities, surface mining, or wetlands. 
    Wildlife hazards means species of wildlife (birds, mammals, reptiles), including feral animals and domesticated animals not under the control, that are associated with aircraft strike problems, are capable of causing structural damage to airport facilities, or act as attractants to other wildlife that pose a strike hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-6, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-7. - Air space obstruction zones. 
    The Airport Height Overlay Zoning Districts are illustrated on the official Waterloo Airport Land Use and Height Zoning Map, attached and made part of this chapter. Such official Airport Land Use and Height Zoning Map may be amended, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-7, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-8. - Land use safety zones. 
    FAR part 77 surfaces and RPZs have been combined to create five airport overlay zones. These five zones are designed to maintain compatible land uses around the airport. The zones shall be evaluated for compatible land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-8, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-9. - Definition of zones. 
    Five airport overlay zoning districts are prescribed within this chapter. Specific dimensions for the individual zones for each runway end are noted in the following tables and text. The airport land use and height zoning maps should be evaluated to determine the specific area of impact associated with each zone. 
(1)  Zone A-Runway protection zone (RPZ). Zone A is intended to provide a clear area that is free of aboveground obstructions and structures. This zone is closest to the individual runway ends. The dimensional standards for this zone are the same as those described in the Airport Design AC (AC 150/5300-13 change 11) and are shown in the following table: 
Table 1: Zone A Dimensional Requirements 
Dimensions Runway 
Ends Approach 
Visibility 
Minimums 1 Length L 
feet Inner Width 
W 1 feet Outer Width 
W 2 feet RPZ 
acres Runway 6 Non Precision 1,700 1,000 1,510 48.978 Runway 24 Non Precision 1,700 1,000 1,510 48.978 Runway 12 Precision 2,500 1,000 1,750 78.914 Runway 30 Non Precision 2,500 1,000 1,750 78.914 Runway 18 Non Precision 1,700 1,000 1,510 48.978 Runway 36 Non Precision 1,700 1,000 1,510 48.978  
1 The RPZ dimensional standards are for the runway end with the specified approach visibility minimums. The departure RPZ dimensional standards are equal to or less than the approach RPZ dimensional standards. When an RPZ begins other than 200 feet beyond the runway end, separate approach and departure RPZs should be provided. Refer to FAA AC 150/5300-13, change 11, appendix 14 for approach and departure RPZs. 
Source: FAA AC 150/5300-13, change 11, airport design standards. 
(2)  Zone B-Approach surface. Zone B is a critical airport overlay zoning surface that reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport. The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway. The following table illustrates the various sizes of Zone B based upon the specific runway criteria. A portion of Zone B is overlain by Zone A because the approach surface and RPZ overlap the entire length of the RPZ. Consequently, the length of Zone B begins at the inner edge of the RPZ. 
(3)  Zone C includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend 1,050 feet from the edge of the primary surface paralleling the runway and extended runway centerline until they reach the end of Zone A at a 90 degree angle. The specific dimensions for Zone C are based upon various options for the primary surface that is predicated upon the type of approach and critical aircraft. 
(4)  Zone D-Horizontal surface. Zone D is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and configurations at individual airports. 
(5)  Zone E-Conical surface. Zone E is the outermost zone of the airport overlay zoning areas and has the least number of land use restriction considerations. The zone begins at the edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the horizontal surface. 
Table 2: Airport Overlay Zones B-E Dimensional Standards 
Runway Dimensional Standards 
(Feet) Item Runway 6 Runway 24 Runway 12 Runway 30 Runway 18 Runway 36 Primary surface width and Zone B inner width 500 500 1,000 1,000 500 500 Zone B end width 3,500 3,500 16,000 4,000 3,500 3,500 Zone B length 10,000 10,000 10,000* 10,000 10,000 10,000 Zone C width 1,050 1,050 1,050 1,050 1,050 1,050 Zone D radius 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 Zone E width 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000  
The length of Zone B for a precision instrument runway is 10,000 feet for the purposes of the land use zone. The FAR part 77 surface which it is based upon extends for an additional 40,000 feet. 
Source: FAA AC 150/5300-13, change 11, airport design standards. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-8.A, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-10. - Zone compatibility. 
(a)  The tables in this section shall be utilized to evaluate land use compatibility for various land use classifications. 
(b)  Uses identified as compatible shall not require additional review. However, consideration should be given to the following areas of concern: 
(1)  Noise sensitive related issues. 
(2)  High concentrations of people. 
(3)  Tall structures. 
(4)  Visual obstructions. 
(5)  Wildlife and bird attractants. 
(6)  Flammable substances and materials. 
(7)  Electrical, navigation, and radio interference. 
(c)  Uses found to be not compatible shall be precluded from development within the specific zone. 
(d)  Uses found to require additional review shall be evaluated for general compatibility utilizing the compatible land use planning checklist and the seven primary areas of concern noted above. 
Table 3: Waterloo Regional Airport Zone Chart 
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Residential Activities Single dwelling unit uses (1 dwelling per lot) Detached single dwelling unit (i.e., farm dwelling, detached single home, manufactured/modular homes if converted to real property and taxed) NC AR AR AR C Detached zero lot line dwelling (i.e., condominium) NC AR AR AR C Attached single dwelling unit (i.e., townhouses) NC AR AR AR C Two dwelling unit uses (i.e., two principal dwelling units within one building on the same parcel) NC AR AR AR C Multi-dwelling unit uses (i.e., three or more principal dwelling units within a single building on the same parcel, apartments such as condominium, elder, assisted living, townhouse-style) Low-rise (1-3 levels) NC AR AR AR C Group living uses (i.e., assisted living, group care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, independent group living) NC AR AR AR C Manufactured housing parks NC AR AR AR C Commercial Activities Eating and drinking establishments (i.e., restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, fast food restaurants, bars, nightclubs, taverns, cocktail lounges) NC AR AR C C Quick vehicle servicing uses (i.e., full-serve and mini-serve gas station, unattended card key service stations, car washes) NC AR AR C C Office uses (i.e., business, government, professional, medical, or financial) General office (i.e., professional offices, financial businesses, government offices) NC AR AR AR C Low-rise (1-3 levels) NC AR AR AR C Medical/dental office (i.e., medical and dental clinics, chiropractic clinics, physical therapy clinics) NC AR AR AR C  
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Retail uses (i.e., sale, lease, or rent of new or used products) Sales-oriented (i.e., appliances, convenience stores, bakeries, electronics, furniture, garden supplies, gas stations, groceries, hardware, malls, strip malls, videos) NC AR AR AR C Personal service-oriented (i.e., retail service-banking establishments, laundromats/dry cleaning, quick printing services, beauty/tanning salons, funeral homes) NC AR AR AR C Repair-oriented (i.e., consumer goods-electronics, office equipment, appliances) NC AR AR AR C Hospitality-oriented (hotels, motels, convention centers, meeting halls, event facilities) NC AR AR AR C Low-rise (1-3 levels) NC AR AR AR C Outdoor storage and display-oriented (i.e., outdoor storage-lumber yards, vehicles sales, landscape material and nursery product sales, farm supply and equipment sales) NC AR AR AR C Surface passenger services (i.e., passenger terminals for buses, rail services, local taxi and limousine services) NC AR AR C C Vehicle repair uses (i.e., vehicle repair or service shops, alignment shops, tire sales) NC AR AR C C Industrial/Manufacturing Activities Industrial service uses (i.e., machine shops, tool repair, towing and vehicle storage, building supply yards, heating/plumbing/electrical contractors, exterminators, janitorial services, fuel oil distributors, solid fuel yards) NC AR AR AR C  
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Manufacturing and production uses (i.e., manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods) Technical/light manufacturing (i.e., electrical components, engineering, scientific and research, office, computer hardware/software, optical, pharmaceuticals, printing/photo facilities, publishing) NC AR AR AR C General manufacturing (i.e., manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise) NC AR AR AR C Heavy manufacturing (i.e., concrete and asphalt plants, meat packing plants, wet corn milling, manufacturing of animal feed, paper/paperboard mills, ethanol plants) NC AR AR AR C Mining and extraction uses NC AR AR AR C Salvage operations (i.e., firms that collect, store, and dismantle damaged or discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances, and building material) NC AR AR C C Self-service storage uses (i.e., mini-warehouses/storage facilities) NC C C C C Warehouse and freight uses (i.e., major wholesale distribution centers, general freight storage, railroad switching yards, bus/rail car storage lots, parcel service, grain terminals) NC C C C C Waste-related uses (i.e., recycling centers, sanitary landfills, waste transfer stations, composting, energy recovery plants, sanitary and water treatment facilities, sanitary collection/pumping facilities, hazardous waste collection sites) AR AR AR AR AR  
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Wholesale sales uses (i.e., sale, lease, or rental of products to retailers for industrial, institutional, or commercial business users) NC AR AR AR C Institutional Activities Basic utility uses (i.e., utility substation facilities, electrical substations, water and sewer lift stations, water towers) NC AR AR AR C College and universities (i.e., public or private colleges and universities, technical colleges, seminaries) NC AR AR AR C Community service uses (i.e., public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing a local service to the people) General community service (i.e., libraries, museums, transit centers, park and ride facilities, senior/community/neighborhood centers, police and fire stations) NC AR AR AR C Community service-shelter (i.e., transient housing) NC AR AR AR C Daycare uses (i.e., childcare centers, adult daycare, preschools, after school programs) NC AR AR AR C Detention facilities (i.e., prisons, jails, probation centers, juvenile detention homes, halfway houses) NC AR AR AR C Educational facilities (i.e., public and private schools) General educational facilities (i.e., public and private elementary, middle, junior, and senior high schools including religious, boarding, military schools) NC AR AR AR C Specialized education facilities (i.e., specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, non-degree-granting schools) NC AR AR AR C Hospitals (i.e., hospitals, medical centers) NC AR AR AR C Religious assembly uses (i.e., churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, Masonic, eagles, moose, or elk lodges) NC AR AR AR C  
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Infrastructure Activities Communication transmission facility uses (i.e., broadcast, wireless, point to point, emergency towers and antennae) NC AR AR AR AR Parking uses (i.e., ground lots, parking structures) AR C C C C Transportation uses (i.e., highways, interstates, local and county roads) AR C C C C Utility uses (i.e., solar power generation equipment, wind generators, wind farms) NC AR AR AR AR Agricultural uses (i.e., commercial cultivation of plants, livestock production) Plant-related (i.e., crop farming, vegetable, fruit, and tree, wholesale plant nurseries) C C C C C Animal-related (i.e., livestock operations, dairy farms, horse farms) AR AR AR C C Resident-related (i.e., single dwelling unit home, mobile home if converted to real property and taxed) NC AR AR AR C Facility-related (i.e., fuel bulk storage/pumping facility, grain elevator, livestock/seed/grain sales) NC AR AR AR AR Water bodies (i.e., open bodies containing water), wildlife areas, and floodplains Manmade resources (i.e., mining and extraction, water detention ponds, wetlands) NC AR AR AR AR Naturally occurring (i.e., lakes, ponds, prairie pot holes, rivers, streams, wetlands) NC AR AR C C Wildlife preservation areas (i.e., petting zoos, wildlife rehabilitation centers, zoos) NC AR AR AR C Floodplains AR AR AR C C Parks and Recreation Activities Commercial recreational uses (i.e., facilities used for physical exercise, recreation, or culture) Outdoor (i.e., campgrounds, tennis/swimming facilities, drive-in theaters, skating rinks, pavilions, amphitheaters) NC AR AR AR C  
C = Compatible    AR = Additional Review Required    NC = Not Compatible 
Land Uses Zone A Zone B 1 Zone C 1 Zone D Zone E Indoor (i.e., physical fitness centers, health clubs, bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard halls, arcades, indoor theaters) NC AR AR AR C Golf (i.e., golf driving ranges, outdoor miniature golf, 9+ hole courses) NC AR AR C C Utility uses (i.e., amusement/theme parks, fairgrounds, racetracks, sports arenas) NC AR AR AR AR Parks (i.e., aquatic, mini, private, sports, neighborhood, school, community) NC AR AR C C Casino NC AR AR AR C  
1. Table 3, including both the land use and height restrictions (FAA part 77), shall apply to areas defined as Zone B and Zone C inside of the conical surface (Zone E), as shown on the airport land use and height zoning map. For areas defined as Zone B and Zone C outside of the conical surface (Zone E), only the height restrictions (FAA part 77), as identified on the airport land use and height zoning map, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-8.B, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-11. - Airport overlay zoning maps. 
    The airport land use and height overlay zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the airport land use and height zoning maps. Such official airport land use and height zoning maps may be amended, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-9, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-12. - Chapter administration. 
    It shall be the duty of the Waterloo city planner, Cedar Falls city planner, and county zoning administrator, referred to herein as the "airport zoning administrator," within their respective jurisdictions to administer the regulations prescribed herein for their respective communities. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the airport zoning administrator within the respective community upon forms furnished by said airport zoning administrator. Applications for action by the airport board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the airport zoning administrator should an applicant request review. Permit applications shall be either granted or denied by the appropriate airport zoning administrator according to the regulations prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-10, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-13. - Airport overlay zoning permits. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide the airport zoning administrator with sufficient information to evaluate the proposed action. This information shall include, but not be limited to, the following as noted in the compatible land use planning checklist: 
(1)  Contact information. 
(2)  Structure information. 
(3)  Site information. 
(4)  Drawing information. 
(5)  Certification. 
(6)  Identify current and potential compatibility concerns. 
(b)  The airport zoning administrator shall evaluate the proposal based upon information provided by the applicant. The airport zoning administrator shall approve the permit if after evaluation, the proposed project is found to be adequately compatible. Should the proposed project be found to be incompatible after review, the airport zoning administrator shall deny the permit. Should the permit be denied, the applicant shall have the right to request a variance or an appeal as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-11, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-14. - Hazardous markings and lighting. 
    Lighting and marking requirements will be determined through an FAA 7460-1 airspace analysis. The owner of any structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain is hereby required to install, operate, and maintain such markers, lights, and other aids to navigation necessary to indicate to the aircraft operators in the vicinity of an airport the presence of an airport hazard. Hazardous markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-12, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-15. - Height limitations. 
(a)  No structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained within any airport zoning district established by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations set forth in this chapter. The permitted height shall not exceed the difference between the grade elevation and the height limitation numbers illustrated on the "Official Waterloo Airport Land Use and Height Map" within the various airport zoning districts encompassed by this chapter. 
(b)  An FAA 7460-1 airspace review shall provide a portion of the information necessary to evaluate potential height impacts. However, it shall not be the sole source of review. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-13, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-16. - Airport zoning commission. 
(a)  The commission so appointed shall be known as the airport zoning commission. In adopting, amending, and repealing airport zoning regulations, the governing body of a city shall follow the procedure in Iowa Code §§ 414.4 and 414.6 and the board of supervisors of a county shall follow the procedure in Iowa Code §§ 335.6 and 335.8. The airport zoning commission shall adopt operating rules or guidelines. 
(b)  The airport zoning commission shall consist of seven total members, two members from the planning and zoning commission of each jurisdiction and one additional member, who is the airport director. The airport zoning commission chairman shall be selected and reappointed by a majority vote of the members serving on the airport zoning commission. The terms of the members of the airport zoning commission shall be determined by state law. Members may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which the member was selected. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-14, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-17. - Airport board of adjustment. 
(a)  The governing bodies of the jurisdictions under this chapter shall provide for the appointment of an airport board of adjustment, as provided in Iowa Code § 414.7 for a city, or as provided in Iowa Code § 335.10 for a county. The airport board of adjustment has the same powers and duties, and its procedure and appeals are subject to the same provisions as established in Iowa Code §§ 414.9 to 414.19 for a city, or Iowa Code §§ 335.12 to 335.16 and 335.18 to 335.21 for a county. The airport board of adjustment shall adopt operating rules of procedure. 
(b)  The airport board of adjustment shall consist of seven total members, two members from each jurisdiction and one additional member, the airport director. The chairman of the airport board of adjustment shall be selected and reappointed by a majority vote of the members serving on the airport board of adjustment. The terms of the members of the airport board of adjustment shall be determined by state law. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which that member was selected. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(c)  The concurring vote of a majority of the airport board of adjustment shall be necessary to do any of the following: 
(1)  Reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official. 
(2)  Decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to pass under any regulations adopted pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 329. 
(3)  Effect any variance from any regulations adopted pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 329. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-15, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-18. - Variances. 
    Any person desiring to erect, alter, or increase the height of any structure, object, or to permit the growth of any natural vegetation, or otherwise use his property in violation with any section of this chapter, may apply to the airport board of adjustment for variance from such regulation. No application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the airport board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the airport zoning administrator for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. No variance shall be granted unless evidence shows all of the following: 
(1)  That the regulations contained herein create practical difficulties where strict or literal interpretation or enforcement would create an unnecessary hardship prohibiting the use of the property in manner reasonably similar to that of others in the zone; 
(2)  The request has a uniqueness that is not common in the zone in which the property is located; 
(3)  The request is not contrary to the public interest; and 
(4)  The spirit and intent of the chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. There shall be a non-refundable application fee paid by the applicant to the appropriate jurisdiction. Said fee will be set by resolution of each jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-16, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-19. - Appeals. 
    Any person, property owner, or taxpayer impacted by any decision of this chapter may appeal to the airport board of adjustment. Such appeal, by application, shall be taken to the board within a reasonable time, but not longer than 30 days. The airport zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the airport board of adjustment an application and all documentation constituting the record upon which the appealed action is requested. In exercising their powers, the airport board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as it believes proper and to that end will have the powers of the airport zoning administrator. There shall be a non-refundable application fee paid by the applicant to the appropriate jurisdiction. Said fee will be set by resolution of each jurisdiction. The concurring vote of four members of the airport board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the airport zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which it is required to pass under this chapter, provided that the action of the airport board of adjustment shall not become effective until after the written decision or resolution of the airport board of adjustment, setting forth the full reason for its decision and the vote of each participating member as documented in its minutes. Said written decision or resolution shall be filed in the office of the airport zoning administrator and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-17, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-20. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the airport board of adjustment may appeal to the court of record as provided in Iowa Code § 414.15. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-18, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-21. - Penalties. 
    If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the appropriate city or county may, in addition to other remedies, seek injunctive relief, commence a municipal or county infraction action, mandamus, or other appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct, or abate such violation. A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the appropriate city or county code and thus constitute a municipal or county infraction, a civil offense punishable by a civil penalty, order of abatement and the entry of a judgment for costs of abatement or correction, pursuant to Iowa Code § 64.22 or 331.307. Any construction started without a permit or which does not comply with the requirements of the corresponding Code of Ordinances shall be removed immediately. The city council or county board of supervisors may, without limitation, provide for the abatement of such infraction, and may pursue any combination of remedies available. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-19, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-22. - Nonconformities. 
    Any pre-existing nonconforming structure, tree, or use, shall not be replaced, rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, so as to constitute a greater airport hazard than it was when this chapter or amendments to it were adopted. A nonconforming structure in existence at the adoption hereof that was not lawful, or authorized under previous zoning chapters, shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming building or structure pursuant to this chapter, or amendments thereto. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or abandoned, but not to encourage their survival. Further, any nonconforming structures, buildings, uses, parcels, or lots shall be subject to the nonconforming regulations of the community in which the property in question is located. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-20, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-23. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height or structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-21, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-24. - Adoption, amendment, and repealing regulations. 
    In adopting, amending, and repealing airport zoning regulations, the governing body of a city shall follow the procedure in Iowa Code §§ 414.4 and 414.6 and the board of supervisors of a county shall follow the procedure in Iowa Code §§ 335.6 and 335.8. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-23, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 4-25. - Effective date. 
    This is a chapter repealing chapter 4, airport, of the Code of Ordinances of the city including airport zoning map and all of the amendments thereto; and enacting in lieu thereof as new chapter 4, airport zoning, including airport land use and height zoning map, of the Code of Ordinances of the city created for the purpose of protecting health, welfare, and public safety within a specific area of the city in proximity to the Waterloo, Iowa Airport. This chapter, known as "The City of Cedar Falls, Iowa Airport Zoning Ordinance," as adopted, shall be in full force and effect upon publication, recording, and/or posting, as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2913, § 4-24, 11-20-2017) 
Chapter 5 - ALCOHOLIC AND MALT BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Purpose. 
    Regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages are preempted to the state by the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Iowa Code ch. 123). The purpose of this chapter is to provide for local regulations for the location of the premises of retail wine or beer and liquor control licensed establishments and governing activities or such matters which may affect the health, welfare and morals of the community relating to the establishment of certain alcohol licenses and permits. 
(Code 2017, § 5-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Unless a specific penalty is provided for in this chapter, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 5-3; Ord. No. 2362, § 3, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 5-3. - Compliance with state law. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or keep for sale or possess alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Iowa Code ch. 123. 
(Code 2017, § 5-4) 
Sec. 5-4. - Eligibility for license or permit. 
    Upon meeting the requirements imposed by state law and the ordinances of the city, a person may apply for a liquor control license or a wine or beer permit. 
(Code 2017, § 5-5) 
Sec. 5-5. - Conditions for issuance of license or permit. 
(a)  As a condition for issuance of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, the applicant must give consent to members of the fire operations division, police operations division, health department, building inspector, county sheriff, deputy sheriff, members of the department of public safety, representatives of the department of inspections and appeals, certified police officers and any official county health officer to enter upon areas of the premises where alcoholic beverages are stored, served or sold, without a warrant, during business hours of the licensee or permittee, to inspect for violations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Iowa Code ch. 123) or of this chapter. 
(b)  No liquor control license shall be issued for premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions and health and fire regulations. No licensee shall have or maintain any interior access to residential or sleeping quarters unless permission is granted by the administrator of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, the permission to be in the form of a living quarters permit. 
(c)  In addition to the statutory requirements for a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, the following requirements must also be met for the issuance of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit that would allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  The place of business for which such liquor control license or wine or beer permit is sought must be located within one of the following zoning districts: C-2 Commercial District, C-3 Commercial District, M-1 Light Industrial District, M-2 Heavy Industrial District, S-1 Shopping Center District, HWY-1 Highway Commercial District, or PC-2 Planned Commercial District. 
a.  The zoning district requirement of subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to any public agency. 
b.  The zoning district requirement of subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to a liquor control license or wine or beer permit issued to a private club as defined in Iowa Code § 123.3(11), provided that such club is owned by, ancillary to, and located on the premises of, a retirement community or retirement village. 
c.  The zoning district requirement of subsection (c)(1) of this section shall not apply to any liquor control license or wine or beer permit which is issued for any establishment located on city-owned property, provided, however, that the city, as owner of the property, shall have consented to the granting of such license or permit. 
(2)  The liquor control license or wine or beer permit must apply only to building areas, with the exception of country clubs or similar type operations. 
(3)  Except for a restaurant, which is defined as any retail establishment where the principal business of which consists of the sale of food products for consumption on the premises, and where the volume of all food sales shall not be less than 66 2/3 percent of the dollar volume of sales made by the establishment, the licensed building is to be no closer, at the closest point, than 150 feet to the border of the zoning district adjacent to the district in which the licensed building is located, if the adjacent zoning district is more restrictive than those zoning districts set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(4)  For establishments that qualify as a restaurant as defined in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee shall furnish to the city clerk verified monthly statements of total dollar volume of food sales and total dollar volume of alcoholic beverage sales for six consecutive months. Thereafter, sales statements, as provided for in this section, shall be submitted for each consecutive six-month period until the liquor control license or wine or beer permit expires or has been revoked. 
(Code 2017, § 5-6; Ord. No. 2256, § 1, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 2397, § 1, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 2749, § 1, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 2830, § 1, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 5-6. - Approval of license or permit by council. 
    The city council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit, shall endorse its approval or disapproval of the application, and shall submit the approval or disapproval to the state alcoholic beverages division. 
(Code 2017, § 5-15) 
Sec. 5-7. - City council action affecting license or permit. 
(a)  The city council may adopt ordinances, resolutions and regulations not in conflict with state law relating to the location and operation of retail wine, beer and liquor establishments. 
(b)  The city council may recommend suspension or revocation of any retail wine or beer permit or liquor control license for violation of any ordinance or regulation adopted by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 5-19) 
Sec. 5-8. - Appeals by license or permit holders. 
    The right of appeal shall be afforded a liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(Code 2017, § 5-20) 
Sec. 5-9. - Possession or consumption in public place; public intoxication. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arrest means the same as defined in Iowa Code § 804.5, and includes taking into custody pursuant to Iowa Code § 232.19. 
    Chemical test means a test of a person's blood, breath or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present, by a qualified person, using devices and methods approved by the commissioner of public safety of the state. 
    Peace officer means the same as defined in Iowa Code § 801.4. 
    School means a public or private school or that portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through grade 12. 
(b)  Possession or consumption in public places. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways, including the sidewalk within the public right-of-way. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not use or consume wine or beer in any public place except: 
(1)  Premises covered by a liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit, as applicable; 
(2)  In any city or state owned park within the city; 
(3)  Within the Cedar Falls Community Center building located at 528 Main Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(4)  Within the Hearst Center for the Arts located at 304 W. Seerley Boulevard, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(5)  Within the Cedar Falls Public Library, located at 524 Main Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa; and 
(6)  Within the Cedar Falls Visitors and Tourism Center, located at 6510 Hudson Road, Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
(c)  Possession or consumption on public school property. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer on public school property or while attending a public or private school-related function. 
(d)  Public intoxication. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place. 
(e)  Possession of open or unsealed container. A person shall not possess any open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways, including the sidewalk within the public right-of-way. A person shall not possess any open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle of alcoholic liquor in any public place except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess any open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle of wine or beer in any public place except: 
(1)  Premises covered by a liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit, as applicable; 
(2)  In city or state owned parks within the city; 
(3)  Within the Cedar Falls Community Center building located at 528 Main Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(4)  Within the Hearst Center for the Arts located at 304 W. Seerley Boulevard, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(5)  Within the Cedar Falls Public Library, located at 524 Main Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa; and 
(6)  Within the Cedar Falls Visitors and Tourism Center, located at 6510 Hudson Road, Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
(f)  Right to chemical test upon arrest. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person's own expense. If the device approved by the commissioner of public safety for testing a sample of a person's breath to determine the person's blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of the chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of the proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in the person's blood, breath or urine established by the results of the chemical test performed within two hours after the person's arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest. 
(g)  Referral to juvenile court. A peace officer shall make a reasonable effort to identify a person under the age of 18 who violates this section and refer the person to juvenile court. 
(h)  Parental notification and school notification. A juvenile court officer shall notify the person's custodial parent, legal guardian, or custodian of the violation. In addition, the juvenile court officer shall make a reasonable effort to identify the elementary or secondary school the person attends, if any, and to notify the superintendent of the school district or the superintendent's designee, or the authorities in charge of the nonpublic school, of the violation. A reasonable attempt to notify the person includes, but is not limited to, a telephone call or notice by first-class mail. 
(i)  Petition to expunge. Upon the expiration of two years following conviction for a violation of this section, a person may petition the court to expunge the person of the conviction, and if the person has had no other criminal convictions, other than simple misdemeanor violations of Iowa Code ch. 321 during the two-year period, the person shall be deemed expunged of the offense as a matter of law. The court shall enter an order expunging the person of the conviction, and ordering that the record of the conviction be expunged by the clerk of the district court. 
(Code 2017, § 5-22; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2144, § 1, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 2341, § I, 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 2362, § 4, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 2505, § 1, 2-14-2005; Ord. No. 2519, § 1, 5-23-2005; Ord. No. 2576, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 2726, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 5-10. - Persons under legal age; penalty. 
(a)  A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine, or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under Iowa Code ch. 123. 
(b)  A person who is 18, 19, or 20 years of age, other than a licensee or permittee, who violates this section regarding the purchase of or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, or possessing or having control of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, commits the following: 
(1)  A simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8C(7). 
(2)  A second offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00. In addition to any other applicable penalty, the person in violation of this section shall choose between either completing a substance abuse evaluation or the suspension of the person's motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one year. 
(3)  A third or subsequent offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine or $500.00 and the suspension of the person's motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one year. 
(c)  The court may, in its discretion, order the person who is under legal age to perform community service work under Iowa Code § 909.3A, of an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this section. 
(d)  If the person who commits a violation of this section is under the age of 18, the matter shall be disposed of in the manner provided in Iowa Code ch. 232. 
(e)  The term "legal age" means 21 years of age or more. 
(Code 2017, § 5-23; Ord. No. 2726, § 3, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 5-11. - Parent and school notification; persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  A peace officer shall make a reasonable effort to identify a person under the age of 18 years discovered to be in possession of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in violation of section 5-10 and refer the person to juvenile court. 
(b)  The juvenile court officer shall notify the person's custodial parent, legal guardian, or custodian of the violation. In addition, the juvenile court shall also make a reasonable effort to identify the elementary or secondary school which the person attends if the person is enrolled in elementary or secondary school and to notify the superintendent or the superintendent's designee of the school which the person attends, or the authorities in charge of the nonpublic school which the person attends, of the possession. A reasonable attempt to notify the person includes, but is not limited to, a telephone call or notice by first-class mail. 
(Code 2017, § 5-24; Ord. No. 2726, § 4, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 5-12. - Seizure of false or altered driver's license or nonoperator identification card. 
(a)  If a liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee or an employee of the licensee or permittee has a reasonable belief based on factual evidence that a driver's license as defined in Iowa Code § 321.1(20A) or nonoperator identification card issued pursuant to Iowa Code § 321.190 offered by a person who wishes to purchase an alcoholic beverage at the licensed premises is altered or falsified or belongs to another person, the licensee, permittee, or employee may retain the driver's license or nonoperator identification card. Within 24 hours, the card shall be delivered to the city police department. When the card is delivered to the city police department, the licensee shall file a written report of the circumstances under which the card was retained. The city police department may investigate whether a violation of Iowa Code § 321.216, 321.216A, or 321.216B, or the corresponding provisions of this Code, if applicable, has occurred. If an investigation is not initiated or a probable cause is not established by the city police department, the driver's license or nonoperator identification card shall be delivered to the person to whom it was issued. The city police department may forward the card with the report to the state department of transportation for investigation, in which case, the department may investigate whether a violation of Iowa Code § 321.216, 321.216A, or 321.216B, or the corresponding provisions of this Code, if applicable, has occurred. The state department of transportation shall return the card to the person to whom it was issued if an investigation is not initiated or a probable cause is not established. 
(b)  Upon taking possession of an identification card as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a receipt for the card with the date and hour of seizure noted shall be provided to the person from whom the card was seized. 
(Code 2017, § 5-25; Ord. No. 2362, § 6, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 5-13. - Miscellaneous prohibitions. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. 
(b)  A person or club holding a liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit under Iowa Code ch. 123, and the person's or club's agents or employees, shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa Code ch. 99B, 99D, 99F, or 99G, or knowingly permit solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit. 
(2)  Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday, however, a holder of a liquor control license or retail beer permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor or beer on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or beer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, nor to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center. 
(4)  Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the division, and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. This prohibition does not apply to common carriers holding a class "D" liquor control license. 
(5)  Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been so reused or adulterated. 
(6)  Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(7)  Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of the licensee or permittee, to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as permitted in Iowa Code § 123.95. This subsection does not apply to the lodging quarters of a class "B" liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee, or to common carriers holding a class "D" liquor control license. 
(8)  Sell, give, or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer. 
(9)  In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine, or any other beverage in or about the permittee's place of business. 
(10)  Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit, however, the absence of security personnel on the licensed premises is insufficient, without additional evidence, to prove that criminal activity occurring on the licensed premises was knowingly permitted in violation of this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, the term "premises" includes parking lots and areas adjacent to the premises of a liquor licensee or permittee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises and used by patrons of the liquor licensee or permittee. 
(11)  Sell or dispense any wine on the premises covered by the permit or permit the consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday, however, a holder of a wine permit authorized to sell wine on Sunday may sell or dispense wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday. 
(12)  Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine which is used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form. 
(c)  A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee. If any person under legal age misrepresents the person's age, and the licensee or permittee establishes that the licensee or permittee made reasonable inquiry to determine whether the prospective purchaser was over legal age, the licensee or permittee is not guilty of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to a person under legal age. 
(Code 2017, § 5-26; Ord. No. 2362, § 6, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-26-2007; Ord. No. 2726, § 5, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 5-14. - Criminal and civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 5-13, except section 5-13(b)(8), shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A person who violates section 5-13(b)(8) commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8C(2). 
(b)  The conviction of any liquor control licensee, wine permittee, or beer permittee for a violation of any of the provisions of section 5-13, subject to subsection (c) of this section, is grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit by the city council of the city. 
(c)  If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a licensee or permittee is convicted or found in violation of section 5-13(b)(8), the city council shall, in addition to criminal penalties fixed for violations by this section, assess a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  A first violation shall subject the licensee or permittee to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under Iowa Code § 123.39 shall result in automatic suspension of the license or permit for a period of 14 days. 
(2)  A second violation within two years shall subject the licensee or permittee to a 30-day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00. 
(3)  A third violation within three years shall subject the licensee or permittee to a 30-day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00. 
(4)  A fourth violation within three years shall result in revocation of the license or permit. 
(5)  For purposes of this subsection: 
a.  The date of any violation shall be used in determining the period between violations. 
b.  Suspension shall be limited to the specific license or permit for the premises found in violation. 
c.  Notwithstanding Iowa Code § 123.40, revocation shall be limited to the specific license or permit found in violation and shall not disqualify a licensee or permittee from holding a license or permit at a separate location. 
(Code 2017, § 5-27; Ord. No. 2362, § 6, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 2617, § 2, 2-26-2007) 
Secs. 5-15-5-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS BEER KEG PERMIT 

Sec. 5-34. - Required for certain events. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed beer permit holder on licensed premises to hold an event where more than one beer keg tapper is to be used at or about the same time without first obtaining a permit therefor, to be issued by the chief of police of the city or the chief's duly authorized representative. A beer keg tapper is any apparatus used to draw or remove beer from a keg. The permit must be obtained at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of the event. 
(Code 2017, § 5-51) 
Sec. 5-35. - Application. 
    Any person seeking the issuance of a permit required by this article shall file an application with the chief of police or the chief's duly authorized representative. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person sponsoring the event, if any. 
(3)  The day and period of time for which the permit is desired. 
(4)  The location of the event. 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance. 
(6)  Any other information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued under this article. 
(Code 2017, § 5-52) 
Sec. 5-36. - Required facilities; designation of responsible person; payment of fee. 
    In order to obtain a permit under this article, the following requirements must be met and provided for: 
(1)  A sufficient number of trash containers must be provided on the site of the event. 
(2)  One restroom or toilet facility, either permanent or temporary, must be provided on the event site for each 50 persons expected to attend the event. 
(3)  The site for the event shall be clearly and visibly marked or roped off and the site must be self-contained. 
(4)  The designation and signature of a person who shall sign the application and shall be responsible for meeting the requirements of this article and shall be responsible for the event itself is required. Such person shall be designated in this article as the permit holder. 
(5)  Payment of a permit fee shall be in an amount to be established annually by resolution by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 5-53; Ord. No. 2067, § 3, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 5-37. - Conditions for issuance. 
    The chief of police or the chief's duly authorized representative shall issue a permit required by this article when he finds that: 
(1)  The proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public or private enjoyment of the neighborhood where the event is to be held. 
(2)  The proposed event or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  The proposed event or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  The proposed event will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to the city. 
(Code 2017, § 5-54) 
Sec. 5-38. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police or the chief's duly authorized representative shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued under this article upon the finding of a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance of the city or statute of the state, or upon good cause having been shown. 
(Code 2017, § 5-55) 
Sec. 5-39. - Responsibilities of permit holder. 
    The permit holder under this article shall have the following responsibilities in connection with the event: 
(1)  Cleanup of the event site, including the streets and private property adjoining the event site on all sides. 
(2)  Causing the permit issued to be displayed in a conspicuous place on the event site. 
(3)  Attending a briefing session, to be conducted by the chief of police or the chief's duly authorized representative, in regard to all matters surrounding the event. The briefing will include information on city ordinances concerning litter, open liquor containers, parking, noise, disturbance of the peace, serving beer or liquor to minors or intoxicated persons, or any other ordinances or statutes which have an effect on the event. 
(Code 2017, § 5-56) 
Sec. 5-40. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
    A holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be bound by all applicable ordinances of the city and all applicable statutes of the state, as fully as though the ordinances and statutes were actually inserted in the permit itself, including those ordinances or state statutes requiring permits or licenses for the sale of beer. 
(Code 2017, § 5-57) 
Sec. 5-41. - Liability of permit holder. 
    The holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be liable for any loss, damage or injuries sustained by any person or the city arising out of or resulting from the negligence of the permit holder or any other person attending the event. The permit holder, by signing the application for the permit and accepting the permit, assumes full responsibility for and agrees to indemnify the city against and save it harmless from any liability whatsoever arising out of or arising from the negligence of the permit holder or any person attending the event. 
(Code 2017, § 5-58) 
Sec. 5-42. - Responsibilities of property owner. 
    It shall be unlawful for a property owner or a person in legal possession of real estate to permit or to allow an event as described in section 5-34 to be held on the real estate unless the permit required in this article is obtained. It shall also be the responsibility of a property owner or a person in possession of real estate to make sure that all the requirements set forth in this article are met. 
(Code 2017, § 5-59; Ord. No. 2665, § 1, 11-24-2008) 
Sec. 5-43. - Notification of use of vehicle equipped for dispensing beer. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle upon or in which more than one keg of beer can be used to dispense beer to fail to notify the police operations division at least 24 hours in advance of the vehicle's use for the dispensing of beer. The owner or operator shall also advise the police department of an estimate of the number of 16-gallon kegs of beer to be dispensed. 
(Code 2017, § 5-60) 
Sec. 5-44. - Keg identification sticker; penalty. 
(a)  Keg identification sticker. Each class "B," "C," or special class "C" liquor control licensee and class "B" or "C" beer permittee who sells beer for off-premises consumption shall affix to each keg of beer an identification sticker provided by the administrator of the alcoholic beverages division of the state department of commerce. The sticker provided shall allow for its full removal when common external keg cleaning procedures are performed. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "keg" means all durable and disposable containers with a liquid capacity of five gallons or more. Each class "B," "C," or special class "C" liquor control licensee and class "B" or "C" beer permittee shall also keep a record of the identification sticker number of each keg of beer sold by the licensee or permittee with the name and address of the purchaser and the number of the purchaser's driver's license, nonoperator's identification card, or military identification card, if the military identification card contains a picture and signature. This information shall be retained by the licensee or permittee for a minimum of 90 days. The records kept pursuant to this subsection shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer during normal business hours. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who fails to affix upon sale, defaces, or fails to record a keg identification sticker or produce a record of keg identification stickers pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction violation, and upon entry of judgment, shall pay a civil penalty in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  For the first offense, that is, the first violation committed by said liquor control licensee or beer permittee, or any of its employees or agents, within the five-year period ending on the date of such violation: $125.00; 
(2)  For the second offense, that is, the second violation committed by said liquor control licensee or beer permittee, or any of its employees or agents, within the five-year period ending on the date of such violation: $175.00; and 
(3)  For the third and each subsequent offense, that is, the third violation committed by said liquor control licensee or beer permittee, or any of its employees or agents, within the five-year period ending on the date of such violation: $250.00. 
In addition, the court may take any other action in connection with any such violation as is authorized by Iowa Code § 364.222 or section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 5-61; Ord. No. 2665, § 2, 11-24-2008) 
Sec. 5-45. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article other than a violation of section 5-44, keg identification sticker, is hereby declared to be a municipal infraction and shall be punishable by a civil penalty in accordance with section 1-9(a)(1). 
(Code 2017, § 5-62; Ord. No. 2665, § 3, 11-24-2008) 
Secs. 5-46-5-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS 

Sec. 5-63. - Approval required. 
    Any permittee or licensee under article I of this chapter, or any applicant for a license or permit under article I of this chapter, desiring to operate an outdoor service area adjacent to and in conjunction with licensed premises must obtain the approval of the city council and of the state alcoholic beverages division before commencing operation of such outdoor service area. 
(Code 2017, § 5-76) 
Sec. 5-64. - Application for approval; granting of approval. 
(a)  An application for approval of an outdoor service area shall be made to the state alcoholic beverages division. Such application may accompany the initial application or any renewal application for a license or permit under article I of this chapter or may be submitted at any time in conjunction with an amended application for a license or permit. An application for the approval of an outdoor service area shall include all information required to be submitted with applications for beer permits and liquor licenses. The accompanying application materials shall be submitted to the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the date it is to be considered by the city council. An outdoor service area shall be subject to the same annual renewal requirements as are all beer permits and liquor licenses. Approval by the city council of an outdoor service area shall be to the state alcoholic beverages division with regard to the diagram, dram shop insurance coverage and all other state and local requirements. 
(b)  Upon submitting an application for approval of an outdoor service area, the applicant shall provide the name and address of the owner of each abutting property as well as every other property which is within 150 feet of the applicant's premises. The city will then notify these property owners by letter of the nature of the application and the date and time when it will appear on the agenda for approval by the city council, so that these property owners will have an opportunity to comment on the application if they wish. 
(c)  Approval or disapproval of an application for approval of an outdoor service area shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such discretion shall be exercised with due regard to public health, safety and welfare considerations. If there is a change of ownership, the outdoor service area use shall be permitted to continue, provided that the usage is continuous and the area has not been altered. 
(Code 2017, § 5-77) 
Sec. 5-65. - Suspension or revocation of approval. 
(a)  The city may, after notice to the licensee or permittee and after a reasonable opportunity for hearing, suspend or revoke authorization for the operation of an outdoor service area for any establishment when the licensee or permittee has violated or has permitted or allowed the violation of any provision of the Iowa Code or this Code pertaining to the operation of an outdoor service area constitutes a threat to public health, welfare or safety, or constitutes a nuisance. 
(b)  The suspension or revocation procedure shall be initiated by the police chief by the filing of a complaint with the city council or state alcoholic beverages division. Written notice of the hearing, as well as a copy of the complaint, shall be served upon the licensee or permittee at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing. In the event of suspension or revocation, the city shall notify the state alcoholic beverages division pursuant to Iowa Code § 123.32. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city council may order the immediate closure of an outdoor service area if it is determined that its continued operation presents a clear and imminent threat to public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation of authorization by the city for the operation of an outdoor service area shall not affect the licensing of the principal establishment, unless separate action to suspend or revoke that license or permit is also initiated. 
(Code 2017, § 5-78) 
Sec. 5-66. - Inspection. 
    Outdoor service areas shall be subject to inspection at least annually at the same time inspection of the adjacent licensed establishment occurs. The city may, in its discretion, inspect an outdoor service area at any other time. 
(Code 2017, § 5-79) 
Sec. 5-67. - Location and operation-Generally. 
    The operation of an outdoor service area shall be subject to the following terms, conditions and regulations: 
(1)  Outdoor service areas must be located on private property and may not encroach on any public right-of-way, except as provided for in section 16-132 for use of public sidewalks for sidewalk cafes. 
(2)  Outdoor service areas shall not be located in the front yard of any licensed premises. 
(3)  Outdoor service areas shall be screened on all sides from public view. Screening shall consist of a fence or other suitable barrier not less than five feet in height and not more than eight feet in height. It shall be of solid construction which will effectively prevent ingress or egress from the premises except by way of an emergency fire exit. Such fire exit shall be required of all outdoor service areas. 
(4)  An outdoor service area shall not be accessible except from the licensed premises which it adjoins. The required fire exit shall be an emergency exit only. 
(5)  An outdoor service area must be immediately adjacent to the licensed establishment of which it is a part. 
(6)  Outdoor service areas shall be permitted only in those zones listed in section 5-6(c)(1), and shall be permitted only if the service area meets or exceeds the requirements of section 5-6(c)(3). 
(7)  Outdoor service areas shall comply with appropriate building, housing and fire codes and with all other applicable state and city laws. 
(8)  Seating or other accommodations in an outdoor service area shall not exceed one person per 15 square feet of floor area accessible to the public. 
(9)  Amplified sound equipment shall be prohibited in outdoor service areas. Compliance with the city noise ordinance shall be required. Additional advertising or identification signage beyond that permitted for the main licensed establishment shall not be permitted. 
(10)  The owner or operator of an outdoor service area shall be required to observe the same per square foot occupancy limits that apply to the building which it abuts. The occupancy limit for each outdoor service area shall be determined by the city building official. If inclement weather requires early closing of the outdoor service area, the licensee or permittee shall not allow patrons of the outdoor service area to enter that portion of the licensed premises housed in the adjacent building if to do so would result in exceeding the occupancy limits therefor as determined by the city building official. 
(Code 2017, § 5-80) 
Sec. 5-68. - Location and operation-Exemptions. 
(a)  An applicant may, as a part of the application for an outdoor service area, request exemption from the requirements of section 5-67(2), (3), (4) and (9). After review and comment by appropriate city staff, the city council may approve such exemptions if it determines that to do so would not jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the users of the outdoor service area or the owners or users of abutting property. The burden of establishing entitlement to such exemption shall be upon the applicant, and cost of compliance alone shall not be sufficient grounds to justify exemption. Outdoor service areas in existence on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived are required to comply with all requirements for outdoor service areas stated in this subsection (a) of this section, or to obtain exemption therefrom. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, an outdoor service area shall be considered a building area as provided for in section 5-6(c)(2). 
(Code 2017, § 5-81) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Authority of police officers and humane officers; interference with officer. 
    In addition to any police officer of the city, an officer of the humane society shall have police powers in the enforcement of this chapter. No person shall interfere with, hinder, molest or abuse any police officer or humane officer in the exercise of such powers. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, any police officer or humane officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a dog, cat, horse or other animal is kept or harbored, to demand the exhibition by the owner of a dog or cat of the license for the dog or cat and the exhibition of the rabies vaccination tag, and to investigate possible cruelty cases. 
(Code 2017, § 6-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  A person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal is guilty of animal neglect if the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Fails to supply the animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water. 
(2)  Fails to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter. 
(3)  Tortures, deprives of necessary sustenance, mutilates, beats, or kills an animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress, or suffering. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a research facility, as defined in Iowa Code § 162.2, provided that the research facility performs functions within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the research facility. 
(c)  A person who negligently or intentionally commits the offense of animal neglect is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any police officer to seize and place in a proper animal shelter any animal cruelly treated as prohibited by this section. 
(Code 2017, § 6-2; Ord. No. 1967, § 2, 2-11-1992) 
Sec. 6-3. - Abandonment of cats and dogs. 
    A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound as defined in Iowa Code § 162.2. A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. If a person is found guilty of a violation of this section or section 6-2, the disposition of the neglected or abused animal shall be determined by the court. 
(Code 2017, § 6-2.1; Ord. No. 1967, § 3, 2-11-1992) 
Sec. 6-4. - Use of streets for driving or riding animals. 
    No person having the care, custody or control of any animal upon any street in the city shall permit such animal to exit a street beyond the curb lines, or edge of a street with no curbs, except in the case of domestic pets. 
(Code 2017, § 6-3) 
Sec. 6-5. - Securing of animals left on street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave standing loose or not securely tied to some post or other thing sufficient to restrain such animal from being at-large or running away, on any of the streets or other places outside of an enclosure within the limits of the city, any team or animal used for riding or driving, without the team or animal being in immediate charge of some person. 
(Code 2017, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-6. - Running at-large prohibited; grazing on public property or property of another. 
(a)  No horses, mules, jacks, cattle, swine, goats, sheep, hens, chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or any other livestock animal or fowl shall be permitted to run at-large within the corporate limits of the city, nor shall any animal be permitted to be staked or tied out to graze on or in front of any person's premises without the consent of such person, nor shall any animal be permitted to be staked or tied out to graze in any of the public streets of the city. 
(b)  No owner or person having charge of any animal, stock or fowl shall permit the animal to run at-large or to be staked out contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 6-6) 
Sec. 6-7. - Impoundment of livestock running at-large. 
(a)  Authority of police officers. It shall be the duty of any member of the police operations division, when on duty, to take up, distrain and impound any animal or fowl found running at-large contrary to the provisions of section 6-6, and care for the animal until the animal's sale or release as provided in this section. Such stock shall be impounded in the city pound, or in such other suitable place as may be designated by the mayor in case the council fails to provide a city pound. 
(b)  Confinement by private persons. Any person may take upon his own premises and distrain any animal or fowl running at-large contrary to the provisions of section 6-6 and endangering such person's or another's safety or property. Such person shall give notice forthwith to the police operations division, or he may deliver such animal or fowl immediately to the police operations division. In either case, the police operations division shall impound the animal as authorized in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Notice of impoundment. Within 24 hours after the impoundment of any animal or fowl pursuant to this section, the chief of police shall post on the door of the city hall or council chamber, in some conspicuous place in the city pound or place of impounding and at some public place in the city, a notice particularly describing the animal or fowl impounded and calling on the owner thereof to identify and take charge of the animal after paying the fees and expenses incurred in the taking, impounding and keeping of such animal or fowl. The chief of police shall serve such notice personally on the owner if known. 
(d)  Sale of unredeemed animals. 
(1)  If a distrained animal or fowl has not been redeemed pursuant to the notice of distraint required by this section, the chief of police shall give notice of the sale of such animal or fowl after the expiration of two days from the time of impoundment. Such sale shall be at a public auction in front of the city pound or other place of impoundment, and it shall be held between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on a day not less than three days nor more than ten days from the date of posting notices. The day of posting shall be counted as the first day. 
(2)  The notice of distraint required by subsection (c) of this section shall contain a description of the animal or fowl and shall state the time and place of sale. 
(3)  At the time and place fixed for the sale in the notice, the chief of police shall proceed to sell such animal or fowl for cash at such public auction to the highest and best bidder therefor. In case no bid is received, or if in the opinion of the chief it is impossible to sell such animal or fowl, he shall humanely dispose of the animal. Within three days after the sale, the chief shall pay to the finance officer the proceeds of such sale. 
(e)  Redemption by owner. The owner of any animal or fowl impounded in accordance with the provisions of this section may redeem the animal at any time before the sale thereof upon the payment to the chief of police of all costs and expenses, including the costs of advertising, and after having first furnished to the chief satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(f)  Disposition of proceeds of sale. After the sale authorized in subsection (d) of this section, the treasurer shall pay the balance, if any, remaining from the sale of the stock to the owner thereof, upon the written order of the mayor, provided such owner shall establish his claim thereto before the mayor within one year from the date of the sale. After the expiration of one year, the money shall be declared forfeited to the city. 
(g)  Redemption fees. Any person claiming any animal or fowl impounded in accordance with this section shall pay the chief of police such amounts as established by the council resolution from time to time for each animal of every kind and for each fowl, for the discharge of such stock. The chief shall charge a further sum per head for each day's keeping of swine and sheep, for each day's keeping of any other animal and for each fowl, and for the cost of advertising if the animal has been advertised. 
(Code 2017, § 6-7; Ord. No. 2028, § 2, 8-23-1993) 
Sec. 6-8. - Recovery of costs by city for damage done by animals. 
    The city shall have a right of action in all cases against the owner or person in control of any of the animals or fowl mentioned in section 6-6 for all damages to public property. 
(Code 2017, § 6-8) 
Sec. 6-9. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    No person shall place or allow to be placed any dead animal or fowl in any public right-of-way or other public place in the city. No person shall allow any dead animal or fowl which the person owned or had control over at the time of death to remain in any public right-of-way or other public place for more than 24 hours after death. No person shall allow any dead animal or fowl to remain on such person's premises for more than 24 hours after death. Such persons, and all other persons in possession of a dead animal or fowl within the city, shall properly dispose of such dead animal or fowl within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-10. - Transportation of dead animals. 
    No person shall take, draw, haul or carry any dead animal through any street of the city without first securely covering and protecting such animal in a manner that will screen the animal from public view and exposure. 
(Code 2017, § 6-10) 
Sec. 6-11. - Cats causing annoyance or disturbance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, owning or sheltering a cat to allow or permit such animal to cause annoyance or otherwise interfere with the premises of another, or by frequent and habitual howling, yelping or otherwise cause serious annoyance or disturbance to reasonable persons. 
(b)  No person shall be convicted under the provisions of this section except upon evidence of two or more reasonable persons of different households. 
(Code 2017, § 6-13) 
Sec. 6-12. - Butchering of animals prohibited. 
    Except as authorized in section 16-15, no person shall within the city limits slaughter, butcher or process any animal or fowl on public property or, within the sensory perception of any person not on the same premises, on private property. Any remains must be disposed of in a sanitary manner and in accordance with the law. Field dressing by authorized hunters of animals and fowl slaughtered in the areas designated for hunting in section 16-15 shall be allowed in those areas. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 4-2-2018; Ord. No. 2928, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Secs. 6-13-6-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-43. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any living creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal control agency means any incorporated society or organization for the prevention of cruelty to animals with which the city council has entered into a contract for the performance of duties with respect to dangerous animals under this article. 
    Animal control officer means any employee of the animal control agency designated by the agency to perform duties with respect to dangerous animals under this article. 
    Animal control officials means a committee, consisting of the animal control officer, the chief animal control officer and such other persons as may be designated by the chief animal control officer. 
    Animal pound or shelter means any premises, either designated by or contracted for by the city council, for the proper care of impounded animals held under the authority of this article. 
    At large means running or found within the city upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public or private grounds. A dog or cat, properly licensed as required by this article, shall not be deemed at-large if it is: 
(1)  On the premises of the owner; 
(2)  Under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the dog or cat, either by leash, cord, chain or other similar restraint not more than ten feet in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle; 
(3)  Properly housed in a veterinary hospital or licensed kennel; 
(4)  Accompanied by or at heel beside and obedient to the commands of the owner or a competent responsible person unless the dog is on a recreational trail. Dogs on recreational trails must be on a leash of six feet or less in length as required in section 17-275(3); or 
(5)  A dog which is either under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the dog, or which is accompanied by or at heel beside and obedient to the commands of the owner or a competent responsible person, and which is within the confines of an authorized off-leash dog exercise facility as described in section 17-209, provided that such person is at all times in compliance with all of the provisions of such section. 
    Cat means all members of the species Felis domestica, male or female, whether altered or not. 
    Chief animal control officer means the chief executive officer or head of the animal control agency. 
    Dog means all members of the canine species, male or female, whether altered or not. 
    Health department means the health department of the city. 
    Horse means an animal of the genus Equus and species caballus. 
    Humane officer means any person designated by the humane society as a law enforcement officer and who qualifies to perform such duties under the laws of the state. 
    Humane society means any organization for the prevention of cruelty to animals incorporated under the laws of the state. 
    Kennel means any premises on which four or more dogs or four or more cats, four months old or older are kept. The term shall not include a veterinary hospital. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog, cat, horse or other animal. 
    Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species, except the operation of a kennel or agricultural or wildlife pursuits. 
    Riding school or stable means any person engaged in the business of teaching persons to ride horses, or providing horses to ride for a fee. 
(Code 2017, § 6-41; Ord. No. 2223, § 1, 3-23-1998; Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-11-2001; Ord. No. 2688, § 1, 7-13-2009) 
Sec. 6-44. - License required for dogs and cats. 
    The owners of all dogs and cats four months old or older shall annually obtain a license therefore as provided in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 6-42; Ord. No. 2223, § 2, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 6-45. - Application for dog or cat license. 
(a)  The owner of a dog or cat for which a license is required shall, on or before January 1 of each year, apply to the city clerk or to the designee of said city clerk for a license for each dog or cat owned by him. Such application for license may be made after January 1, and at any time, for a dog or cat which has come into the possession or ownership of the applicant, or which has reached the age of four months after such date. 
(b)  The application shall be in writing on blanks provided by the city clerk, and shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the address of the owner, and be signed by the owner. Such application shall also state the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine administered and the date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated. 
(Code 2017, § 6-43; Ord. No. 2223, § 3, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 6-46. - Dog and cat license fees. 
(a)  Generally. The annual license fee for each male dog or cat or spayed dog or cat or female dog or cat incapable of reproduction and for each unspayed female dog or cat shall be in an amount established annually by resolution by the city council. The license fee for all dogs or cats kept in a kennel shall be waived so long as the owner of the kennel dogs or cats pays the annual kennel fee and complies with all other requirements for kennels as contained in section 6-99. However, the owner of all dogs or cats four months old or older must comply with all provisions of this article, including obtaining a rabies vaccination and license tag, even though the license fee has been waived. A written certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be required to prove that a male dog or cat has been altered or that a female dog or cat has been spayed or is incapable of reproduction. 
(b)  Delinquency. All license fees for dogs or cats become delinquent on April 1 in the year in which they are due and payable, and a penalty in an amount to be established annually by the city council shall be added to each unpaid license fee on or after such date. 
(Code 2017, § 6-44; Ord. No. 2006, § 3, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2067, § 4, 10-10-1994; Ord. No. 2223, § 4, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 6-47. - Rabies vaccination for dogs and cats. 
(a)  Vaccination prerequisite for obtaining license. Before a license is issued for any dog or cat, the owner must present evidence with the application for the license that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies. Such evidence shall be a certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian, and the certificate shall show that the vaccination does not expire within six months from the effective date of the dog or cat license. 
(b)  Administration of vaccine; rabies tag. The rabies vaccination required by subsection (a) of this section shall be an injection of antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of agriculture, and the frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccination shall be as established by such department. The vaccine shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the state department of agriculture. The veterinarian shall issue a tag with a certificate of vaccination, and such tag shall at all times be attached to the collar of the dog or cat. 
(c)  Vaccination required. Every owner of a dog or cat shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have a dog or cat in his possession four months of age or over which has not been vaccinated against rabies. 
(Code 2017, § 6-45; Ord. No. 2006, § 4, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 6-48. - Issuance and use of dog or cat license tag. 
(a)  The city clerk or the designee of the city clerk shall, upon receipt of the application for a dog or cat license, payment of the license fee and proof of rabies vaccination, deliver or mail to the applicant a license, which shall be in the form of a metal tag. 
(b)  The license tag shall be attached by the owner of a dog or cat to a substantial collar, and, during the term of the license, the collar, with attached license, shall be at all times kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued. On the expiration of the license, the owner shall not remove the license tag from the dog or cat until the owner has purchased and attached a new current license tag for the dog or cat. 
(Code 2017, § 6-46; Ord. No. 2223, § 5, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 6-49. - Duration of dog or cat license; transfer of tag or license. 
(a)  Duration of license; transfer of tag. All dog and cat licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following the date of issuance. A license tag issued for one dog or cat shall not be transferable to another dog or cat. 
(b)  Transfer of license. When the permanent ownership of a dog or cat is transferred, the license for the dog or cat may be transferred by the city clerk by notation on the license record giving the name and address of the new owner. 
(Code 2017, § 6-47) 
Sec. 6-50. - Implied consent to inspection of property of person obtaining dog or cat license. 
    The application for and the receipt of a dog or cat license shall include an implied consent by the owner to permit an inspection of both real and personal property under his control for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, including inspection for cruelty to animals. 
(Code 2017, § 6-48) 
Sec. 6-51. - Exceptions to dog and cat license requirements. 
    The requirements of this article for licenses for dogs or cats shall not apply to dogs or cats that are under the control of the owners or handlers and which are in transit or to be exhibited, or to nonresidents of the city, if they are in the state for less than 30 days, or which are assigned to a research institution or like facility. 
(Code 2017, § 6-49) 
Sec. 6-52. - Animal pound. 
(a)  Establishment by city. 
(1)  The city may establish and maintain a municipal animal pound or shelter to be conducted and operated by the city. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the authorized person appointed by the city to supervise and control such pound or shelter to cause it to be kept in a sanitary condition and free from offensive odors, to provide for adequate wholesome food for animals impounded therein, to provide careful and humane treatment toward such animals, and to isolate diseased animals and provide for humane destruction of animals when necessary. 
(b)  Authority to contract for care and disposition of animals in lieu of establishing pound. The city may, in lieu of the establishment and maintenance of animal pounds, contract with any incorporated society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, for the collection and protection of licensed or unlicensed dogs, cats and other animals or the maintenance of a shelter or pound for licensed or unlicensed dogs, cats or other animals, for the collection of dogs or cats or other animals at-large, for the destruction or other disposition of seized dogs or cats or other animals not redeemed as provided by ordinance, for the disposal of dead animals, and to assist in the collection of licenses upon dogs and cats. 
(Code 2017, § 6-50) 
Sec. 6-53. - Impoundment of dogs or cats running at-large. 
    Any dog or cat found running at-large shall be apprehended and impounded. When such dog or cat has been apprehended and impounded, the police department or humane officer shall post written notice on the residence of the dog or cat owner, if such owner is known. The impounding agency shall also post notice of the impounded dog or cat on its website, if such owner is known. If the owner does not redeem the dog or cat as provided in section 6-52, the dog or cat may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with law. The impoundment and disposition provisions of this section do not apply to animals impounded under division 3 of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 6-51; Ord. No. 2688, § 2, 7-13-2009) 
Sec. 6-54. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
    Any unlicensed dog or cat or any other animal restrained or impounded in accordance with provisions of this article shall be held for a period of five days if there is no known owner. Any dog or cat restrained or impounded that is licensed or wearing a rabies tag will be held for a period of seven days. Litters of puppies and kittens may only be held for 24 hours. At the end of the five- or seven-day period, the owner of the dog or cat or other animal may redeem the animal by obtaining the required license and/or rabies vaccination, and by paying the cost of impoundment, which shall include a pickup fee and a daily boarding fee. The cost of impoundment paid to the humane society shall be retained by the humane society. The impoundment and disposition provisions of this section do not apply to animals impounded under division 3 of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 6-52; Ord. No. 2688, § 3, 7-13-2009) 
Sec. 6-55. - Disposition of impounded animals for certain purposes prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person employed by the city or any person employed by or connected with the animal pound or shelter, or any society or organization operating or maintaining such pound or shelter under lease or contract with the city, to sell, give away or dispose of, through any pretext or by any device or means whatsoever, any dog or cat or other animal impounded in such pound to any person for the purpose of using such dog or cat or other animal as food, or for the purpose of medical experimentation unless the institution desiring such dog or cat or other animal for medical experimentation is duly approved and authorized by the state to conduct such experimentation, or for any other purpose except for pets and related activities. 
(Code 2017, § 6-53) 
Sec. 6-56. - Duty to report attacks by animals and known or suspected cases of rabies. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog or cat or any other animal which has bitten or attacked a person, or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack, to report this act to the health department, police operations division or humane officer. It shall be the duty of physicians or veterinarians to report to the health department the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies. 
(Code 2017, § 6-54) 
Sec. 6-57. - Confinement of animal biting person or suspected of having rabies. 
    When a member of the health department or police operations division or humane officer receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal, or that a dog, cat or other animal is suspected of having rabies, he shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner he directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such official, and after two weeks the animal may be humanely destroyed. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment, which shall include a pickup fee and a daily boarding fee. 
(Code 2017, § 6-55) 
Sec. 6-58. - Permitting dog or cat to run at-large. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to: 
(1)  Generally. Permit or allow a dog or cat to be at-large. Any dog or cat found at-large shall be presumed to be so with the permission of its owner and proof that such dog or cat was at-large, and of ownership, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption in any proceeding charging any violation of this section. 
(2)  Cemeteries. Permit or allow such dog or cat to be in any public cemetery at any time. 
(3)  Public parks and playgrounds. When signposted, permit such dog or cat to be in a public playground or park during the last Friday, Saturday and Sunday of June each and every year, except if such animal is part of an organized public activity. 
(b)  Exceptions. The foregoing subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section shall not apply to service dogs or assistive animals used by handicapped persons. 
(c)  Repeated violations. Any owner of a dog or cat who has been found in violation of this section on three or more occasions within a two-year period immediately prior to impoundment of an animal found to be in violation of this section, shall not have the right to redeem such animal from impoundment as provided for in section 6-54. Instead, the animal shall be disposed of as provided for in section 6-55. 
(Code 2017, § 6-56; Ord. No. 1961, § 1, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 2778, § 1, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 6-59. - Permitting dog or cat to attack persons or animals, destroy property, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to attack persons, domestic animals or destroy property, or to permit such dog or cat to place persons in reasonable fear of attack or injury. Proof of ownership of a dog or cat and that the dog or cat did attack persons or domestic animals, destroy property or place persons in reasonable fear of attack or injury shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption of permission of the owner in any proceeding charging violation of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 6-57) 
Sec. 6-60. - Noisy dogs or cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to permit or allow the dog or cat to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to a reasonable person by frequent and habitual howling, whining, yelping or barking. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to permit or allow the dog or cat to howl, whine, yelp, bark, or otherwise make noise for more than 15 minutes in duration (whether consecutive or not) in any 24 hour-period within the city. 
(c)  Proof of ownership of a dog or cat shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption of permission of the owner in any proceedings charging any violation of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 6-58; Ord. No. 2778, § 2, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 6-61. - Confinement of female dogs or cats in heat. 
    The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall confine the female dog or cat in a building, or keep the dog or cat in his presence, so that the female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(Code 2017, § 6-59) 
Sec. 6-62. - Cleanup of animal droppings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, horse or other animal to fail to clean up and remove as soon as possible any excrement or droppings deposited by the dog, cat, horse or other animal on any real estate, whether privately or publicly owned, other than on the premises of the owner or person in charge. 
(Code 2017, § 6-60) 
Sec. 6-63. - Duty of owner to keep premises in sanitary condition. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, horse or other animal to permit excrement or droppings from any of such animals to collect on the premises of the owner or person in charge, causing odor or unsanitary conditions. Failure to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided in chapter 15. 
(Code 2017, § 6-61) 
Sec. 6-64. - Artificially colored animals. 
    No chick, duckling, gosling or rabbit that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially may be sold or offered for sale, raffled, offered or given as a prize, premium or advertising device, or displayed in any store, shop, carnival or other public place. 
(Code 2017, § 6-62) 
Sec. 6-65. - Sale of baby fowl or use as prize, premium, etc. 
    Chicks, ducklings and goslings younger than four weeks of age may not be sold or offered for sale, raffled or offered or given as a prize, premium or advertising device, in quantity of less than 12 birds to an individual person, unless sold by a person engaged in the business of selling chicks, ducklings and goslings for agricultural or wildlife purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 6-63) 
Sec. 6-66. - Care of baby fowl displayed to public. 
    Stores, shops, vendors and others displaying chicks, ducklings or goslings to the public shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain the chicks, ducklings or goslings in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water available to the birds at all times. 
(Code 2017, § 6-64) 
Sec. 6-67. - Giving away animal as business inducement. 
    No person shall give away any live vertebrate animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 2017, § 6-65) 
Sec. 6-68. - Display of wild animals. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a theatrical exhibit or circus, except that no theatrical exhibit or act shall be held in which animals are encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, electrical or mechanical devices. 
(Code 2017, § 6-66) 
Sec. 6-69. - Duty of owner regarding care of animals. 
(a)  Standard of care. Each owner or keeper of an animal shall comply with the standards of care for each such animal set forth in this section. Failure to comply with any standards of care set forth in this section shall be a violation of this section. 
(b)  Adequate veterinary care. It shall be the duty of each owner or keeper of an animal to provide the animal with adequate veterinary care, which shall mean that a sick, diseased, or injured animal shall be provided with a proper program of care that is recommended by a veterinarian, or shall be humanly euthanized. Each animal shall be provided with proper immunizations, proper flea control measures, and proper preventive health care, including parasite control. 
(c)  Cleaning and grooming. It shall be the duty of each owner or keeper of an animal to keep the animal clean, and to provide proper grooming as appropriate for the species. 
(Code 2017, § 6-67; Ord. No. 2778, § 3, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 6-70. - Animals prohibited: Sturgis Falls Celebration and Cedar Basin Jazz Festival, Inc. 
(a)  The city council shall designate the dates and locations for the annual Sturgis Falls Celebration and Cedar Basin Jazz Festival, Inc., in the city. Such designation by resolution shall occur no later than two weeks prior to the start of the Sturgis Falls Celebration and Cedar Basin Jazz Festival, Inc., which take place simultaneously. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit or allow the animal to be in the areas designated by the city council as Sturgis Falls Celebration and Cedar Basin Jazz Festival, Inc., locations during the designated dates. The following listed dogs are exempt: a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties, or engaged in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills; service dog; certified therapy dog; assistive animal. 
(Code 2017, § 6-68; Ord. No. 2788, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
Secs. 6-71-6-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RIDING SCHOOLS OR STABLES; KENNELS OPERATED AS NONCONFORMING USE 

Sec. 6-99. - License. 
(a)  Required; fee. No person shall own or operate a riding school or stable within the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying the license fee therefor. The license fee for each riding school or stable shall be such amount as established by resolution from time to time. 
(b)  Conditions. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a license, the riding school or stable must be inspected to ensure adequate construction and adequate provisions for sanitation. 
(2)  The riding school or stable must be in a properly zoned area. 
(3)  The riding school or stable must be open at reasonable times for inspection to ensure proper sanitation. 
(4)  The riding school or stable must at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  The riding school or stable shall comply with the minimum standards as determined by the city and made a part of this division. 
(c)  Inspection of premises; suspension or revocation of license. As a condition of applying for and accepting a license, each owner or operator of a riding school or stable shall permit an inspection of the riding school or stable by a member of the police operations division or health department or humane officer at any reasonable time. Failure to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition or evidence of cruelty to animals kept therein may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license by the city council. During the time the license is suspended or revoked, no animal shall be kept in the riding school or stable. 
(Code 2017, § 6-86; Ord. No. 2727, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-100. - Standards for riding schools and stables. 
    All riding schools or stables shall, in addition to other requirements of this division, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a license or revocation of a license. 
(1)  Feeding. All animals shall be provided with daily food and water, free from contamination, and such food and water shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(2)  Riding equipment. All equipment used for riding must fit properly for each individual animal. 
(3)  General sanitation requirements. 
a.  All buildings and sheds used for stabling animals shall be well-lighted and well-ventilated and provide protection from the weather. 
b.  All buildings and sheds used for stabling animals shall be kept clean and in good repair at all times, and manure shall be removed therefrom daily. A manure pile shall not be allowed to stand for a period longer than one month during the months from October 15 through April 30 or for four days during any month from May 1 through October 14. 
c.  Any enclosure where animals are kept shall be graded and drained so as to keep the surface reasonably dry. 
(4)  Fly control. Flies must be controlled through general sanitation and necessary means. 
(5)  Health of animals. Animals let for riding purposes must be in good physical condition. 
(Code 2017, § 6-87; Ord. No. 2727, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 6-101. - Kennels operated as nonconforming use. 
    Any kennel that is not located in a properly zoned district under the provisions of chapter 26 is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use. The use of a premises as a kennel shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered except when required by law, nor shall the number of dogs or cats over six months of age be increased. Whenever a dog or cat owned or kept on the kennel dies or is sold or is given away, the dog or cat shall not be replaced until such time as the use of the premises is no longer a kennel and a nonconforming use. In addition, if the use of a premises as a kennel is discontinued for a period of one year, use of the premises shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the zoning district in which the premises are located. 
(Code 2017, § 6-88; Ord. No. 2727, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 6-102-6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-131. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this division, any animal which attacks or injures any person or domestic animal, or which constitutes a physical threat to any person or domestic animal, shall constitute a dangerous animal; provided, however, that a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 6-106) 
Sec. 6-132. - Authority to impound or require confinement. 
    If a peace officer or an animal control officer, in his discretion, believes that a dangerous animal poses an unreasonable risk or threat of harm to any person or domestic animal, the peace officer or animal control officer may impound such dangerous animal. As an alternative to impoundment, the peace officer or animal control officer may, in his discretion, leave a dangerous animal in the custody of its owner, upon receipt of the owner's written agreement to keep the dangerous animal in a secure enclosure until such time as the animal control officials have reviewed the circumstances and taken action under section 6-134. 
(Code 2017, § 6-107) 
Sec. 6-133. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Upon impoundment of a dangerous animal under section 6-132, a peace officer or animal control officer shall notify the owner as soon as practicable, but in any event within 48 hours after such impoundment, if the owner is known. 
(Code 2017, § 6-108) 
Sec. 6-134. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Within 48 hours after impoundment of any dangerous animal, the animal control officials shall review the circumstances surrounding the impoundment and shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Retain such animal for purposes of observation and evaluation for a period not to exceed 30 days, in which case the owner, if known, shall be promptly notified thereof in writing. 
(2)  Release such animal to the control of its owner pursuant to a written agreement to be signed by the owner, upon such terms and conditions as the animal control officials deem reasonably necessary to ensure the public safety, including, but not limited to, the following requirements: 
a.  Requiring that, at all times, the animal either be confined in a secure enclosure, or be attended by the owner or a person capable of controlling the animal who is eight years of age or older, and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
b.  Prohibiting the animal from being chained, tethered or otherwise tied to any fixed object such as a tree, post or building. 
c.  Requiring the owner to inform by any means, including written notification, signs, etc., any persons, including, but not limited to, the postmaster, utility company, meter readers or other persons who routinely come on the property of the owner, that a dangerous animal is on the premises, or, if the owner moves his residence to another location within the city, to inform any such persons that the animal is now on the new premises. 
d.  Requiring the owner to prove financial responsibility for any injury or damage which may be caused by the animal by posting a cash or surety bond for an amount up to $1,000.00. 
e.  Requiring the owner to agree to neither sell, offer for sale, breed, give away, nor take any designated dangerous animal out of the city without first having given written notice thereof to the animal control officials. 
f.  Requiring the owner to attend a prescribed course in dog owner responsibility or an obedience class. 
g.  Requiring the owner to tattoo the dangerous animal to provide permanent identification of the animal. 
h.  Requiring all fees and expenses described in section 6-136 to be paid by the owner before the animal is released to the owner. 
i.  Requiring the owner to agree that failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the written agreement may result in the animal subsequently being impounded and humanely destroyed. 
(3)  Cause the animal to be humanely destroyed if, in the opinion of the animal control officials, the release of such animal would create an unreasonable risk of harm to the public safety. 
(b)  In making its determination regarding the disposition of the animal, the animal control officials shall consider all of the circumstances, including, but not limited to, whether the animal's behavior was provoked by any person or other animal. 
(Code 2017, § 6-109) 
Sec. 6-135. - Notice of destruction of animal; appeal. 
(a)  Notification of owner; appeal procedure. 
(1)  If the animal control officials determine that a dangerous animal which has been impounded pursuant to this division is to be destroyed pursuant to the provisions of section 6-134(a)(3), the animal control officials shall notify the owner of such animal in writing, at least ten days in advance, of the intent to destroy the animal, and further inform such owner of his right to appeal as provided by this section. 
(2)  The owner of such animal may, at any time prior to the date upon which the animal is to be destroyed, appeal the determination of the animal control officials to the administration committee of the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk. 
(3)  After receipt of a notice of appeal under this section, the city clerk shall calendar the appeal for hearing by the administration committee of the city council, and shall notify the owner and the animal control officials of such action. 
(4)  The animal control officials shall not thereafter destroy such animal until the administration committee of the city council shall have first heard the appeal and rendered its decision. 
(5)  Any owner of a dangerous animal who fails to file an appeal or to appear at such hearing after being given notice as provided in this section shall be deemed to have waived any right in or claim to such animal or any right to claim any damages or other relief by reason of any action by the animal control officials pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Action by administration committee. After hearing such testimony and evidence as it may deem proper, the administration committee of the city council may: 
(1)  Uphold the decision of the animal control officials and order the animal humanely destroyed. 
(2)  Modify or reverse, either in whole or in part, the decision of the animal control officials, and order the return of the animal to its owner, and impose such conditions upon such return as may be reasonably necessary to ensure the public safety, including, but not limited to, the terms and conditions set forth in sections 6-134(a)(2)a through i, or a continuation of the impoundment of such animal for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Enforcement of decision. After the decision of the administration committee of the city council has been rendered as provided in this section, the animal control officials shall take such action as is necessary to carry out such decision. 
(Code 2017, § 6-110) 
Sec. 6-136. - Payment of impoundment fees. 
    The owner of a dangerous animal which has been impounded pursuant to this division shall be charged for all costs incurred in connection with the impoundment of the animal, including, but not limited to, a pickup fee and a daily boarding fee. The owner shall be required to pay all such fees before any animal is released to its owner. 
(Code 2017, § 6-111) 
Sec. 6-137. - Harboring prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly harbor or hide or cause to be harbored or hidden any known dangerous animal. Any such animal shall immediately be surrendered to a peace officer or an animal control officer. Any violation of this section shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 6-112) 
Secs. 6-138-6-157. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AGRICULTURAL NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-158. - Keeping of agricultural animals. 
    No horse, mule, cow, calf, swine, sheep, goat, llama, camel, ostrich, peacock, chicken, goose, duck, turkey or other agricultural animal or specialized breed of such agricultural animal shall be kept on any property that is not located in the A-1 Agricultural District under chapter 26, zoning, with the exception that horses may be kept on properties that are zoned R-1 Residential District, on the terms provided in section 26-164. 
(Code 2017, § 6-113; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 6-159. - Keeping of chickens as nonconforming use. 
(a)  Existing nonconforming use. The keeping of chickens that are located on any property that is not zoned A-1 Agricultural District, under chapter 26, zoning, as of November 1, 2006, is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use. Any person who owns or possesses chickens that are located on any property in any zoning district other than the A-1 Agricultural District under chapter 26, zoning, as of November 1, 2006, may continue to keep not more than three chickens, but not to include roosters, on such property, as long as such chickens are kept in a totally enclosed structure which is located outside of a residential dwelling, and which is located at least 25 feet from any other residential dwelling. 
(b)  Termination of nonconforming use by discontinuation. In addition, if such person discontinues the keeping of chickens on such property for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall terminate, and the use of the property shall thereafter conform to the requirements of section 6-158. The keeping of such chickens shall be specific to the property on which the chickens were located on November 1, 2006, and shall be specific to the person keeping such chickens on such property as of such date, and may not be transferred to any other person or to any other property. 
(c)  Termination of nonconforming use for health reasons. Further, in the event of issuance of an advisory by any department of public health, federal, state or local, that all chickens must be exterminated in the interests of public health, the keeping of all chickens that then constitute a valid nonconforming use under this section shall immediately terminate, and shall not thereafter be re-established on such properties, and the use of all such properties shall thereafter conform to the requirements of section 6-158. 
(Code 2017, § 6-114; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 6-160. - Indoor pets. 
    Gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, rabbits, mice, birds, snakes, insects, lizards, and other similar animals that are normally maintained as household pets and kept in an enclosure inside a principal or accessory structure located on a property are not, by the provisions of this division, prohibited in any zoning district in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 6-115; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 11-13-2006) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 7-19. - Adoption. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article by specific changes, the 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings and the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter called the "building code" in this article, are hereby adopted by reference and are effective as if fully set forth in this article. 
(b)  An official copy of the code adopted by this article, including a certificate by the clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in the office of the clerk, in either a hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 7-26; Ord. No. 2868, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-20. - Amendments. 
    The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwelling and the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in section 7-19, is amended in the following respects: 
(1)  Subsections IBC103.1 and R103.1, Creation of Enforcement Agency , are amended to read as follows: 
IBC103.1 and R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established in the city an inspection services division, which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the building official. 
(2)  Subsections IBC104.2 and R104.2, Applications and Permits , are amended to read as follows: 
IBC104.2 and R104.2 Applications and Permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file: 
(a)  An applicant shall show proof of registration with the state and shall execute and file with the city building official (or a specified inter-governmental agency if so designated by the building official) a certificate of insurance written by a company authorized to transact business in the state, in limits of not less than $300,000.00 combined single limit to any person and $100,000.00 property damage; said certificate to be written on a standard form and carrying an endorsement naming the city and its employees (or the inter-governmental agency designated by the building official) as additional insured as its interest may appear and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required of such contractor by any ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. It shall be a further condition of said certificate of insurance that the obligator will hold the city (through the specified inter-governmental agency if so designated) harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetence on the part of such contractor, his agents or employees in the performance of the work done under a license or permit issued upon the filing of said certificate. 
Said certificate of insurance shall be issued by December 31 of each year, and shall be re-filed on or before said date for each subsequent year and shall be in continuous full force and effect. That is the intent and purpose of said certificate of insurance to also bind the individual, company, firm, association or partnership, whether it be trade name, corporation or other business association or arrangement with which the principal is associated. 
Homeowners working on their principal property shall be exempt from filing said certificate. 
(b)  Where a person desires to remodel or repair a building or structure of which they are the owner or owners of record, such work may be done by a member of their household without requiring the certificate of insurance otherwise required by this section. 
(1)  Required permits shall be necessary for all remodel or repair work. 
(2)  No owner or owner of record shall replace, remodel or repair any electrical, plumbing or heating on any property that they are not the owner/occupant with a homestead exemption and valid permit. 
(3)  Subsections IBC104.8 and R104.8, Liability , are amended to read as follows: 
IBC104.8 and R104.8 Liability. The building official, or his authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties for the city, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the city or the building official or employee because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of such Codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this Code or enforced by the inspection services division shall be defended by the city until the final termination of such proceedings, any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city. This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the inspection services division of the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code or any certificates of inspection issued under this Code. 
(4)  Subsections IBC104.8 and R104.8.1, Affirmation , are added, to read as follows: 
IBC104.8.1 and R104.8.1 Affirmation. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(5)  Subsections IBC104.8.2 and R104.8.2, Conflict of Interest , are added, to read as follows: 
IBC104.8.2 and R104.8.2 Conflict of Interest. No official or representative of the inspection services division shall be engaged directly or indirectly with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or the preparation of plans or specifications therefor, unless the official or representative is the owner of such building; nor shall such official or representative engage in any work which conflicts with the official duties or with the interests of the inspection services division. 
R104.10.1, Flood hazard areas , is deleted. 
(6)  Subsection R105.2, Work Exempt From Permit , is amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
2.  Fences not over six feet (1829 mm) high. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. 
4.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. 
5.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below. 
Exception: Wooden decks are not, for the purpose of this article, to be considered as a sidewalk or driveway, and section R105.1 shall apply to such. 
6.  Painting, papering, tiling and carpeting. 
7.  Swimming pools that are accessory to one- or two-family dwellings. 
8.  Swings or other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling. 
9.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
Delete references to Electrical, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing. 
(7)  Subsection IBC105.2, Work Exempt From Permit , is amended to read as follows: 
IBC105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  Fences not over seven feet (2134 mm) high. 
2.  Oil derricks. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, IIIA liquids. 
4.  Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater than 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of the height to diameter or width is not greater than 2:1. 
5.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
6.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
7.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
8.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy. 
9.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems. 
10.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
11.  Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
12.  Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1753 mm) in height. 
Delete all references to Electrical, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing in subsection 105.2. 
R105.2.2, Repairs , is deleted. 
R105.3.1.1, Determination of Substantially Improved or Substantially Damaged Existing Buildings In Flood Hazard Areas , is deleted. 
(8)  Subsections IBC105.5 and R105.5, Expiration , is amended to read as follows: 
IBC105.5 and R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire 12 months from the date of issue, unless the application is accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the permit may be issued for the time period of the construction schedule, with the approval of the building official. If the work has not been completed, including all required inspections, by the expiration date of the permit, no further work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner, or the owner's agent, and payment of the renewal fee has been received. The building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than six months each, without payment of the renewal fee. Extensions shall be requested by the owner, or the owner's agent, and justifiable cause demonstrated by the owner. 
(9)  Sections IBC109 and R108, Fees , are amended by adding the following new subsections: 
IBC109.7 and R108.7, Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
IBC109.7.1 and R108.7.1 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(10)  Subsection IBC110.3.5, Lath, Gypsum Board and Gypsum Panel Product Inspection , is amended by deleting the exception. 
(11)  Sections IBC113 and R112, Board of Appeals , are amended to read as follows: 
Section IBC113 and R112. Board of Appeals. 
IBC113.1 and R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official or fire official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official and fire official. 
In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the board shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the board upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the board on the date of adoption of this ordinance who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the board until both the expiration of his current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
IBC113.2 and R112.2 Limitation of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administration provisions of this Code; nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this Code. 
IBC113.3 and R112.3 Qualifications. The board shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction or experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems, and who are not employed by the city, except that one member of the city council may serve on the board. At no time shall there be more than two members of the board selected from the same profession or business. 
IBC113.4 and R112.4 Appointment of Members; Terms. The board of appeals shall consist of seven members who are appointed by the mayor with city council approval and who shall hold office at the mayor's pleasure. The members of the board of appeals shall serve without compensation. 
IBC113.5 and R112.5 Chairman Selection; Secretary. The board of appeals shall select one of its members to serve as chairman. The building official and fire official shall be ex-officio members, one of whom shall act as the secretary to the board, keeping records of all proceedings. 
IBC113.6 and R112.6 Conflict of Interest. No member of the board of appeals shall pass on any action or appeal in which he is engaged as a contractor or material dealer, or in preparation of specifications or plans, or in which he has any personal interest. 
IBC113.7 and R112.7 Meetings. The board of appeals shall meet upon notice of the chairman, within ten days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work. The meetings or hearings of the board shall be public. When four qualified members of the board are not present to consider any specific appeal, either the appellant or the authorized representatives of the building official or fire official may request a postponement of the hearing. 
IBC113.8 and R112.8 Appeals. Any person, firm or corporation may exercise the right to file an appeal for the purpose of new construction methods or materials, or for the true intent of the building code or fire code as interpreted by the building official or fire official. 
IBC113.9 and R112.9 Procedure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official and fire official. 
IBC113.10 and R112.10 Votes Required. Failure to secure four concurring votes of the members of the board of appeals shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the building official or fire official. 
IBC113.11 and R112.11 Enforcement. The building official or fire official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decisions of the board of appeals. 
(12)  Sections IBC114, and R113, Violations , are amended to read as follows: 
IBC114.1 and R113.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit such work to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Code. 
IBC114.2 and R113.2 Notice of Violations. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the owner and person responsible for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, demolition, equipment, usage, occupation or maintenance of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
IBC114.3 and R113.3 Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
IBC114.4 and R113.4 Violation Penalties. A person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code or such amendments shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction as outlined in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(13)  Sections IBC115 and R114, Stop Work Orders , are amended to read as follows: 
IBC115.1 and R114.1 Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. When a stop work order has been issued, the person responsible for such work being done shall make application to obtain a permit as required by chapter 1 of this Code. The permit for such work shall be obtained within 30 days from receipt of the stop work notice. A violation of this subsection shall be deemed a municipal infraction and punished as provided in chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
IBC115.2, Issuance, IBC115.3, Unlawful Continuance, and R114.2, Unlawful Continuance , are deleted. 
(14)  Section IBC116, Unsafe Structures and Equipment , is amended to read as follows, and insert Section R115, Unsafe Structures and Equipment , to read as follows: 
IBC116.1 and R115.1 Unsafe Buildings or Structures. All buildings or structures regulated by this Code that are or hereafter become structurally unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members, that are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and that are in deteriorating condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that are specified in this Code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages. 
IBC116.2 and R115.2 Declaration of Unsafe Structures. All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with procedures set forth in chapter 15, article I of the Code of Ordinances of the city, entitled, "Nuisances". As an alternative, the building official, or other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the city council, may institute the appropriate action within the procedures specified in section R115.3 or IBC116.3 to abate the violation. 
IBC116.3 and R115.3 Procedure for Condemnation and Removal. It shall be the duty of the building official or a designated representative to report to the city council any buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the city which may be deemed dangerous. Whenever it is reported to or comes to the attention of the city council that a building is unsafe or dangerous as set forth in the preceding subsection, the mayor shall appoint a committee of three councilmembers who, together with the building official, fire chief and county health officer, shall inspect such premises and report their findings to the city council. If that committee reports that such building or structure is unsafe or dangerous and shall recommend its destruction as a nuisance, the matter shall be set down for hearing at the next regular meeting of the city council, and at least ten days' written notice of the hearing shall be served on the holder of the legal title of the premises and on the person in possession thereof; provided, however, that, if the owner of such building is a nonresident to the state or is not found within the state and has no agent within the state upon whom service can be made, service shall be made by mailing the written notice to the last known address of the owner of record and by two publications in a newspaper in general circulation in the city, the last publication thereof to be at least ten days before the date set for the hearing. 
At the hearing, the owner and person in possession of the premises shall be given opportunity to show cause why such building or structure should not be declared to be a nuisance and destroyed. If the city council shall decide that the building is dangerous, is liable to fall, is a fire hazard, or is unfit for human habitation or is dangerous to life and health, then it may declare the building to be a nuisance and order it to be abated within the time fixed by it. Written notice of such finding shall be given the owner and person in possession, and they shall be given time to destroy the building as the council may fix; provided, however, that, if the owner of such building or structure is a nonresident of the state or is not found within the state and has no agent within the state upon whom service can be made, service of the written notice shall be made by mailing the notice to the last known address and by two publications in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the last publication thereof to be at least ten days before the date set for the destruction of the building or structure. 
(15)  Subsections IBC116.4, Method of Service, and IBC116.5, Restoration , are deleted. 
(16)  Subsections R302.1, Exterior Walls, through R302.4.2, Membrane Penetrations , are deleted in their entirety, and replaced with the following: 
Section R302.1 Two-Family Dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and/or floor assemblies having not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rating when testing in accordance with ASTM E 119. Fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall and wall assemblies shall extend to the underside of the roof sheathing. 
Exception: A fire resistant rating of one-half hour shall be permitted in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
R302.1.1 Supporting Construction. When floor assemblies are required to be fire-resistance-rated by section R302.1, the supporting construction of such assemblies shall have an equal or greater fire-resistive rating. 
R302.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated by fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies meeting the requirements of section R302 for exterior walls. 
Exception: A common two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with chapters 33 through 42. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with section R302.3. 
R302.2.1 Continuity. The common wall for townhouses shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab and shall extend the full length of the common wall including walls extending through and separating attached accessory structures. 
R302.2.2 Parapets. Parapets constructed in accordance with section R302.2.3 shall be provided for townhouses as an extension of common exterior or walls in accordance with the following: 
1.  Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at the same elevation, the parapet shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the roof surfaces. 
2.  Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at different elevations and the higher roof is not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof, the parapet shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof surface. 
Exception: A parapet is not required in the two cases above when the roof is covered with a minimum class C roof covering, and the roof decking or sheathing is of noncombustible materials or approved fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of four feet (1219 mm) on each side of the wall or walls, or one layer of 5/8 -inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board is installed directly beneath the roof decking or sheathing for a distance of four feet (1219 mm) on each side of the wall or walls. 
3.  A parapet is not required where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at different elevations and the higher roof is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof. The common wall construction from the lower roof to the underside of the higher roof deck shall not have less than a one-hour fire-resistive rating. The wall shall be rated for exposure from both sides. 
R302.2.3 Parapet Construction. Parapets shall have the same fire-resistance rating as that required for the supporting wall or wall. On any side adjacent to a roof surface, the parapet shall have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 18 inches (457 mm), to include counter-flashing and coping materials. Where the roof slopes toward a parapet at slopes greater than two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.7-percent per slope), the parapet shall extend to the same height as any portion of the roof within a distance of three feet (914 mm), but in no case shall the height be less than 30 inches (762 mm). 
R302.2.4 Structural Independence. Each individual townhouse shall be structurally independent. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Foundations supporting exterior walls or common walls. 
2.  Structural roof and wall sheathing from each unit may fasten to the common wall framing. 
3.  Nonstructural wall coverings. 
4.  Flashing at termination of roof covering over common wall. 
5.  Townhouses separated by a common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall as provided in section R302.2. 
R302.3 Rated Penetrations. Penetrations of wall or floor/ceiling assemblies required to be fire-resistance-rated in accordance with section R302.1 or R302.2 shall be protected in accordance with this section. 
R302.3.1 Through Penetrations. Through penetrations of fire-resistance-rated wall or floor assemblies shall comply with section R302.3.1.1 or R302.3.1.2. 
Exception: Where the penetrating items are steel, ferrous or copper pipes or steel conduits, the annular space shall be permitted to be protected as follows: 
1.  In concrete or masonry wall or floor assemblies where the penetrating item is a maximum six inches (152 mm) nominal diameter and the opening is a maximum 144 square inches (92 900 mm 2), concrete, grout or mortar shall be permitted where installed to the full thickness of the wall or floor assembly or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating. 
2.  The material used to fill the annular space shall prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E 119 time temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch of water (3 Pa) at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated. 
R302.3.1.1 Fire-Resistance-Rated Assembly. Penetrations shall be installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly. 
R302.3.1.2 Penetration Firestop System. Penetrations shall be protected by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch of water (3 Pa) and shall have an F rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall or floor/ceiling assembly penetrated. 
R302.3.2 Membrane Penetrations. Membrane penetrations shall comply with section 302.3.1. Where walls are required to have a minimum one-hour fire resistance rating, recessed light fixtures shall be so installed such that the required fire resistance will not be reduced. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 16 square inches (0.0103 m 2) in area provided the total area of such openings does not exceed 100 square inches (0.0645 m 2) for any 100 square feet (9.29 m 2) of wall area. Outlet boxes on opposite sides of the wall shall be separated as follows: 
1.1.  By a horizontal distance of not less than 24 inches (610 mm); 
1.2.  By a horizontal distance of not less than the depth of the wall cavity when the wall cavity is filled with cellulose loose-fill, rock-wool or slag mineral wool insulation; 
1.3.  By solid fire blocking in accordance with section R602.8.1; 
1.4.  By protecting both outlet boxes by listed putty pads; or 
1.5.  By other listed materials and methods. 
2.  Membrane penetrations for listed electrical outlet boxes of any materials are permitted provided such boxes have been tested for use in fire resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. Outlet boxes on the opposite sides of the wall shall be separated as follows: 
2.1.  By a horizontal distance of not less than 24 inches (610 mm); 
2.2.  By solid fire-blocking in accordance with section R602.8; 
2.3.  By protecting both outlet boxes by listed putty pads; or 
2.4.  By other listed materials and methods. 
3.  The annular space created by the penetration of a fire sprinkler provided it is covered by a metal escutcheon plate. 
(17)  Section IBC310, Residential Group R , is amended to delete all references to "congregate living facilities." 
(18)  Subsection R302.13, Fire Protection of Floors , is deleted in its entirety. 
(19)  Subsection R308.4.6, Glazing Adjacent to Stairs and Ramps , is amended to read the same as IBC 2406.4.6 Glazing adjacent to stairways and ramps. 
(20)  Subsection R308.4.7, Glazing Adjacent to the Bottom Stair Landing , is amended to read the same as IBC 2406.4.7 Glazing adjacent to the bottom stairway landing. 
(21)  Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems , is deleted in its entirety. 
(22)  Subsection R317.1.4, Wood Columns , is amended to delete item #3. 
(23)  Subsection R403.1, General , is amended to add these exceptions: 
Exceptions: 
1.  A one-story wood or metal-framed building (unattached from other principal structures) not used for human occupancy nor exceeding 850 square feet in floor area, supporting roof loads only, may be supported by a slab-on-grade with turned-down footing which provides a minimum perimeter bearing edge of eight inches in width and 12 inches in depth. The slab shall be reinforced with 6 x 6-10 gauge weld wire mesh or No. 4 reinforcement rebar spaced 2'-0" o.c. each way and one No. 4 bar placed within the perimeter of the slab at the top and bottom. 
2.  Alternate foundation methods may be used for structures when, in the opinion of the building official, site and location will not warrant standard means of construction. In no case shall such foundations be less than extending to the prescribed frost line. 
3.  Unenclosed carports and patio covers not more than one story in height may be supported by isolated post footings, provided there are no wall sections or enclosures between supporting posts. The diameter of such footings shall be no less than 12 inches and extend to the established frost line. 
4.  Wood decks not more than one story in height may be supported by isolated post footings, provided there are no wall sections or roof enclosures. The diameter of such post footings shall be no less than eight inches in width and eight inches in depth and extend to the established frost line. 
5.  Additions or attachments by any means between existing principal structures and accessory structures, as described in exception 1 of this section, shall not be allowed without first providing a continuous foundation around the entire perimeter of all structures involved and extending to the established frost line. 
(24)  Subsection R403.1.4.1, Frost Protection , is amended by deleting Items #2 and #3, and by deleting Exceptions #1, #2, and #3. 
(25)  Subsection R403.2, Footings For Wood Foundations , is amended to read as follows: 
R403.2.1 Footing Requirements. All footings shall be cast-in-place concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 pounds per square inch at 28 days and shall be reinforced longitudinally with not less than two No. 4 reinforcing bars. Reinforcement shall be symmetrically placed and so located as to ensure no less than three inches of concrete cover on all sides. See table R403.1(1) and R403.1(2) for size requirements. 
(26)  Section R403.3, Frost Protected Shallow Foundations , including subsections R403.3.1 through R403.3.4 and R403.4.1, Crushed stone footings, is deleted in its entirety. R403.4, Footings for precast concrete foundations, and R403.4.2, Concrete footings, remain as written in the 2015 International Residential Code. 
(27)  Subsection R405.2.3, Drainage System , is amended to read as follows: 
R405.2.3 Drainage System. Sump pump systems shall meet the requirements of chapter 11 of the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(28)  Subsection R408.3, Unvented Crawl Space , is amended to read as follows: 
R408.3 Unvented Crawl Space. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than 1 square foot for each 150 square feet of under-floor space area. One such ventilating opening shall be within three feet of each corner of the building. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with approved materials provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/4 inch. Floor area and ground surface shall be covered with an approved vapor retarder material. 
Exception: Ventilation of a crawl space in new or existing buildings may be eliminated if all of the following requirements are provided: 
A.  The under-floor ground surface area is covered with an approved vapor retarder and capped with a concrete slab having a minimum thickness of two inches; 
B.  An opening as required for accessibility in section R408.4 is maintained without a cover; and 
C.  The main foundation portion is capable of providing adequate ventilation to handle the additional area. 
(29)  Subsection R703.2, Water-Resistive Barrier , is amended by deleting the last sentence, which reads: The water-resistive barrier is not required for detached accessory buildings. 
(Code 2017, § 7-27; Ord. No. 2868, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-21. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Chapters 11, 20, and 24 through 44 of the International Residential Code and all appendix chapters are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(b)  Chapters 27, 28 and 29 and all appendix chapters of the International Building Code are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(c)  Any references to the International Plumbing Code and the International Electrical Code are hereby deleted, and in their place are substituted references to the Uniform Plumbing Code and the National Electrical Code, respectively. 
(Code 2017, § 7-28; Ord. No. 2868, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 7-22-7-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-46. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the city electrical code, may be so cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "code" or "electrical code." 
(Code 2017, § 7-46; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-47. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to adopt an electrical code by reference, and to provide for the examination, qualification and licensing of electrical contractors, master electricians, and journeyman electricians. Also included are provisions for the inspection and regulation of electrical installations, issuance of permits, the collection of fees, and to provide penalties for violations of this article in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 2017, § 7-47; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-48. - Rules of construction. 
    In this article, certain terms shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Electrical terms are definitions relating to electrical equipment, wiring methods and special wiring locations and conditions shall be those accepted by the trade and listed in the National Electrical Code or other recognized safe wiring manuals or tests. 
(2)  Building classification and occupancy shall be determined from the city building code and the zoning chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 7-48; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-49. - National Electrical Code adoption. 
(a)  The 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code, including article 90, chapters 1 through 9, and annex A, B, C, D and H, inclusive, as published by the National Electrical Code committee, and adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference and is effective as if fully set forth in this article. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different materials, methods of construction or requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  An official copy of the code adopted by this article, including a certificate by the city clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in the office of the city clerk, in either hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 1, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 7-50. - National Electrical Code amendments. 
    The provisions of this section specify certain amendments, by deletion, addition or substitution of the 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code. Where this section states that an article, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted, only the specific article, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted. Where this section states that an article or subsection is deleted in its entirety, all references listed thereafter associated with this specific article (with subsections, enumerations and exceptions) or subsection (with enumerations and exceptions) are deleted. 
2017 NEC Chapter 2 Amendments 
(a)  Section 210.12 (D) is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  Section 230.50(A) Underground Service-Entrance Conductors, is deleted in its entirety and the following sentence is substituted therefor: 
"Underground service-entrance conductors shall be installed in a raceway not less than two feet underground." 
2017 NEC Chapter 3 Amendments 
(c)  Section 300.13(B), Device Removal , is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted therefor: 
"(B) Device removal. In all circuits, the continuity of conductors shall not be dependent upon device connections where the removal of such devices would interrupt continuity." 
2017 NEC Chapter 4 Amendments 
(d)  Section 406.4 (D)(4) is deleted in its entirety. 
2017 NEC Annex H Amendments 
(e)  Section 80.9(C), Additions, Alterations or Repairs , is amended by adding the following: 
(1)  It is prohibited by this ordinance to perform any repair to, add to, or revamp any residential services less 
(f)  Section 80.13, Authority, subparagraph (13) , is amended by inserting a period after the words "ready for inspection," and deleting the words, "and shall conduct the inspection within _____/_____/_____days." 
(g)  Section 80.15, Electrical Board , is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted therefor: 
BOARD OF ELECTRICAL APPEALS. 
(A)  Membership; appointment of members; term of office. 
(1)  The board of electrical appeals shall consist of five members: one member of the city council, appointed each year, two members from the electrical contractors of the city, one journeyman electrician and one public member, each appointed for a period of four years. The electrical inspector shall serve as secretary to the board but is non-voting. Appointments are made by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Should a vacancy in the board occur, it shall be the duty of the secretary of the board to notify the mayor of the vacancy, and the mayor and city council shall, at a regular meeting, as soon as possible thereafter, appoint a new member to the board to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(2)  Expiration of appointments, except for the city councilmember, shall be staggered so that one member is appointed or reappointed each year. Terms of appointment shall expire on December 31. If the mayor and city council fail to appoint at the scheduled time, the expired term member will be held over until re-appointment or replacement. 
(3)  The members of the board of electrical appeals shall serve without compensation. 
(4)  In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the board shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the board upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the board on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the board until both the expiration of his or her current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
(B)  Meetings; records. 
(1)  All meetings of the board of electrical appeals are open to the public and shall be held in the council chambers or other location indicated in a public notice posted 24 hours prior to any meeting. 
(2)  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transacting of all business, but any action taken by the board shall require a majority vote of all members of the board. 
(3)  The board shall annually elect one of its members as chairperson of the board. 
(4)  The secretary of the board shall keep a record of the board meetings. 
(C)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person shall have the right to register an appeal with the board of electrical appeals for a review of any decision of the electrical inspector, provided that such appeal is made in writing within ten days after having been notified of such decision by the electrical inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal, the board of appeals shall proceed to determine whether the action of the electrical inspector complies with this article, and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings within ten days of receiving the appeal. No appeal shall be considered unless the appeal is filed within a period of ten days. The board of appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
(2)  An appeal to the city council of any ruling of the board shall be made by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the ruling being appealed. The council shall give the appellant and the board a minimum of five days written notice by certified mail of the date, time and location of hearing of said appeal. All interested persons shall be given the opportunity to be heard at such hearing and the city council may affirm, modify or overrule the action of the board based upon the evidence submitted before the city council. 
(4)  80.19(D) Annual Permits , is deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  80.19(F) Inspection and Approvals, subparagraph (3) , is amended by deleting the words "or until _____ days have elapsed from the time of such notification". 
(6)  80.23(B) Penalties, subparagraph (3) , is deleted in its entirety, and replaced with the following: 
80.23(B)(3) Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
80.23(B)(4) Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(7)  80.25 (C), Notification , is deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  80.27 Inspector's Qualifications , is amended by deleting said section in its entirety and substituting the following therefor: 80.27 Inspector's qualifications. 
(A)  The office of the electrical inspector, within the inspection services division of the department of community development of the city, is hereby created, and such inspector is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to inspect any and all buildings, tents and other structures, public and private, and, as provided in this article, to condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe condition for the prevention of fire and for safety to life and property, all electrical equipment installations and connections of electrical current for light, heat and power purposes, and to control the disposition and arrangement of such equipment so that persons and property shall not be in danger therefrom. 
(B)  The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the director of community development, after recommendation of the building official, and shall be directly responsible to the building official. 
(C)  The appointee shall be qualified as an electrical inspector, as determined by any state requirements, the job classification and the civil service commission. 
(9)  New section 80.28, Licensing , is added as follows: 
(A)  Licenses required. 
(1)  Electrical licenses shall be governed by Iowa Code ch. 103. 
(2)  All electrical contractors not currently registered with the city shall pay a registration fee as set by the city council. 
(3)  Any electrical license issued by the city, as allowed by state law, shall be required to pay a fee as set by city council annually. 
(10)  80.29, Liability for Damages , is amended by adding the word "city," in the blank. 
(11)  80.35, Effective date , is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 2, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 7-51. - Municipal infraction; penalty; abatement of violations. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or the code adopted by this article, or who performs any work on any electrical systems or equipment within the city contrary to the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article, or who fails to perform any act or duty required by this article or the code adopted by this article, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction. Upon entry of a judgment by a court for such municipal infraction, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). Such judgment may also include an order of court to abate or correct the violation or violations, as authorized by section 1-8 and by Iowa Code § 364.22. 
(Code 2017, § 7-51; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-52. - Moved buildings. 
(a)  Residential moved buildings shall be brought into compliance with the electrical requirements of new residential-type buildings. Exception: Parts of an electrical system which were not damaged and had been installed in compliance with the electrical code which was in effect at the time of installation may be retained in said electrical systems. 
(b)  Electrical systems in any other moved buildings shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this Code the same as for new construction. 
(c)  The permanent service connection shall not be made by the power company until the electrical system is completely installed and is approved by the inspector. 
(d)  The existing service on the moved building shall not be connected to the electrical power source unless specifically approved by an inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 7-53; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-53. - Unlawful connections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity to any electric equipment that has been installed or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the electrical inspector, until re-inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 7-54; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-54. - Inspection of wiring required prior to installation of meter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set a meter for electric purposes to any building or premises, wiring of which has not been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. A violation of this section will cause the electrical inspector to give written notice and immediately cause the removal of such conditions and the discontinuance of such current. 
(Code 2017, § 7-55; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-55. - Alteration of identification or rating markings. 
    It shall be unlawful to cover, remove, alter, change or deface the maker's name or identification mark or any of the rating markings on electrical equipment. 
(Code 2017, § 7-56; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-56. - Supervision by building official. 
    The electrical inspector shall work fully under the supervision and jurisdiction of the building official and take all orders and perform any duties or services that may be designated by the building official pertaining to electrical inspections or other related duties. 
(Code 2017, § 7-57; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Sec. 7-57. - Conflict of interest. 
    It shall be unlawful for the electrical inspector or assistant electrical inspectors to engage in the business of the sales, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city, at any time, while holding the office provided for in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-58; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
Secs. 7-58-7-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-88. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the natural gas code of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 7-191; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-89. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AGA means American Gas Association. 
    Approved , as to materials, workmanship and types of construction, means approval by the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel, as the result of investigation, inspections or tests conducted by the inspector, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by nationally recognized authorities. 
    Category I vented appliance means an appliance that operates with a nonpositive vent static pressure and with a vent gas temperature that avoids excessive condensate production in the vent. 
    Combustible material means walls, floors, ceilings, shelves or other parts of a building constructed of wood, composition or paper, including walls constructed of wooden studding, lath and plaster. 
    CSAus means Canadian Standards Association; United States (replaces AGA logo and symbols). 
    Flue liner means a liner to be installed in a masonry chimney used to vent natural gas burning equipment up to 350,000 British thermal units per hour. 
    GAMA means Gas Appliance Manufacturer's Association. 
    Gas inspector means the manager or assistant manager of the gas operations department of the Cedar Falls Utilities. 
    Gas appliance means a fixture or apparatus manufactured and designed to use natural gas as a fuel. 
    Gas piping means any run of pipe or fittings that is used to convey natural gas, installed on any premises or in any building, but shall not include any portion of the service piping. 
    Gas piping system means any arrangement of gas piping supplied by one meter. 
    House piping means that portion of the gas piping leading from the outlet side of the gas meter, and any gas piping connected to and extending beyond that portion of the system. 
    IAS means International Approval Services (formerly AGA). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is eight-body feet or more in width or 40-body feet or more in length in the traveling mode or, when erected on site, is 320 cubic feet or more, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Minor repairs means adjustment of appliances, replacement of parts, repairing leaks and similar work. 
    NFPA means National Fire Protection Association. 
    Protected combustible material means combustible material protected with a metal shield extending over an area exposed to the effects of heat from a gas appliance, so formed that an air space of not less than one inch is maintained between such shield and the combustible materials. In lieu of such air space, fireproof material not less than one-quarter inch in thickness or other approved equally effective insulating material may be used between such metal shield and any combustible material. 
    Service piping means the piping between the street gas main and the gas meter. 
    Type B vent means a vent for venting listed gas appliances with draft hoods and other category I gas appliances listed for use with type B gas vents. 
    Vent connection means a pipe designed to convey the products of combustion from a gas appliance to a flue liner. 
(Code 2017, § 7-192; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-90. - Conflicting provisions; subjects not covered by article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable where federal or state laws or rules and regulations thereof preempt any provision. Subjects not regulated by this article or interpretation of this article should be referred to National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 54, National Fuel Gas Code current edition. 
(Code 2017, § 7-193; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-91. - Administration of article. 
(a)  The gas inspector shall administer this article. 
(b)  HUD approved manufactured homes are under federal jurisdiction and exempt from portions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-194; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-92. - Gas inspector. 
(a)  The general manager of utilities shall appoint a qualified gas inspector, who shall be confirmed by the utility board of trustees. 
(b)  The inspector shall hold office during the pleasure of the utilities board and until a successor is appointed by the general manager and is confirmed by the utilities board of trustees. 
(c)  The inspector will be and will constitute the authority for administration of this article. 
(d)  The inspector or utility personnel authorized by the inspector shall inspect and supervise all work done or authorized to be done under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-195; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-93. - Bond; guarantee of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except as otherwise provided in this article, to install, alter or repair any gas piping, gas vent, or gas burning appliances until the person has first obtained a surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00, which must be approved by the inspector and held on file in the gas operations department at the Cedar Falls Utilities. 
(b)  The bond shall be accompanied by a guarantee of future 24-hour on call service on all equipment to be installed. This guarantee shall be limited to a period of two years from the date of installation of such equipment. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the person to keep a current bond on file in the gas operations department at the Cedar Falls Utilities. If the bond expires, no further installation permits shall be issued to the individual or company until a valid bond is issued and filed as provided herein. 
(Code 2017, § 7-196; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-94. - General inspections. 
(a)  Upon completion of the installation of any gas piping or gas appliance, and prior to the use thereof, the permit holder shall notify the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel that such piping or appliances are ready for inspection. 
(b)  The inspections shall be made by the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel, who shall either approve that portion of the work as completed, or shall notify the permit holder wherein the work fails to comply with this article. The permit holder must notify the utilities when all work is completed for a final inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 7-197; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-95. - Authority to disconnect appliances or piping. 
    The gas inspector and authorized utility personnel are hereby authorized to disconnect any gas appliance or gas piping which shall be found not to conform to the requirements of this article; which may be found defective and in such condition as to endanger life or property; or which was not authorized by the utilities. Where such disconnection has been made, a notice shall be attached to such appliance or gas piping, which shall state that the appliance or piping has been disconnected, together with the reasons. Such notice shall not be removed, nor shall the appliance or gas piping be reconnected, until authorized by the inspector. (Also see section 7-109(c).) 
(Code 2017, § 7-198; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-96. - Certificate of inspection; smoke tests. 
(a)  No gas-fired equipment shall be placed in permanent operation without prior inspection and a certificate of inspection issued by authorized utility personnel. A white tag signifies compliance. 
(b)  Whenever a smoke test or other approved testing method is required, the test shall be performed in the presence of authorized utility personnel. 
(c)  If the final piping inspection shows the piping has been found to comply with the provisions of this article, a certificate of inspection shall be issued. A white tag signifies compliance. 
(d)  If the inspection of the gas-fired equipment shows that it complies with the provisions of this article, a certificate of inspection shall be issued. A white tag signifies compliance. 
(Code 2017, § 7-199; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-97. - Connecting or turning on service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized utility employee, to turn on or reconnect gas service or a meter in or on any premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to turn on or connect gas on or in any premises unless all outlets are properly and securely connected to appliances or capped or plugged. 
(Code 2017, § 7-200; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-98. - Gas piping. 
(a)  All gas piping must be black steel, galvanized pipe or corrugated stainless steel tubing and fittings. Sizing of gas lines must be adequate to deliver gas supply to all appliances connected to piping without creating a pressure drop that will prevent the appliances from operating at their intended efficiency. 
(b)  All such pipe shall either be new or shall previously been used for no other purpose than conveying gas, and shall be clear and free from cutting burrs and defects in structure or threading and shall be thoroughly brushed and scale blown. 
(c)  Gas piping should be run exposed wherever possible. Where gas piping is installed in concealed areas such as walls, ceilings, etc., where corrosion is no problem, welded standard pipe, corrugated stainless steel tubing and fittings or threaded fittings, all with the proper air test of ten pounds for 15 minutes, may be used. Authorized utility personnel must inspect the installation. 
(d)  When gas piping is buried in an exterior location, either wrapped or coated pipe welded and air tested, or polyethylene pipe authorized by the gas inspector must be used. In general, no gas piping should be installed under a cement floor or slab. If this becomes necessary, wrapped black steel pipe or polyethylene pipe laid inside a gas tight duct with the duct vented to the outside must be used. The installer must furnish all necessary equipment and gauges for air testing pipelines belonging to the customer. It will be permissible to use plastic piping approved for natural gas, for outside underground lines only. 
(e)  A shutoff valve must be provided in the pipeline ahead of each gas appliance installed, ahead of the union or appliance connector. The shutoff valve on a furnace must be installed outside the furnace cabinet where accessible. Exceptions must be approved by the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel. Approved flexible appliance connectors may be used to connect portable appliances such as ranges, dryers, etc. Flexible connectors in commercial applications will be required to be double walled or approved for commercial applications. Standard residential connectors will not be allowed in commercial applications. 
(f)  Flexible connectors will not be allowed to pass through a wall, ceiling, floor or cabinet on movable appliances. Only one flexible connector per appliance will be allowed. 
(g)  A drip leg shall be required on furnaces and water heaters only. Manufactured homes are exempt from this rule. 
(h)  Copper or aluminum tubing shall not be used for gas lines or connections, except where it is part of the appliance design. 
(i)  Pipe compound or thread tape shall be used on all fittings and of a make recommended by an approved source from its manufacturer as being approved for both LP and natural gas. 
(j)  All gas piping carrying a gas pressure in excess of nine inches water column shall be welded and air tested. All gas piping over two inches in size shall be welded and air tested. The air test shall be no less than 150 percent the proposed working pressure, but not less than ten psig. The air test will be for 15 minutes without pressure drop. 
(k)  Threaded pipe and fittings may be tested with an air test instead of the usual soap bubble test on all joints. The test is ten pounds for 15 minutes. Cedar Falls Utilities personnel shall witness all air tests referenced in this article and reserve the right to require a longer time for any air tests based upon pipe size, length of the pipe runs and other conditions. 
(l)  Gas piping may be installed in concealed locations with no access in accordance with the following rule: When gas piping that is to be concealed is being installed; only elbows, tees, caps and couplings shall be used. 
(m)  Manufactured homes may be connected to the gas meter with solid iron pipe or a Dormont type outdoor flex connector approved for manufactured home use. 
(n)  Any natural gas piping going through brick, block or concrete walls must be sleeved with plastic pipe to protect from deterioration. 
(Code 2017, § 7-201; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-99. - Installation of used appliances. 
    Used gas appliances may be reinstalled when, in the opinion of the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel, such appliances may be used without danger to life or property. Used furnaces shall require a smoke test or equivalent test witnessed by authorized utility personnel prior to installation. 
(Code 2017, § 7-202; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-100. - Approval of appliances. 
    Gas appliances shall be CSAus approved or approved by an equivalent-testing laboratory. A rating plate shall be attached in such a manner as to be easily read. Where gas appliances are installed that have not been so approved they will be subject to the judgment of the gas inspector as to their fitness for use. Alteration or protection before their use may be required in order to meet the gas inspector's safety requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 7-203; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-101. - Water heaters. 
(a)  Water heaters shall not be installed in bathrooms or in rooms less than 600 cubic feet in size unless adequate air intake and ventilation is provided. All water heaters must be provided with a positive automatic shutoff valve that will not allow gas to pass through the main burner in the event of a pilot outage. All water heaters must be equipped with an approved automatic opening and closing temperature and pressure relief valve. All water heaters installed in a garage area shall be at least 18 inches from floor level to the burner. 
(b)  All water heaters must be vented, and the vent must be so installed, regardless of horizontal or vertical height or lengths, that all products of combustion are carried to the outside air. Where there is a flue liner from a furnace or a space heater, the water heater must be vented into this liner or into a separate flue or vent. Water heaters should not be vented into oil burner stacks. 
(c)  Water heaters installed in manufactured homes shall be marked "for manufactured home use." 
(Code 2017, § 7-204; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-102. - Space heating appliances. 
(a)  Gas warm air furnaces, boilers and unit heaters, or any type of space heater, shall be CSAus-approved or approved by an equivalent testing laboratory. Clearance from combustible materials shall be according to manufacturer's recommendations or as required by the gas utility. 
(b)  All heating equipment installed in a garage area shall be at least 18 inches from floor level to the burner. 
(c)  Minimum sheet metal clearance for gas fired hot air furnaces shall be as follows, or, if this is not possible, the furnace shall be satisfactorily insulated with fireproof material: 
(1)  Plenums on forced air furnaces with a maximum high limit setting up to 250 degrees Fahrenheit shall have a clearance of two inches from combustible material and a one-inch clearance on heat runs three feet out from the plenum. 
(2)  Gravity furnaces where a limit higher than 250 degrees Fahrenheit is maintained, shall have adequate clearance from combustible material or be so insulated that they will be considered by an authorized gas inspector to be safe. 
(3)  All gas-fired appliances requiring natural venting must have a draft diverter properly designed to the manufacturer's specifications. 
(d)  Where a space heater, furnace, conversion burner or any other gas fired appliance is installed in a confined area such as a utility room or similar area, an adequate supply of combustion air must be supplied from other than the living quarters area. An outside air opening one inch larger than the combined venting area of connected equipment will be deemed adequate. 
(e)  Any house built or remodeled after 1973 must have adequate combustion and dilution air to provide for the proper, safe operation of the natural gas furnace. Fresh air taken from outside or from a ventilated attic shall be installed, preferably into the cold air return, by the furnace installer. 
(f)  No circulating air supply inlet for blower type warm air furnaces shall be located where there is a possibility of reversing the venting, picking up fumes, objectionable odors or flammable vapors. 
(g)  Where exhaust fans are installed in a building that can cause the gas vents to reverse, downdraft or spill when the gas appliance is burning, the appliance must be shielded or protected or an induced draft fan must be installed so that it will function properly or more outside air must be introduced. 
(h)  All furnaces shall be provided with an approved electrical disconnect located within reach of the furnace. 
(Code 2017, § 7-205; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-103. - Operating instructions for appliances. 
(a)  Operating instructions for appliances are to be left on the job by the installer. 
(b)  Instructions furnished by the manufacturer, outlining procedures as follows, should be attached to or near the installation: 
(1)  Instructions for the proper manner of operating the main shutoff gas valve and pilot valve and the proper sequence for lighting. 
(2)  Instructions outlining the proper sequence for turning off gas burners and closing gas main and auxiliary valves. 
(Code 2017, § 7-206; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-104. - Venting. 
(a)  Forced draft or exhaust systems may only be installed in areas for which they have been designed by the manufacturer, or where conditions make it appropriate. 
(b)  All gas appliances shall be vented unless otherwise approved by an authorized utility inspector. Some exceptions are domestic ranges, gas and air torches and dryers. All gas venting should be provided with ample vertical height and a horizontal length as short as possible. 
(c)  Appliance air and/or fresh air must be installed at least ten feet from gas meter setups. Appliance exhaust should not be vented directly below windows or above gas meter setups. Manufacturer installation instructions will be used on exhaust installations. Exceptions to the provision set forth in this subsection must be approved in advance by the gas inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 7-207; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-105. - Chimneys. 
(a)  For heating equipment, flue liners must be used where total gas burning input is more than 50,000 or less than 350,000 Btu's per hour. 
(b)  Installation of new furnaces that no longer use the chimney going up through the house and leave only the water heater in the chimney must have a properly sized chimney to accommodate the water heater only, even if this requires a smaller liner to be installed in the existing chimney. 
(c)  The flue pipe should extend through the chimney wall to the inner face of the liner, but not beyond, and should be firmly cemented to masonry. The flue pipe should be sealed into the chimney liner or attached to the type B vent by use of a tee or elbow. 
(d)  Flue connections from two or more appliances should not enter opposing or adjacent sides of the chimney or type B vent at the same level. Flue pipes must never be connected into a fireplace chimney flue. 
(Code 2017, § 7-208; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-106. - Chimney flues. 
(a)  Where gas vents are used to discharge gases directly to the outside without the use of masonry chimneys, type B insulated vents may be used. The manufacturer's instructions for clearance from combustible materials and clearance plates must be used. 
(b)  A CSAus or equivalent testing laboratory approved draft hood must be used on all gas-fired appliances requiring venting, except incinerators, where a field control must be used as provided by the manufacturer. 
(c)  The draft hood, in all cases, must be located at a point level with or higher than the top of the highest flue passage in the appliance. In order to be able to develop full rating on some heating appliances, it will be necessary to install the draft hood as high as possible. This is true of revertible flue furnaces, where it is specifically recommended that the relief opening of the draft hood is at least one foot higher than the highest point of the flue passage. For conversion of revertible flue type appliances, it is recommended that a small opening or passage of not less than one inch pipe size be provided between the top of the highest point in the flue passage of the appliance and its vertical flue pipe. 
(d)  If there is a bypass, the bypass shall be opened slightly and locked in position. 
(e)  All draft hoods shall be installed in the position for which they were designed. In no case shall a draft hood be installed in a false ceiling or in a separate room from the heating system, or in any manner that will permit a difference in pressure between the draft hood relief opening and the combustion air supply. 
(Code 2017, § 7-209; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-107. - Installation of gas-fired equipment in sleeping quarters. 
(a)  Only properly vented space heaters may be installed in sleeping quarters. Ample fresh air intake or area must be available. 
(b)  All gas furnaces, space heaters or boilers, or any gas appliance where pressure fluctuation may interfere with its proper operation, must be equipped with a pressure regulator. All such appliances must also be equipped with an automatic pilot controlled safety shutoff that will shut the gas off to the main burner in the event of pilot failure. 
(Code 2017, § 7-210; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-108. - Approved flue liners. 
    Approved flue liners are as follows: vitrified steel pipe, stainless steel pipe, lap joint vitrified clay pipe, flexible stainless steel, type B liners or butt to butt tile. Use of the latter is limited to manufacturer's recommended use only. Type "B" vents shall be installed as close as possible to the appliance, to meet GAMA regulations. 
(Code 2017, § 7-211; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-109. - Starting up and checking out gas-fired equipment. 
(a)  All gas appliances shall be properly assembled and checked out by the installer. The appliance shall then be shut off and an authorized utility inspector notified for its checkout and inspection. 
(b)  All permits shall be taken out in advance of any installation and the authorized utility inspector shall be notified when the installation is completed. This applies to owners who do their own installing as well as to contractors. 
(c)  When the appliance installation or piping has passed the authorized utility inspector's inspection, it will be tagged with an acceptance tag. If the work or appliance is not satisfactory, it will be tagged with a caution or rejection tag and may either be left in service or shut off, depending on the safe condition of the appliance. The installer will be notified, either by the inspector at the job or by phone, regarding the failure of the installation to pass inspection. An authorized utility inspector will shut off service to the appliance or the gas meter if the installer fails to correct all defects in the appliance or piping. 
(Code 2017, § 7-212; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-110. - Burners firing 500,000 BTUs per hour or larger input. 
    Minimum requirements for burners firing 500,000 BTUs per hour or larger input are as follows: 
(1)  All such burners must be equipped with approved electronic controls. 
(2)  Main burner shutoff valves shall be an approved type, with handles permanently attached. 
(3)  Main burner shutoff valves shall be rated to close against a minimum of 15 pounds per square inch gas pressure in three seconds or less. 
(4)  Where gas pressure exceeds 15 pounds per square inch in the gas utility mains, the safety shutoff valve shall be rated to close against these pressures. 
(5)  Electrical wiring shall provide for closing of this valve on: 
a.  Power failure or interruption. 
b.  Action from any safety limit switches. 
c.  Pilot failure. 
(6)  Two electrically operated gas valves on the main burner gas lien are required. One shall be the input control valve and the other the safety shutoff valve and each shall be so constructed that it will perform its specific job. 
(7)  A one-eighth-inch pipe tap is to be provided with a nipple and cap in the manifold for connecting a manifold pressure gauge for test purposes. 
(8)  A high and low gas pressure switch shall be installed downstream from the input valve and set as close to manifold pressure as possible without causing nuisance shutdowns. When used with an automatic reset type valve, this control must be equipped with a manual reset feature. When used with a manual reset type safety shutoff valve, this control may be either the automatic reset type or the manual reset type. 
(Code 2017, § 7-213; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-111. - General burner firing. 
(a)  All burners must be adjusted for input size by fixed orifice and pressure regulator adjustment with the manual valve in the wide-open position for final checkout. A manual pilot shutoff valve and a pilot safety shutoff valve must be installed. 
(b)  A low water cutoff with an automatic feeder must be provided on all steam boilers. Adequate protection to ensure automatic filling or shutdown of the burner must be provided for gas fired hot water boilers. When a pressure or temperature control is used as an operating controller, an additional high pressure or high temperature safety control must be installed to serve as the high limit to shut burners off in the event of overpressurizing or too high a temperature. 
(c)  A double acting, properly sized field control with a stack temperature switch must be installed; or, if a diverter is used, a temperature switch must be installed at the bottom of the draft diverter on this size of appliance. This switch must be wired into the safety shutoff valve. 
(d)  Wiring and operating diagrams shall be placed on the job as close to appliances as is practical. 
(e)  Specially fired gas burning appliances not complying with the requirements of this section shall not be connected to the gas utility piping system unless individual clearance has been made with the gas inspector. The appliance must be something other than a boiler, furnace, water heater, etc. It must be proven safe for its particular use to the satisfaction of the inspector, and be provided with whatever controls are required to make it a safe appliance to operate. 
(Code 2017, § 7-214; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-112. - Proximity of appliances to combustible materials. 
(a)  Gas appliances so constructed that the burners are not shielded by metal or other approved insulating material shall not be located within 12 inches of any combustible material. 
(b)  All gas appliances, except floor and wall furnaces, so constructed that metal shields or other approved insulating materials are an integral part of their construction, shall not be installed so as to permit such metal shields or other approved insulating materials to be within six inches of combustible material or within three inches of protected combustible material, unless approved by CSAus or an equivalent testing laboratory for less clearance. 
(c)  Gas appliances having open flames, such as gas plates and ranges shall not be installed within three feet of any combustible ceiling material. 
(d)  The top and side walls of a warm air gas furnace shall be not less than six inches from protected or unprotected combustible material, unless approved by CSAus or an equivalent testing laboratory for less clearance. 
(e)  Every floor of combustible construction under a gas burning warm air furnace shall be covered with one-quarter inch of fireproof millboard or other equivalent fire protective material. The floor protection shall project at least 12 inches beyond all sides of the furnace or to the furnace enclosure. The floor covering may be omitted on a wood floor under any gas burning warm air furnace, if the combustion chamber is not less than 24 inches from the floor and is separated by a metal plate or shield, unless approved by CSAus or an equivalent testing laboratory for less clearance. 
(Code 2017, § 7-215; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-113. - Incinerators. 
(a)  All gas-fired incinerators shall be CSAus or equivalent approved. 
(b)  Incinerators shall not be connected to any flue liners except vitrified steel pipe. 
(c)  An approved barometric draft control shall be installed on all incinerators. 
(d)  The smoke pipe connection from an incinerator to an approved flue liner shall be at least 24-gauge galvanized steel. Sheet metal screws shall secure the joints. 
(Code 2017, § 7-216; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-114. - Gas lights and grills. 
(a)  Where outdoor gas lights and grills are installed, copper or plastic tubing approved for natural gas may be used outside any building. 
(b)  All taps or connections must be made downstream from the meter. Steel pipe and fittings must be used aboveground and connected to the tubing underground. 
(c)  A gas shutoff must be used, and should be installed in the iron pipe as close to the meter as possible. 
(d)  The tubing or pipe should be laid in a trench from the building to the light or grill and deep enough so that it will not be broken by normal activity in the area where it is installed. 
(Code 2017, § 7-217; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-115. - Fireplace logs, gas logs and fireplace inserts. 
(a)  Fireplace logs, gas logs and fireplace inserts that have one of the following testing laboratory certifications will be approved: 
(1)  American Gas Association (AGA). International Approval Services (IAS) (formerly AGA). 
(2)  Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL). 
(3)  Building Officials and Code Administrators International (BOCA). 
(4)  Resources, Applications, Designs and Controls, Inc. (RADCO). 
(5)  International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO). 
(6)  City of Los Angeles General Approval. 
(7)  Southern Building Code Congress. 
(8)  Canadian Standards Association; United States (CSAus) (replaces AGA logo and symbols). 
(b)  All flue dampers must be permanently blocked open a minimum of one inch across the damper. 
(c)  Fresh air will be required for new natural gas fireplaces. The fresh air must not be taken from a garage area. 
(d)  Glass doors will not be required on any installation, but are recommended. 
(e)  Log lighters will be allowed, however, the valve should be installed out of the path of radiant or direct heat from burning wood. 
(Code 2017, § 7-218; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-116. - Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST). 
    Any person installing or purchasing for installation any CSST must be certified for each manufacturer of CSST being installed. The installer must also carry the installer's certification card of the CSST manufacturer to exhibit to authorized Cedar Falls Utilities personnel upon request. All installations of CSST shall conform to the manufacturer's specifications, and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  CSST shall not be installed on any exposed surface where damage may occur unless it is properly protected. 
(2)  Air tests are required except as otherwise provided in this subsection. The first test will be the rough-in air test at ten pounds for 15 minutes. At this time all strike plates, sleeves, and shields shall be in place. The "final air test" will be ten pounds for 15 minutes after walls, ceilings, etc., have been installed. On retrofit jobs, where the CSST is pushed through a chase that is already closed in, only one test will be required. 
(3)  Two-pound CSST systems are authorized only with approval of Cedar Falls Utilities prior to the installation of the gas service to the building. 
(4)  If the two-pound CSST installation contains a regulator at the two pound/inches water column manifold, the regulator shall be vented to the outside with a bug cap attached. 
(Code 2017, § 7-219; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Secs. 7-117-7-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 7-146. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed any gas piping, gas vent, flue liner or natural gas appliance without obtaining a permit to do so. Such permit shall be signed by the gas inspector or authorized utility personnel. 
(Code 2017, § 7-236; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-147. - Exception. 
    A permit will not be required under this division for minor repairs. 
(Code 2017, § 7-237; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-148. - Issuance. 
    Any permit required by this division may be issued to any building or appliance owner to do any construction work regulated by this division, provided that the building or appliance owner or permanently employed maintenance personnel of the building owner shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. The building or appliance owner applying for the permit is not required to be bonded in accordance with section 7-93. 
(Code 2017, § 7-238; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-149. - Fee. 
(a)  A permit fee will not be charged for a permit required under this division if a permit is taken out prior to the start of the work or while the work is in progress. If a permit is issued more than one day after completion of the work, a fee in the amount established by resolution from time to time will be charged. 
(b)  Owner's permits will be issued without charge. 
(Code 2017, § 7-239; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 7-150. - Permit for temporary use of gas. 
    When temporary use of gas is desired, the gas inspector may grant a permit for such use for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided the gas piping which is to be used has been given a test equal to that required for a final inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 7-240; Ord. No. 2321, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Secs. 7-151-7-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-169. - Title; Uniform Plumbing Code; adoption; purpose and scope; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the Cedar Falls Plumbing Code, and may be so cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the "code". 
(b)  The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, including chapters 1 through 17, all inclusive, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, except as such codes are amended in this article, is hereby adopted by reference and is effective as if fully set forth in this article. 
(c)  The purpose of this section and section 7-170 is to establish local installation standards modifying and superseding certain articles, paragraphs and subsections of the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code. Any and all plumbing systems shall be installed in conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this article and the code adopted in this article. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different materials, methods of installation or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(d)  An official copy of the code adopted by this article, including a certificate by the city clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in the office of the city clerk, in either hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 7-256; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-170. - Uniform Plumbing Code; amendments. 
(a)  The provisions of this section specify certain amendments, by deletion, addition or substitution, of the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code. Where this section states that a section, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted, only the specific section, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted. Where this section states that a part, section or subsection is deleted in its entirety, all references listed thereafter associated with this specific part of section (with subsections, enumerations and exceptions) or subsection (with enumerations and exceptions) are deleted. 
2015 UPC Chapter 1 Amendments 
(1)  Section 102.2, Existing Construction, is amended by adding the following after the last sentence: 
If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise or altered in such a manner as to require the replacement of 50 percent or more of the plumbing equipment, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for new buildings. If the type of occupancy of an existing building is partially or entirely changed, the plumbing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for the new type of occupancy. 
(2)  Section 103.0, Duties and Powers of the Authority Having Jurisdiction, is amended by adding the following after the last sentence: 
(a)  The office of the plumbing inspector for the city is hereby created, and such inspector is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to inspect any and all buildings or structures, public or private, and as provided in this article, to condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe condition all plumbing and plumbing related structures for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall be appointed by the director of community development after recommendation of the building official, and such inspector shall be directly responsible to the building official. 
(c)  The appointee shall be a qualified plumber and shall have at least ten years of practical experience in the plumbing trade or five years as a plumbing inspector, or, in lieu of such experience, a combination of trade school, practical experience and inspection experience considered by the building official as being suitable for minimum requirements, shall be possessed of such executive ability as requisite for the performance of required duties, shall have thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation and maintenance of plumbing equipment, and shall be well versed in improved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the state relating to sanitation and plumbing and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof and in the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(d)  The plumbing inspector shall hold a current journeyman plumber's license with the State of Iowa, or shall be required to pass an examination for journeyman prior to appointment. 
(3)  Section 103.1 is amended by adding the following new subsections: 
103.1.1 Supervision of Building Official. The plumbing inspector shall work fully under the supervision and jurisdiction of the building official and take all orders and perform any duties or services that may be assigned by the building official pertaining to plumbing inspections or other related duties. 
103.1.2 Conflict of Interest. It shall be unlawful for the plumbing inspector to engage in the business of the sales, installation or maintenance of plumbing equipment, either directly or indirectly, and the inspector shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city, at any time, while holding the office provided for in this division. 
103.1.3 Records. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector shall keep records of applications for plumbing permits and of all inspections. The records shall be available to the public. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall keep an accounting record for the collection of permit fees. 
(c)  The plumbing inspector shall keep records of sewer connections from city mains to the property line and from the property line to each building connected to city services. 
103.1.4 Interpretation of Regulations. The plumbing inspector shall have full power to exercise judgment in a reasonable and proper manner and rule accordingly on all special cases in regard to any matters in this article or not specifically covered thereby, subject to section 107.0 pertaining to appeals. 
(4)  Section 103.3.1, Licensing , is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted therefor: 
103.3.1 Licenses Required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any plumbing system within the scope of this article unless such person has obtained from the State of Iowa board of plumbing examiners and appeals, a master plumber's business license, nor shall any such business or dealer employ any but licensed master plumbers, journeyman plumbers or apprentice plumbers employed by and working under the direction of a holder of the license for one of the classes of licenses prescribed by this article. 
(b)  All plumbing contractors not currently registered by the city shall pay a one time registration fee as set by the city council. 
(c)  A plumbing business, other than pipe layers, shall show proof of a state issued master plumbing contractor license and shall execute and file with the city building official (or a specified inter-governmental agency if so designated by the building official) a certificate of insurance written by a company authorized to transact business in the state, in limits established annually by resolution by the city council; said certificate to be written on a standard form and carrying an endorsement naming the city, and its employees (or the inter-governmental agency designated by the building official) as additional insureds as its interest may appear and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required of such contract by any ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. It shall be a further condition of said certificate of insurance that the obligator will hold the city (through the specified intergovernmental agency if so designated) harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetency on the part of such contractor, his agents or employees in the performance of the work done under a license or permit issued upon the filing of said certificate. 
(d)  Upon payment of the annual license fee set by city council, a pipe layer's license may be issued to a company that meets the insurance requirements of subsection (b) of this section set by the city and may be required to take an exam approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(e)  Said certificate of insurance shall be issued by December 31 of each year, and shall be refiled on or before said date for each subsequent year and shall be in continuous full force and effect. That it is the intent and purpose of said certificate of insurance to also bind the individual, company, firm, association or partnership, whether it be trade name, corporation, or other business association or arrangement with which the principal is associated. 
(5)  Section 104.4.3 Expiration , is amended by deleting subsections 104.4.3 and 104.4.4 in their entirety and substituting the following therefor: 
104.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this code shall expire 12 months from the date of issue, unless the application is accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the permit may be issued for the time period of the construction schedule, with the approval of the building official. If the work has not been completed, including all required inspections, by the expiration date of the permit, no further work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner, or the owner's agent, and payment of the renewal fee has been received. The building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than six months each, without payment of the renewal fee. Extensions shall be requested by the owner or the owner's agent and justifiable cause demonstrated by the owner. 
(6)  Section 104.5, Permit Fees , is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting the following new subsection 104.5: 
104.5.1 Permit Fees. 
(a)  Fees will be charged for new installations, replacement of old installations with new installations, or change of location, and, in the case of plumbing fixtures, for the removal of fixtures. 
(b)  The schedule of permit fees shall be as established annually by resolution by the city council. 
(c)  Payment of fees for permits shall be made on or before the tenth day of the month following the date of the statement from the plumbing inspector. All fees shall be paid to the plumbing inspector, and be payable to the city. The plumbing inspector shall receipt for the fees in duplicate, and one of the receipts shall be given to the applicant. 
(d)  Failure to comply with subsection (c) of this section will automatically cause the person to cease work. 
(7)  Section 106.0, Violation and Penalties , is amended by deleting subsection 106.3 and substituting the following in its place: 
106.3 Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
106.3.1 If any plumbing work, including construction or repair, is being performed within the city contrary to the provisions of the code adopted by this article, it shall be deemed a municipal infraction and, in addition to the penalties described in this section, shall be corrected in accordance with the code adopted by this article. 
106.3.2 The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this article or the code adopted by this article, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by this article or the code adopted by this article is, unless otherwise specified, a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
106.3.3 Any person violating any provision of this article may be subject to an additional civil penalty and possible denial, revocation or suspension of license pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 105. 
(8)  Section 107.0, Board of Appeals , is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted therefor: 
107.0 Board of Appeals. 
107.1 Membership; Appointment of Members; Term of Office. 
(a)  The board of plumbing appeals shall consist of five members, one member of the city council, appointed each year, one owner, officer, director, shareholder or employee of a plumbing company, one master plumber, one journeyman plumber and one public member, each appointed for a period of four years. The plumbing inspector shall serve as secretary to the board but is nonvoting. Appointments shall be made by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. Should a vacancy in the board occur, it shall be the duty of the secretary of the board to notify the mayor of the vacancy, and the mayor and city council shall, at a regular meeting, as soon possible thereafter, appoint a new member to the board to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(b)  Expiration of appointments, except for the city councilmember, shall be staggered, so that one member is appointed or reappointed each year. Terms of appointment shall expire on December 31. If the mayor and city council fail to appoint at the scheduled time, the expired term member will be held over until re-appointment or replacement. 
(c)  In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the board shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the board upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the board on the date of adoption of this ordinance who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the board until both the expiration of his current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
107.2 Meetings; Records. 
(a)  All meetings of the plumbing appeals board shall be held in the council chambers, or other location indicated in a public notice posted 24 hours prior to any meeting. 
(b)  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transacting of all business, but any action taken by the board shall require a majority vote of all members of the board. 
(c)  The board shall annually elect one of its members as the chairman of the board. 
(d)  The secretary of the board shall keep a record of the board meetings. 
107.3 Compensation of Members. The members of the plumbing board of appeals shall serve without compensation. 
107.4 Appeals. 
(a)  Any person shall have the right to register an appeal with the plumbing board of appeals for a review of any decision of the plumbing inspector, provided that such appeal is made in writing within ten days after having been notified of such decision by the plumbing inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal, the board of appeals shall proceed to determine whether the action of the plumbing inspector complies with this article and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings within ten days of receiving the appeal. No appeal shall be considered unless the appeal is filed within the period of ten days. The board of appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
(b)  An appeal to the city council of any ruling of the board may be made by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the ruling being appealed. The city council shall give the appellant and the board a minimum of five days written notice by certified mail of the date, time and location of hearing of said appeal. All interested persons shall be given the opportunity to be heard at such hearing and the city council may affirm, modify or overrule the action of the board based upon the evidence submitted before the city council. 
2015 UPC Chapter 2 Amendments 
(9)  Section 218.0 is amended by adding the following definition: 
Pipe layer: A person approved by the city to install the building sewer. 
2015 UPC Chapter 3 Amendments 
(10)  Section 306.0, Industrial Wastes , is amended by adding a new subsection 306.3 to read as follows: 
306.3 Any industrial or commercial property connecting to the city sanitary sewage system shall only do so after the installation of an inspection manhole on said property. This manhole shall be readily accessible for inspection and/or testing by city or state personnel at all times. Minimum size of the manhole shall be 36 inches. 
An exception to this provision may be made only in the judgment of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(11)  Subsection 312.13, Exposed ABS Piping , is deleted it in its entirety. 
(12)  Subsection 312.14, Exposed PVC Piping , is deleted it in its entirety. 
(13)  Subsection 314.2, Tunneling and Driving , is amended by adding the following last sentence: 
Boring shall only be allowed with prior approval of the authority having jurisdiction. 
UPC Chapter 4 Amendments 
(14)  Subsection 402.6.1, Closet Rings (Closet Flanges) , is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted in its place: 
402.6.1 Closet Rings (Closet Flanges). 
Closet rings (closet flanges) for water closets or similar fixtures shall be of an approved type and shall be bronze, copper, hard lead, cast-iron, galvanized malleable iron, ABS, PVC, or other approved materials. Each such closet ring (closet flange) shall be approximately seven inches (178 mm) in diameter and, where installed, shall, together with the soil pipe, present a 11/2 inch (38 mm) wide flange or face to receive the fixture gasket or closet seal. Caulked-on closet rings (closet flanges) shall be not less than one-quarter of an inch (6.4 mm) thick and not less than two inches (51 mm) in overall depth. Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be burned or soldered to lead bends or stubs, shall be caulked to cast-iron soil pipe, shall be solvent cemented to ABS and PVC, and shall be screwed or fastened in an approved manner to other materials with the top surface 1/4 inch above the finished floor. Closet bends or stubs shall be cut off so as to present a smooth surface even with the top of the closet ring before rough inspection is called. Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be adequately designed and secured to support fixtures connected thereto. 
2015 UPC Chapter 7 Amendments 
(15)  Subsection 713.4 is deleted and the following is substituted in its place: 
713.4 The public sewer may be considered as not being available when such public sewer is more than 200 feet away. Said distance shall be construed as being measured from the public sewer to the nearest property line. The 200 feet distance shall also apply to residences and buildings erected prior to the passage of this chapter. This distance will be considered reasonable for the connection of sewer and water when so ordered by the plumbing inspector or authorized by the building official. 
(16)  Section 714.0, Damage to Public Sewer or Private Sewage Disposal System , is amended by adding new subsection 714.6 thereto: 
714.6 Any sewer taps, tie-ins and/or sanitary sewer service which is damaged in any way that would allow any subsurface contamination, pollution damage, hazardous or nuisance condition to the public sewer system, shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to repair and/or maintain and keep in good operating condition. Written notification will be sent to said property owner stating the condition and/or repairs necessary to correct the damage or nuisance condition. If the property owner does not repair the damage or nuisance, the city may contact a plumbing contractor to repair said damage and will assess the property owner for all repairs, or legal action may be taken to correct the condition. 
2015 UPC Chapter 11 Amendments 
(17)  Section 1101.6.1, Discharge , is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following new subsection 1101.6.1 Discharge: 
1101.6.1 Discharge. There shall be no cross-connection to the sanitary sewer and in no instance shall the discharge be to city right-of-way or city streets. Where possible the discharge of said sump shall be by gravity where the city has provided a relief tile behind the city curb or the sump may be connected to the storm sewer or discharged to a drainage ditch except as otherwise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
(18)  Subsection 1101.6.5(3), Open Area , is deleted in its entirety. 
2015 UPC Chapter 12 Amendments 
Chapter 12, Fuel Piping: 
The Authority Having Jurisdiction for chapter 12 shall be the Cedar Falls Utilities and the Inspection Services Division of the community development Department of the city. 
(19)  Section 1212.0, Appliance Connections to Building Piping , is amended by deleting subsection 1212.1(5) in its entirety. 
(Code 2017, § 7-257; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-171. - Disclaimer. 
    The rules adopted by this article shall not be construed to exempt the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized in this article or the certificates of approval issued, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-258; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 7-172-7-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITION ON DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND GROUNDWATER TO CITY SANITARY SEWER 

Sec. 7-196. - Discharge of stormwater or groundwater into city sanitary sewer system. 
    The discharge of water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or from any other natural precipitation source into the city sanitary sewer collection system has the potential to cause damage to property and to overload the city wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment system. Such discharge may result in the backup of sewage into living quarters of residential dwellings, or into other buildings or structures in the city, thereby creating a potential public health hazard, and potentially exceeding the capacity of the city wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment system. Therefore, the city finds that it is essential to the maintenance of public health, safety, comfort, and welfare, to the minimization of damage to property, and to the maintenance of the functioning and capacity of the city wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment system, that the provisions of this division be strictly enforced. Since Ordinance No. 1275 was adopted on February 10, 1969, this Code has prohibited the discharge of stormwater from any dwelling, building or other structure into the city's sanitary sewer system. The provisions of this division shall apply to every dwelling, building or other structure in the city, for the construction of which a city building permit was issued after February 10, 1969. 
(Code 2017, § 7-259; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-197. - Restrictions and definitions. 
    No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, or from any other natural precipitation source shall be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system. Any dwelling, building or other structure subject to the provisions of this division which, because of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, require a seepage collection system, a "beaver drain," or any sump pump system to discharge water, shall have a permanently-installed discharge line which shall not at any time connect to or discharge such stormwater into the city sanitary sewer system. For purposes of this division, a permanent installation shall be one which provides for a year-round discharge connection to the city subdrain/storm sewer system. If there is no city subdrain/storm sewer system available to the property, the surface discharge point shall be located no closer than ten feet from any property line, or as otherwise approved by the director of community development or his designee. Such discharge line shall consist of a rigid discharge line inside the structure, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and, if connected to the city subdrain/storm sewer system, shall include a check valve. 
(Code 2017, § 7-260; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-198. - Sump, pump, and rigid pipe; method of installation. 
(a)  Any such discharge line shall consist of a pipe that shall be installed through the outside foundation wall of the dwelling, building or other structure, with rigid pipe (plastic, copper or galvanized) 11/2 inches (40 mm) inside diameter minimum, without valves or quick connections that would alter the path of discharge. The discharge shall be directed away from the foundation wall of the structure. 
(b)  No discharge shall be directed so as to impact neighboring properties or any city street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(c)  Where a sump pit exists in any such dwelling, building or other structure subject to this division, it shall have a pump installed with rigid piping as specified in this section. 
(d)  Any plumber, contractor, or other person who knowingly installs a sump, pump and/or piping that is not in conformance with the provisions of this division shall be liable to the city for all damages caused by such improper installation, and shall further be subject to the penalties set forth in section 7-204. 
(Code 2017, § 7-261; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-199. - Disconnections ordered. 
    Any owner of any dwelling, building, or other structure in the city that is subject to this division, which has a roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or other natural precipitation source that is now connected to and/or discharging into the city sanitary sewer system, shall immediately disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in the city sanitary sewer system shall be closed or repaired in a manner approved by the director of community development or his designee. 
(Code 2017, § 7-262; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-200. - Inspections. 
    Every owner of any dwelling, building or other structure that is subject to the provisions of this division, shall allow the city director of community development or his designee, to gain admittance to the owner's property in order to inspect such dwelling, building or other structure, to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge from said property into the city sanitary sewer system. The owner of any such property may meet the requirements of this section by contracting with a licensed plumber who is authorized to do business in the city to perform such inspection. Such plumber shall inspect the owner's property and the sump pump system, and shall complete, sign and return an inspection form to the city, documenting the results of the inspection. The inspection form shall be furnished to the owner or the licensed plumber upon request. All costs associated with an inspection by a licensed plumber retained by the property owner under this section shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Code 2017, § 7-263; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-201. - Time limit for owner to allow inspection by the city or by a licensed plumber. 
    The owner of any dwelling, building or other structure shall have a period of 30 days from the date the city sends a written notice to the owner requesting admittance to the owner's property for an inspection, to either allow a city inspection of the property, or to contract with a licensed plumber to perform the inspection, and notify the city of the results thereof, as provided in section 7-200. Such inspection, whether performed by the city inspector, or by the licensed plumber hired by the property owner, shall be completed within said 30 day period. 
(Code 2017, § 7-264; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-202. - Time limit for disconnection of discharge into city sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  Upon completion of a city inspection of a property, or upon the city's receipt of an inspection form from the licensed plumber hired by the owner of the property, the city shall determine whether any such property is improperly discharging stormwater into the city sanitary sewer system, and shall send a notice to the property owner regarding the results of said inspection. If the property is found to be discharging stormwater into the city sanitary sewer system, then the owner shall have a period of 90 days from the date the city sends such written notice to the owner, to obtain a plumbing permit, and to disconnect the owner's sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the city sanitary sewer system, and to request an inspection, certifying that all work necessary to disconnect the owner's sump pump or other prohibited discharge from said property into the city sanitary sewer system has been completed. 
(b)  All work that is necessary to comply with the provisions of this division which requires the issuance of any plumbing, building or other permit under this Code shall be inspected by the city inspection services division for compliance with all applicable Code requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 7-265; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-203. - Sanitary sewer surcharge. 
    Any owner who fails to timely comply with the requirements of either section 7-201 or 7-202 shall thereupon be subject to and shall pay a monthly surcharge on the property owner's city sewer bill in the amount of $100.00 per month. Said surcharge shall commence on the first day of the month following the expiration of the 30-day period set forth in section 7-201, or the 90-day period set forth in section 7-202, as applicable, when either the property owner has failed to timely allow a city inspection or has failed to timely correct any illegal connections to the city sanitary sewer system, or has failed to contract with a licensed plumber to inspect the property and correct any illegal connections to the city sanitary sewer system. Such surcharge shall continue to be imposed on the owner's city sanitary sewer bill for as long as the property owner continues to own the property without complying with the requirements of this division. This monthly surcharge is intended to offset the added cost to the city associated with having the city wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment system process clear or clean water unnecessarily, when the status of the property owner's connection or non-connection to the city sanitary sewer system cannot be ascertained, or when the owner has failed to timely disconnect any discharge of stormwater to the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 2017, § 7-266; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 7-204. - Penalties and enforcement. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this section. 
(1)  If any person is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this division, the city shall send written notice stating the nature of the violation, and providing the person with at least 30 days to correct the violation. Any person who has received a written notice from the city described in this subsection (a) and who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this division shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from also seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, abatement or injunctive relief. 
(3)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city resulting from such violation. The city hereby also retains any and all available civil remedies, including, but not limited to, injunction or abatement actions to remedy any violation of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 7-267; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Secs. 7-205-7-231. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-232. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business or mercantile storage or commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes, which when loaded on any carrier of any kind has a loaded height exceeding 13 feet, six inches and a loaded width exceeding eight feet. 
    Building mover means any person who engages in the work of moving in any way, or raising, lowering or supporting by shoring, or upon temporary blocking, jacks or wedges, any building or other structure, or any part thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 7-411) 
Sec. 7-233. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 7-412) 
Sec. 7-234. - Transfer of license or permit. 
    No license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 2017, § 7-413) 
Sec. 7-235. - Revocation of license or permit. 
    Any person who shall, in the application for a license required by this article, or for a house moving permit, make any false or untrue statement, who shall violate the provisions of this article, who shall fail to pay any cost or expense incurred by the city as a result of his operations, or whose bond or insurance as required by this article has been cancelled or otherwise terminated, shall, upon such finding, have his license revoked. 
(Code 2017, § 7-414) 
Sec. 7-236. - Moving of certain buildings prohibited; safety of route. 
(a)  No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city which exceeds 34 feet, including overhang, in width, or which exceeds 30 feet loaded height without prior approval by the city council of the city. 
(b)  No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city to a lot in the city if the value of the building before moving is less than 50 percent of the value of a new building of the same type. No building shall be moved in or through the streets of the city to a lot in the city if the building is in such a deteriorated condition that in the opinion of the building official it is unsafe and a hazard. 
(c)  No building shall be moved on any route which in the opinion of the building official endangers other buildings or property. 
(Code 2017, § 7-415; Ord. No. 2164, § 1, 9-9-1996) 
Sec. 7-237. - Responsibility for injuries or damage. 
    Any injury done to any street, avenue, highway, alley, public ground, sidewalk, curb, crossing or pavement when a building is moved shall be promptly repaired to the satisfaction of the director of municipal operations and programs, and the cost of any injury or damage done to any person or to any property, either public or private, shall be promptly paid, and the bonds provided for in section 7-276 shall stand as security therefor. 
(Code 2017, § 7-416) 
Sec. 7-238. - Report of damage. 
    The house mover shall report any damage done to any street, avenue, highway, boulevard, alley, sidewalk, curb, tree or telephone or light pole or wires, or to any other public or private property, except property owned by the house mover or the structure being moved, to the building official, within 12 hours from and after the occurrence causing the damage. 
(Code 2017, § 7-417) 
Sec. 7-239. - Parking on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person moving a building to stop, stand or park a house, equipment, material or structure upon privately owned property without first having obtained the consent of the owner or person in charge of the privately owned property. Upon complaint of the owner or person in charge of the privately owned property, failure of the person to obtain the consent is declared to be an offense. 
(Code 2017, § 7-418) 
Sec. 7-240. - Use of streets; hours for movement; emergency storage on street. 
(a)  In no case shall paved streets, alleys, avenues or public grounds be used for the purpose of moving any building unless they are in the most practical direct route from the place of origin to the place of destination. The movement, when commenced, shall be continued from sunrise to 3:00 p.m., day by day, until completed, with the least possible obstruction to the thoroughfares occupied. 
(b)  No building being moved shall be stored on the streets of the city unless authorized by the building official. No such authorization shall be granted unless application for the occupancy is made to the building official, in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor. The occupancy shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that an emergency exists which was not the making of the individual moving the building or to which the mover did not contribute. Before authorization for street occupancy can be granted, the applicant must sign a statement assuming liability for any damage to persons and property, including property of the city, and indemnify the city for any claims against the city arising out of the occupancy. Barricades of a type meeting the city engineer's specifications as to size and illumination shall be kept in a conspicuous place at each end and side of the building during the night, which shall be between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 2017, § 7-419) 
Sec. 7-241. - Temporary no parking zones. 
    Parking shall be prohibited on streets included in the routing for the moving of a building if deemed necessary by the city. At least 48 hours in advance of the time of moving, the person moving the building shall post signs provided by the city designating the streets included in the routing as no parking zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in such no parking zones when the temporary no parking signs are posted. If any automobile is parked illegally in violation of the provisions of this section, and a summons has been issued by the police operations division, the person moving the building shall be responsible for the expense of towing the vehicle away, but may recover the expense from the violator. The person moving the building shall assume all risk of damage to any vehicle either towed away or parked in the route. The person moving the building shall remove all temporary no parking signs on the streets included in the routing immediately after the building being moved has passed the street assigned for no parking. The person removing the building shall return the no parking signs to the city after their removal, and shall pay the city for any signs lost, damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 2017, § 7-420) 
Sec. 7-242. - Inspection of streets. 
    The party moving any building shall, within one day after the building reaches its destination, report such fact to the city clerk, who shall thereupon notify the director of municipal operations and programs, who shall immediately inspect the streets and alleys or public grounds over which the building was moved and ascertain the condition of the streets, alleys or public grounds. If the removal of such building has caused any damage to the streets, alleys or public grounds or electric light wires or cables or other property belonging to the city, the city shall repair the damage done at the expense of the party taking out the permit, and shall hold the sureties on the bond given by the house mover responsible for the payment of the expense. 
(Code 2017, § 7-421) 
Sec. 7-243. - Report to fire chief. 
    Every house mover shall report to the fire chief each night the exact location where the building is to remain. 
(Code 2017, § 7-422) 
Sec. 7-244. - Removal of utility poles and wires. 
    Whenever in moving any building it shall be necessary to cut or move any electric light, telephone, traffic or other wire, pole or fixture, the owner of the wire, pole or fixture shall have the right to cut or move it or supervise the cutting or moving, and a written notice shall be given by the moving permittee to the owner at least 48 hours before the time required for cutting or moving, specifying the place, the person who requests the cutting or removal, and the time when the cutting or removal will be required. The expense of cutting or removing the wires, poles or fixtures or supervising the cutting or removal shall be paid by the moving contractor, if the owner of the wires, poles or fixtures has done the work in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city relating thereto. If the owners of the wires, poles or fixtures have failed to comply with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city relating thereto, then the owner shall bear all expenses of cutting or removing the wires, poles or fixtures. 
(Code 2017, § 7-423) 
Sec. 7-245. - Clearing and filling of old building site; abandonment of utility connections. 
(a)  After a building is moved, all abandoned water, sewer, electrical and other service connections shall be plugged and filled in. In addition, all abandoned septic tanks and dry wells shall be pumped out and filled with sand. Permission to so abandon utilities, septic tanks and dry wells shall first be obtained from the city, and any other necessary release shall be obtained from the utility companies. The releases and permission must be filed with the application for a permit to move the building. 
(b)  Every permittee under division 3 of this article shall remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site within 60 days after the building is moved, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. Within 90 days after the building is moved, but no less than 30 days after final grading of the site, or at the earliest opportunity during the growing season that is conducive to plant germination, the site shall be seeded with grass or similar acceptable vegetative ground cover. The owner of the property shall make reasonable efforts to ensure proper germination of the planted vegetation, and the property owner shall thereafter maintain the property in compliance with all applicable city ordinances. 
(c)  The city shall proceed to do all work necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general surety bond of the permittee. 
(Code 2017, § 7-424; Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-246. - Compliance with building code and zoning chapter. 
(a)  After a change of use has been made in a building, the reestablishment of a prior use that would not have been legal in a new building of the same type of construction is prohibited unless all the provisions of the building code and the zoning chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code or other city ordinances are complied with. A change from one prohibited use to another prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of the building code and of the zoning chapter. 
(b)  Each moved building shall be made to comply with all the provisions of the city building code, as far as it is practical to do so. Sewer and water supply shall be provided. 
(c)  All work required to bring the building moved up to the standards required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be completed within six months from the date the building is moved. 
(Code 2017, § 7-425) 
Sec. 7-247. - Building permit required; time limit for installation of building on new site. 
    No licensee under this article shall move any building to any lot unless he shall have first obtained a building permit for the building on the lot from the building official, and no permit for moving a house to a lot in the city shall be granted by the building official if there has not been issued a building permit for the building on the lot. No building shall be moved to a lot in the city for the purpose of storing the building on the lot. A building moved to a lot shall be permanently installed on its new foundation within 60 days of the date moved on the lot. 
(Code 2017, § 7-426) 
Secs. 7-248-7-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 7-273. - Required. 
    Before engaging in the operation of moving buildings, every person shall obtain a license therefor. 
(Code 2017, § 7-446) 
Sec. 7-274. - Application. 
    Any person intending to engage in building moving in the city shall file a written application for a building mover's license in the office of the city clerk. The application shall set forth, in such detail as may be required by the building official, the applicant's qualifications and experience, the kind or type of equipment he intends to use, whether or not he owns such equipment, and such other information as may be necessary to determine his qualifications as a building mover. 
(Code 2017, § 7-447) 
Sec. 7-275. - Insurance. 
    Before any license required by this division shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall obtain and furnish to the city an insurance policy for public liability and property damage in the amount of $100,000.00 per person injured, $300,000.00 for each accident, and $50,000.00 property damage. The insurance policy shall name the city and the applicant as named insured, and shall provide that the policy cannot be revoked, cancelled or modified in any way until the city has been notified by certified mail at least ten days prior to the proposed action. 
(Code 2017, § 7-448) 
Sec. 7-276. - Bond. 
    The applicant for a license required by this division shall file with his application a bond with an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned that all work done under the license shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, in accordance with all provisions of this Code and all other ordinances of the city relating to house moving, and that the applicant will pay to the city, to the city utilities or to any person all costs incurred or all damages for injuries to person or property, including, but not limited to, damages to any street, curb or sidewalk or to any other public property caused by negligence, fault or mismanagement of the applicant or person in his employ, or due to any other cause, in doing any work under the license or a permit for such work. 
(Code 2017, § 7-449) 
Sec. 7-277. - Fee. 
    The fee for a license required by this division shall be in such amount as established by the council resolution from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 7-450) 
Sec. 7-278. - Issuance. 
    Upon payment of the proper license fee and the filing of the bond and insurance policy as required by this division, and after obtaining the approval of the building official, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant therefor the license required by this division. 
(Code 2017, § 7-451) 
Secs. 7-279-7-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 7-305. - Required. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official pursuant to this division. 
(Code 2017, § 7-471) 
Sec. 7-306. - Application. 
(a)  A building mover shall submit his application for a permit to move a building to the office of the building official at least ten days prior to the proposed time of moving. 
(b)  The application for the permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official, and shall be filed in his office. 
(c)  The application shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the building proposed to be moved. 
(2)  A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city. 
(3)  A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city. 
(4)  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved. 
(5)  The proposed moving date and hours. 
(6)  A list of trees abutting the proposed route which would require trimming. 
(7)  Any additional information which the building official shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 2017, § 7-472) 
Sec. 7-307. - Filing of consents to route. 
    With the application for a permit to move a building, there shall be filed the consents to the routing by the telephone company, the city utilities, the fire operations division, the police operations division and the public works department, and, where the route crosses railroad property, consent must be obtained from the railroad involved. 
(Code 2017, § 7-473; Ord. No. 2941, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 7-308. - Filing of consents to trimming of trees. 
    If there are trees which do not have branches that extend into the public right-of-way but need to be trimmed because of the moving of a building, the permit applicant shall secure and file the written consent of the owner of the trees. If the trees extend into the public right-of-way, the additional written consent of the city arborist must be obtained. The consent shall be based on the fact of whether or not serious damage or injury will result to the trees. 
(Code 2017, § 7-474) 
Sec. 7-309. - Applicant to show that owner of building is apprised of total cost of move. 
    The building mover, if other than the owner, shall, when applying for a permit to move a building, submit evidence that the owner of the building to be moved is aware of the total of all costs and charges that will be incurred as a result of the moving, either through a signed agreement or a copy of a notification to the owner signed by both the mover and the owner. 
(Code 2017, § 7-475) 
Sec. 7-310. - Fee. 
(a)  The application for a permit to move a building shall be accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as established by resolution from time to time. 
(b)  If a building or structure is moved from the City to Waterloo, Iowa, or to Evansdale, Iowa, or if a building or structure is to be moved from Waterloo, Iowa, or Evansdale, Iowa, into this city, the permit fee shall be equally divided between this city and the other city involved. In either event, only one permit fee shall be charged, and the permit fee shall be paid to the city from which the building or structure is being moved. 
(Code 2017, § 7-476) 
Sec. 7-311. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of the application for a permit to move a building, payment of the fee therefor and filing of bond, and upon approval of the proposed move by the city arborist, chief of police and the director of public works, the permit sought shall be issued by the building official. 
(Code 2017, § 7-477; Ord. No. 2941, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 7-312. - Denial. 
(a)  When, in the judgment of the police operations division, the city arborist or the director of public works, the proposed building movement will result in an undue hazard to traffic, or undue damage to streets, avenues, boulevards, thoroughfares, highways, curbs, sidewalks, trees or other public or private property, or where it is determined by the building official that the relocation of the building is not in the best interests of the surrounding property owners due to age of the structure or the structure's architecture not being compatible with the existing buildings, the permit sought shall be denied, and the reasons therefor endorsed upon the application. 
(b)  The permit to move a building shall also be denied if the structure will not comply with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state relating to electrical and plumbing requirements of new structures, unless the owner has obtained a permit to correct the violations, or if the power or telephone company refused to consent to the operations, or if the structure will not comply with the zoning chapters within the proposed location. 
(Code 2017, § 7-478; Ord. No. 2941, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 7-313-7-342. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-343. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a building consisting of less than 120 square feet in area, on a property with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure, which has no basement, crawl space, or other depression from existing grade of more than 12 inches in depth. 
    Building means any structure, except an accessory structure, which is used for residential, business, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, recreational or other purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 7-479; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-344. - Permit required to demolish or remove building. 
    Any owner of property in the city that desires to demolish, tear down or remove a building, including a building that has been totally or partially destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm or other casualty, other than by the moving of the building in accordance with division 1 of this article, must first secure a permit therefor from the department of community development of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 7-480; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-345. - Application and fee. 
(a)  A property owner shall submit an application for a permit prior to commencing work on the demolition or removal of the building. 
(b)  The application for the permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official, and shall be filed in the office of the building official. The application shall contain such information as may be required by the building official. 
(c)  The application for a permit to demolish or remove a building shall be accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as is established by the city council resolution from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 7-481; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-346. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of the application for a permit to demolish or remove a building, and payment of the fee therefor, and upon approval of the application by the building official, the permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(Code 2017, § 7-482; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-347. - Denial. 
    If for any reason the building official determines that the application should be denied, the building official shall deny the application and state the reasons for such denial in writing endorsed upon the application or, in the alternative, the building official may grant the application for demolition or removal of the building, conditioned upon reasonable requirements relating to the public health or the safety of persons or property. 
(Code 2017, § 7-483; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-348. - Filling and grading of site. 
    Within 60 days following demolition of the building, the property owner shall either submit an application for a building permit for a new building or structure on the property, or shall fill and grade the site to a topographic elevation equal to or level with the surrounding adjacent natural grade elevations. 
(Code 2017, § 7-484; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-349. - Seeding of site. 
    Within 30 days of final grading of the site, or at the earliest opportunity thereafter during the growing season which is conducive to plant germination, the owner shall seed the site with grass or similar vegetative ground cover acceptable to the building official. The property owner shall take reasonable measures to ensure the proper germination of the planted vegetation, and shall thereafter maintain the property in accordance with all applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 2017, § 7-485; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-350. - Assessment of costs to property. 
    In the event the owner fails to fill and grade the site, seed the site with grass or vegetative ground cover, or fails to ensure proper germination of the vegetation on the property, the city may then perform said work, levy the costs thereof as assessments, which shall thereafter be a lien on the property, and the city clerk shall certify such assessments to the county auditor as assessments to be paid in installments as provided by law. 
(Code 2017, § 7-486; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-351. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any person who shall, in the application for a permit required by this division, make any false or untrue statement, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this division, including compliance with any conditions placed upon approval of the application for a permit, shall have his permit revoked by the building official. 
(Code 2017, § 7-487; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Sec. 7-352. - Application to existing property. 
    The provisions of sections 7-348 and 7-349 shall be applicable to all properties in the city, regardless whether the demolition of any building on any such properties occurred prior to or subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, this division being for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Code 2017, § 7-488; Ord. No. 2485, § 2, 8-23-2004) 
Secs. 7-353-7-377. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-378. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard potable water supplies by preventing backflow into public water systems. 
(Code 2017, § 7-500; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-379. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative authority means for the purpose of this section, the administrative authority shall be the board of trustees of the municipal water utility of the city, for backflow prevention assemblies for containment, and the city council of the city, for backflow prevention by isolation, acting through such persons or agencies they shall designate. 
    Air gap water distribution means an air gap water distribution is the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying potable water to the flood level rim of any tank, vat, or fixture. 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment means a backflow prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California-Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met the requirements of ANSI-AWWA standard C510, current revision, "Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI-AWWA Standard C511, current revision, "Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies" for containment. The listing shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in a fire protection system means a backflow prevention assembly to be used in a fire protection system which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL), and the requirement of the fire code and the building code of the city, in addition to the requirements in the definition of the term "approved backflow prevention assembly for containment." Devices sized smaller than 21/2 inches which have not been listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if they meet the requirements of the fire code and the building code of the city. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the water purveyors approved public water supply such as, but not limited to a private well, pond, or river. 
    Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste, also defined as high hazard. 
    Cross connection means any actual or potential connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or tank, receptacle, equipment, or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted, and contaminated water, or other substance, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition. 
    Customer means the owner, operator, or occupant of a building or property which has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water system which has a water service from a public water system. 
    Degree of hazard means the rating of a cross connection or water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check valves, four properly located test cocks and two isolation valves. 
    High hazard cross connections means a cross connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste. 
    Isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service entrance. 
    Low hazard cross connection means a cross connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a degree which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. 
    Multiple family residential units means a building designed to be used as residential occupancy for three or more dwelling units, each having separate plumbing facilities. 
    Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. The term "pollution" is defined as low hazard. 
    Potable water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes, and meets the requirements of the health authority having jurisdiction. 
    Privately owned customer water system piping means water service line pipes and plumbing fixtures connected to the public water system of the city which are extended to the customer's property and into the customer's building for service to the customer and are regulatory controlled by which is defined in the city. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check valves, a different pressure relief valve, four properly located test cocks, and two isolation valves. 
    Registered backflow prevention assembly technician means a person who is registered by the state of to test or repair backflow prevention assemblies and report on the condition of those assemblies. 
    Single-unit dwelling means a structure containing one dwelling unit. 
    Thermal expansion means volumetric increase of water due to heating resulting in increased pressure in a closed system. 
    Water service means depending on the context, water service is the physical connection between a public water system and, a customer's building, property, or private water system or the act of providing potable water to a customer. 
(Code 2017, § 7-501; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-380. - Administrative authority. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article only, the administrative authority shall be the board of trustees of the municipal water utility of the city for backflow prevention assemblies for containment and the city council of the city for backflow prevention by isolation, acting through such persons or agencies they shall designate. 
(b)  The administrative authority shall have the right to enter, with the consent of the customer or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for possible cross-connections. 
(c)  The administrative authority may approve training programs for backflow prevention assembly technicians and register backflow prevention assembly technicians who successfully complete an approved training program. 
(d)  The administrative authority may collect fees for the administration of this program. Fees shall be established by resolution of the board of trustees of the municipal water utility and city council from time to time. 
(e)  The administrative authority shall maintain records of cross connection hazard surveys, and the installation, testing and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies for containment purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 7-502; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-381. - New water service. 
(a)  Plans shall be submitted to the administrative authority for review of all new water services to determine size and degree of hazard. 
(b)  The administrative authority shall determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard. 
(c)  The administrative authority shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation of water service. 
(Code 2017, § 7-503; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-382. - Existing water services. 
(a)  Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water services for the purpose of this section. 
(b)  The administrative authority shall publish and make available to each customer a copy of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard. 
(c)  After publication of the standards, the administrative authority shall notify customers whose premises are classified as single-unit residential in writing of the provisions of this article and shall require compliance therewith. 
(d)  Within six months after publication of the standards, customers whose premises are not classified as single-unit residential shall complete and return to the administrative authority a cross-connection hazard survey to be used to determine the type of containment device. 
(e)  The administrative authority shall, on the basis of information received from customers or gathered through on-premises investigations or surveys, determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard. 
(f)  Within the time frame specified in writing by the administrative authority, the customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for containment required by the administrative authority. 
(g)  For existing water services, the administrative authority may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When the high hazard cross connections are found, the administrative authority shall, at its sole discretion: 
(1)  Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow; or 
(2)  Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly for containment required by the administrative authority has been installed. 
(h)  Failure of the administrative authority to notify a customer that they are believed to have a high hazard cross connection and that they shall install backflow prevention assemblies for containment in no way relieves a customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 7-504; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-383. - Customer. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross connections exist without approved backflow protection within his premises starting at the point of service from the public potable water system. 
(b)  The customer shall at his own expense cause installation, operation, testing, and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the administrative authority. 
(c)  The customer shall ensure the administrative authority is provided with copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly on the approved form within 15 days after testing and/or repairs are completed. 
(d)  In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify the municipal utility of the city and the city building inspection division of the incident and take immediate action to confine the contamination or pollution. 
(Code 2017, § 7-505; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-384. - Required backflow prevention assemblies for containment; water services. 
(a)  An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for water services having one or more cross connections which the administrative authority classifies as high hazard. 
(b)  An approved double check valve assembly is required for water services having no high hazard cross-connections but having one or more cross connections which the administrative authority has classified as low hazard. 
(c)  Every water service which is required to install a backflow prevention assembly at point of entry will be required to follow section 608.3 of the uniform plumbing code at time of installation. 
(Code 2017, § 7-506; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-385. - Required backflow prevention assemblies for containment, fire protection systems. 
(a)  A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on all new and existing fire protection systems which the administrative authority determines to have any of the following: 
(1)  Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises for pumper connection. 
(2)  Interconnections with auxiliary supplies, such as reservoirs, rivers, ponds, wells, mills, or other industrial water systems. 
(3)  Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection system. 
(4)  Combined industrial or domestic with high hazard and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks. 
(5)  Any other facility, connection, or condition which may cause contamination. 
(b)  A double check valve assembly shall be required for all other fire protection systems. The double check valve shall be required on all new systems at the time of installation and on existing systems at the time that they are upgraded. 
(c)  Submittal of proposed backflow prevention devices to the administrative authority does not relieve the designer or sprinkler contractor of the responsibility of submitting plans, including backflow prevention devices, to the fire marshal for approval. 
(Code 2017, § 7-507; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-386. - Registration of backflow prevention assembly technician. 
    A backflow prevention assembly technician registered by the state shall include his registration number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-508; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-387. - Registered backflow prevention assembly technician noncompliance. 
(a)  The registration of a technician will be recommended for revocation or suspension for a period of up to two years for noncompliance with this article. Further action will be taken as prescribed by law to prevent further noncompliance. 
(b)  Any of the following conditions constitute noncompliance: 
(1)  Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies. 
(3)  Failure to meet registration requirements. 
(4)  Related unethical practices. 
(Code 2017, § 7-509; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-388. - Installation of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  Installation of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a licensed and bonded plumbing contractor of the city with proper permits. 
(b)  The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be installed in horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from containment or pollution between the backflow prevention assembly and the water main. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding. 
(d)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits. 
(e)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing. Those devices used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician prior to service being reactivated. 
(f)  If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for containment. 
(g)  Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain. 
(h)  No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a place where it would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an electrical panel or above ceiling level. 
(i)  If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable to the customer, another backflow prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow need during the time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping. All such installations shall be at the customer's expense. 
(j)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing as stated in section 603 of the uniform plumbing code. 
(k)  All shut-off valves conform with the current edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control (University of Southern California) requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of installation. Ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two inches and smaller and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two inches. 
(Code 2017, § 7-510; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-389. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician. The costs of test required in subsections (b) through (e) of this section shall be borne by the customer. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and tested and inspected at least annually. 
(c)  Backflow prevention assemblies which are in place, but have been out of operation for more than three months, shall be tested before being put back into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications shall be tested before being put into operation each season. 
(d)  Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for noncompliance, the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be retested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician immediately after repair or replacement. 
(e)  The administrative authority may require backflow prevention assemblies to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement. 
(f)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the administrative authority on the form provided by the administrative authority within 15 days of the test. 
(g)  The administrative authority may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem necessary to verify test procedures and results. 
(Code 2017, § 7-511; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-390. - Repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by registered backflow prevention assembly technicians. 
(b)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during repair or maintenance and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts. 
(c)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the administrative authority on the form provided by the administrative authority within 15 days of the repair. The report shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. 
(d)  Any time fire services are discontinued for a period of time longer than necessary to test the device, the tester is required to notify the fire marshal's office that the fire services are shut off for repairs. 
(Code 2017, § 7-512; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Sec. 7-391. - Customer noncompliance. 
    The water service may be discontinued in the case of noncompliance with this section. Noncompliance includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refusal to allow the administrative authority access to the property to inspect for cross connections. 
(2)  Removal of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(3)  Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(4)  Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross-connections exist. 
(5)  Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(6)  Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly as required by the administrative authority. 
(7)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-513; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 6-23-1997) 
Secs. 7-392-7-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 7-411. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the city mechanical code, may be so cited, and may be referred to in this article as the "code" or the "mechanical code." 
(Code 2017, § 7-550; Ord. No. 2869, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-412. - Purpose and scope; definitions; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to adopt a mechanical code by reference, to provide for the inspection and regulation of mechanical installations, issuance of permits, the collection of fees, and to provide penalties for violations of this article, all in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The term "mechanical systems and equipment," as used in this article, shall mean all heating, ventilating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems and equipment. 
(c)  The provisions of this code shall apply to and govern all uses, installations, alterations, repairs, removals, replacements, connections, disconnections, and maintenance of all mechanical systems and equipment within the city. 
(d)  Any and all mechanical systems and equipment shall be installed, altered, repaired, replaced and maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations as set forth in this article. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(Code 2017, § 7-551; Ord. No. 2869, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-413. - International Mechanical Code adoption. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, including chapters 1 through 15, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference and is effective as if fully set forth in this article. 
(b)  An official copy of the mechanical code as adopted, including a certificate by the city clerk as to its adoption and the effective date, is on file in the office of the city clerk, in either hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 7-552; Ord. No. 2869, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-414. - Amendments to International Mechanical Code. 
    The provisions of this section specify certain amendments by addition, deletion or substitution, of the 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (hereinafter the "IMC"). Where this section states that a section, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted, only the specific section, subsection, enumeration or exception is deleted. Where this section states that a part, section or subsection is deleted in its entirety, all references listed thereafter associated with the specific part of section (with subsections, enumerations and exceptions) or subsection (with enumerations and exceptions) are deleted. 
General IMC Amendments 
(1)  All references in the IMC to the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby deleted, and are replaced with a reference to National Fire Protection Association Standard 54 (hereinafter "NFPA 54"), which is hereby adopted by this reference into this Code. 
(2)  All references in the IMC to the International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted, and are replaced with a reference to the Uniform Plumbing Code, which is adopted by reference in section 7-169. 
(3)  The administrative authority for NFPA 54 shall be Cedar Falls Utilities and the inspection services division of the department of community development of the city. 
2015 IMC Chapter 1 Amendments 
(4)  Section 102.2, Existing Installations , is amended by adding the following thereto: 
If an existing building is damaged by fire or is otherwise altered in such a manner as to require the replacement of 50 percent or more of the mechanical equipment, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for new buildings. If the type of occupancy of an existing building is partially or entirely changed, the mechanical system shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article for the new type of occupancy. 
(5)  Subsection 106.4.3, Expiration , is deleted in its entirety and the following section 106.4.3, Expiration, is substituted in its place: 
106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire 12 months from the date of issue, unless the application is accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the permit may be issued for the time period of the construction schedule, with the approval of the building official. If the work has not been completed, including all required inspections, by the expiration date of the permit, no further work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner, or the owner's agent, and payment of the renewal fee has been received. The building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than six months each, without payment of the renewal fee. Extensions shall be requested by the owner, or owner's agent, and justifiable cause demonstrated by the owner. 
(6)  Subsection 106.4.4 is deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 106.5, Fees , is deleted in its entirety, and replaced with the following new section 106.5 Fees: 
Section 106.5 Fees. 
106.5.1 General Fees. Fees will be charged for new mechanical installations, replacement of old mechanical installations with new installations, or change of location of mechanical systems, and for the removal of mechanical fixtures. 
106.5.2 The schedule of permit fees shall be as established annually by resolution of the city council. 
106.5.3 Payment of fees for permits shall be made on or before the tenth day of the month following the date of the statement from the mechanical Inspector. All fees shall be delivered to the mechanical Inspector, and be payable to the city. The mechanical inspector shall receipt for the fees in duplicate, and one of the copies shall be given to the applicant. 
106.5.4 Failure to comply with subsection 106.5.3 of this section will automatically require the person to cease work. 
(8)  Subsections 108.1, Unlawful Acts , through 108.4, Violation Penalties , are hereby deleted in their entirety and the following new subsections 108.1 through 108.4.3 are substituted therefor: 
108.1 It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use or maintain any mechanical systems or equipment in violation of any of the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article, or to cause or permit the same to be done in violation thereof. 
108.2 It shall be unlawful for any person to do any work on any mechanical systems or equipment without having the requisite state-issued license therefor, or in violation of the restrictions imposed on said license, all as provided for in this article or the code adopted by this article. 
108.3 It shall be unlawful for any person to lend his, her or its state-issued license to, or to borrow the license of, another person in connection with any work on mechanical systems or equipment described in this article, or the code adopted by this article. 
108.4 Penalty; abatement of violations. 
108.4.1 Any person who violates any provision of this article or the code adopted by this article, or who performs any work on any mechanical systems or equipment within the city contrary to the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article, or who fails to perform any act or duty required by this article or the code adopted by this article, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction. Upon entry of a judgment by a court for such municipal infraction, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). Such judgment may also include an order of court to abate or correct the violation or violations, as authorized by section 1-9. 
108.4.2 Any work on a mechanical system or equipment within the city which is performed or done in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article or the code adopted by this article shall, in addition to the penalties described in subsection 108.4.1, be corrected in accordance with the provisions of the code adopted in this article. 
108.4.3 Any person violating any provision of this article may be subject to an additional civil penalty and possible denial, revocation or suspension of license pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 105. 
(9)  Section 108.6, Abatement of Violation , is deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 108.7, Unsafe Mechanical Systems , is hereby amended by adding the following at the end of the section: 
108.7.4 Abatement required. Any building, structure or premises that is unhealthful, unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to human life by reason of inadequate maintenance, obsolescence, overloading, or defective mechanical system or equipment, or mechanical system or equipment not conforming with this article, is hereby declared illegal, and shall be abated by removal, repair or replacement in accordance with the procedures in this division. 
108.7.5 Notice. Whenever the mechanical inspector shall find any building, structure or premises to be unsafe as defined in this division, the inspector shall, in accordance with established procedure for legal notices, give notice to the person responsible for the building, structure or premises. Such notice shall require those responsible to correct such condition in accordance with the provisions of this article, within a stated time. 
108.7.6 Vacation of premises on failure to comply with notice. Upon failure to comply with the written notice as set forth in section 108.7.5, the mechanical inspector is hereby authorized to vacate the building, structure or premises and close the building, structure or premises to further use until unsafe conditions are abated; however, when appeal has been filed under section 109.1.4, the vacation shall be stayed until the appeal has been heard. 
108.7.7 Emergency vacation of premises. In case of emergency, where the occupants of a building, structure or premises are in imminent danger because of an unsafe or sanitary condition, the mechanical inspector shall order the occupants thereof to vacate immediately, and such order shall not be stayed by an appeal. 
(11)  Subsection 109.1.1, Limitation of Authority , is amended by adding the following subsections 109.1.1.1 through 109.1.1.3: 
109.1.1.1 The board of mechanical appeals shall consist of five members: one member of the city council, appointed each year, one owner, officer, director, shareholder or employee of a mechanical contracting company, one master mechanical license holder, one journeyman mechanical license holder, and one public member, each appointed for a period of four years. The mechanical inspector shall serve as secretary to the board but is nonvoting. Appointments are made by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. Should a vacancy in the board occur, it shall be the duty of the secretary of the board to notify the mayor of the vacancy, and the mayor and city council shall, at a regular meeting, as soon as possible thereafter, appoint a new member to the board to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
109.1.1.2 Expiration of appointments, except for the city councilmember, shall be staggered so that one member is appointed or reappointed each year. Terms of appointment shall expire on December 31. If the mayor and city council fail to appoint at the scheduled time, the expired term member will be held over until re-appointment or replacement. 
109.1.1.3 In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the board shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the board upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the board on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the board until both the expiration of his current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
(12)  Section 109 is amended by adding thereto the following subsections 109.1.2 through 109.1.4: 
109.1.2 Meetings; Records. 
(1)  All meetings of the board of mechanical examiners and appeals are open to the public and shall be held in the council chambers, or other location indicated in a public notice posted 24 hours prior to any meeting. 
(2)  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transacting of all business, but any action taken by the board shall require a majority vote of all members of the board. 
(3)  The board shall annually elect one of its members as chairman of the board. 
(4)  The secretary of the board shall keep a record of the board meetings. 
109.1.3 Compensation of Members. 
The members of the board of mechanical examiners and appeals shall serve without compensation. 
109.1.4 Appeals. 
109.1.4.1 Any person shall have the right to register an appeal with the board of mechanical appeals for a review of any decision of the mechanical inspector, provided that such appeal is made in writing within ten days after having been notified of such decision by the mechanical inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal, the board of mechanical appeals shall proceed to determine whether the action of the mechanical inspector complies with this article, and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings within ten days of receiving the appeal. No appeal shall be considered unless the appeal is filed within a period of ten days. The board of appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
109.1.4.2 An appeal to the city council of any ruling of the board shall be made by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the ruling being appealed. The council shall give the appellant and the board a minimum of five days written notice by certified mail of the date, time and location of hearing of said appeal. All interested persons shall be given the opportunity to be heard at such hearing and the city council may affirm, modify or overrule the action of the board based upon the evidence submitted before the city council. 
(13)  Subsections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted in their entirety. 
(14)  The following new section 111.0, Mechanical Inspector , is added to chapter 1: 
111.0 Mechanical Inspector. 
111.1 Office Created; Appointment; Qualifications. 
(1)  The office of the mechanical inspector, within the inspection services division of the department of community development of the city, is hereby created, and such inspector is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to inspect any and all buildings or structures, public and private, and, as provided in this article, to condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe condition for safety to life and property, all mechanical systems, equipment and related structures, and to control the disposition and arrangement of such equipment and systems so that persons and property shall not be in danger therefrom. The terms "Authority Having Jurisdiction" and "mechanical inspector," as used in this article or in the code adopted by this article, refer to the same person and are used interchangeably. 
(2)  The mechanical inspector shall be appointed by the director of community development, after recommendation of the building official, and shall be directly responsible to the building official. 
(3)  The appointee shall: 
(a)  Be qualified in the mechanical trade and shall have at least ten years of practical experience in the mechanical trade or five years of experience as a mechanical inspector, or, in lieu of such experience, shall have a combination of trade school, practical experience and inspection experience considered by the city council as being suitable for minimum requirements, and shall have had two years of practical mechanical experience; 
(b)  Be possessed of such executive ability as requisite for the performance of required duties and have thorough knowledge of the standards, materials and methods used in the installation of mechanical equipment; 
(c)  Be well versed in improved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the state relating to mechanical work and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and in the uniform mechanical code; and 
(d)  As a minimum, hold a current state journeyman mechanical license, or shall be required to pass an examination for journeyman mechanical prior to appointment by the community development department. 
111.2 Supervision by Building Official. 
The mechanical inspector shall work fully under the supervision and jurisdiction of the building official and take all orders and perform any duties or services that may be designated by the building official pertaining to mechanical inspections or other related duties. 
111.3 Conflict of Interest. 
It shall be unlawful for the mechanical inspector or assistant mechanical inspectors to engage in the business of the sales, installation or maintenance of mechanical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city, at any time, while holding the office provided for in this division. 
111.4 Records. 
(1)  The mechanical inspector shall keep or cause to be kept records of all permits issued and inspections made and all other business of his office. The records shall be available to the public. 
(2)  The mechanical inspector shall keep an accounting record for the billing of permit fees. 
111.5 Interpretation of regulations. 
The mechanical inspector shall have full power to exercise judgment in a reasonable and proper manner and rule accordingly on all special cases in regard to any matters in this article or not specifically covered thereby, subject to section 110.1.4, pertaining to appeals. 
(15)  The following new section 112.0, Licenses and Examinations , is added to chapter 1: 
112.0 Licenses and Examinations. 
112.1 Licenses Required. 
112.1.1 Unless otherwise specified, any reference to licenses in this article shall mean a license issued by the State of Iowa board of mechanical examiners and appeals. 
112.1.2 No person or business entity shall engage in any business involving installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of mechanical systems or equipment within the scope of this article unless such person has obtained a master mechanical contractor's business license issued by the state. 
112.2 Master mechanical business registration. 
Any person who desires to apply for a mechanical permit shall make written application therefor to the mechanical inspector on forms obtained from the mechanical inspector. 
New master mechanical contractors will be required to pay a one-time registration fee to be entered into the permit system. Fees shall be set by the city council. 
112.2.1 A mechanical contracting business shall show proof of a state issued master contractor license with the State of Iowa and shall execute and file with the city building official a certificate of insurance written by a company authorized to transact business in the state, in limits established annually by resolution of the city council; said certificate to be written on a standard form and carrying an endorsement naming the city, and its employees as additional insured's as their interests may appear, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required of such contractor by any ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. It shall be a further condition of said certificate of insurance that the obligor will hold the city harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetency on the part of such contractor, his agents or employees in the performance of the work done under a license or permit issued upon the filing of said certificate. 
112.2.2 Said certificate of insurance shall be issued by December 31 of each year and shall be refiled on or before said date for each subsequent year, and shall be in continuous full force and effect. It is the intent and purpose of said certificate of insurance to also bind the individual, company, firm, association or partnership, whether it be trade name, corporation, or other business association or arrangement with which the principal is associated. 
2015 IMC Chapter 4 Amendments 
(16)  Subsection 403.3.2.1, Outdoor Air for Dwelling Units , is deleted, and replaced with the following new Subsection 403.3.2.1: 
403.3.2.1 Outdoor air for dwelling units. Buildings regulated by the International Residential Code shall be required to provide outdoor air ventilation by means of a Heat Recovery Ventilator or Energy Recovery Ventilator. 
2015 IMC Chapter 5 Amendments 
(17)  Subsection 508.1, Makeup Air , through subsection 508.1.2, Air Balance , are deleted and replaced with the following subsection 508.1, makeup air: 
508.1 Makeup Air. Replacement air quality shall be adequate to prevent negative pressures in the commercial cooking area from exceeding 0.02 inch water column (4.98kPa). Make up air units shall be dedicated to the kitchen area. When its fire extinguishing system discharges, makeup air supplied to the hoods shall be shut off. 
Exception 1: With prior approval the authority having jurisdiction may waive the dedicated makeup air requirement. 
508.1.1 All makeup air shall be capable of maintaining a minimum of 60 degrees in the occupied space. Cooling is not required. All makeup air shall be interlocked with the hood's exhaust system, so that if the makeup air is not operating, the exhaust will not operate. 
508.1.2 A nationally recognized company certified in testing and balancing, such as National Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB) or its equivalent as approved by the authority having jurisdiction, shall balance all systems. 
2015 IMC Chapter 6 Amendments 
(18)  Subsection 603.6.1.1, Flexible Duct Length , is deleted and replaced with the following subsection 603.6.1.1: 
603.6.1.1, Flexible Duct Length. Factory made air ducts (flex pipe) at lengths greater than six feet shall require approval of the authority having jurisdiction. 
NFPA 54 Amendments 
(19)  Chapter 10 of NFPA 54 , incorporated by reference by section 1 of General IMC Amendments, is amended as follows: 
1.  Section 10.22, Room heaters, is deleted in its entirety. 
2.  Subsection 12.3.2, Appliances not required to be vented, is amended by deleting subsections 8 and 10. 
(Code 2017, § 7-553; Ord. No. 2869, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 7-415. - Disclaimer. 
    The rules adopted by this article shall not be construed to exempt the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any mechanical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized in this article or the certificates of approval issued, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-554; Ord. No. 2869, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 7-416-7-443. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION 

Sec. 7-444. - Conversion of existing structure to horizontal property regime (condominium). 
    When all of the owners of real property or all of the lessees under a lease of real property desire to submit a parcel of real property located in the city, upon which an existing building or structure is located, to the horizontal property regime established by Iowa Code ch. 499B, the declarant shall file the declaration of the horizontal property regime with the city clerk of the city at least 60 days before the declaration is recorded in the office of the county recorder, to enable the city to establish that the existing building or structure meets the applicable building code requirements of the city, as specified in Iowa Code § 499B.20 and as described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-560; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 2-23-2009) 
Sec. 7-445. - Filing of as-built plans. 
    In compliance with all requirements of Iowa Code ch. 499B and this article, the declarant shall submit to the city clerk at the time of filing of the declaration a full and exact copy of "as-built" plans of the existing structure in sufficient detail to allow the city building official to determine whether the existing structure meets the building code requirements of the city which are in effect as of the date of the proposed conversion of the existing structure to the horizontal property regime, together with the applicable condominium conversion fee, in such amount as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 7-561; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 2-23-2009) 
Sec. 7-446. - Compliance with city building code requirements. 
    In order to satisfy the requirements of this article, the existing building or structure which is to be submitted to the horizontal property regime must meet all city building code requirements which are in effect as of the date of filing of the declaration with the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 7-562; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 2-23-2009) 
Sec. 7-447. - Inspection of structure. 
    Upon the filing of such a declaration with the city clerk, the city clerk shall promptly furnish a copy of the declaration, including the as built plans, to the city building official. The city building official shall promptly conduct all necessary site and building inspections to determine whether the existing structure meets all city building code requirements described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-563; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 2-23-2009) 
Sec. 7-448. - Issuance of certificate of compliance or noncompliance. 
    Within 60 days of the date of filing of such declaration with the city clerk, the city building official shall either: 
(1)  Issue to the declarant a certificate of compliance of the existing structure, if the existing structure meets all city building code requirements described in this article; or 
(2)  Issue to the declarant a certificate of noncompliance of the existing structure, stating with specificity wherein the existing structure does not meet the city building code requirements described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-564; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 2-23-2009) 
Secs. 7-449-7-479. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONVERSION TO HOUSING COOPERATIVE 

Sec. 7-480. - Conversion of existing structure to housing cooperative. 
    When a corporation that is formed as a housing cooperative under Iowa Code ch. 499A desires to acquire title to real property located in the city in order to establish a housing cooperative with respect to an existing building or structure which is located on such real property, the housing cooperative shall file a statement of intent to acquire the real property with the city clerk of the city at least 60 days before the deed conveying the real property to the housing cooperative is recorded in the office of the Black Hawk County Recorder, to enable the city to establish that the existing building or structure located on said real property meets the applicable building code requirements of the city as described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-565; Ord. No. 2790, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 7-481. - Filing of as-built plans. 
    The housing cooperative shall submit to the city clerk, at the time of filing of the statement of intent described in section 7-480, a full and exact copy of as built plans of the existing building or structure in sufficient detail to allow the city building official to determine whether the existing building or structure meets the building code requirements of the city which are in effect as of the date of the filing of such statement of intent. Such statement of intent shall also be accompanied by the applicable housing cooperative conversion fee, in such amount as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 7-566; Ord. No. 2790, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 7-482. - Compliance with city building code requirements. 
    In order to satisfy the requirements of this article, the existing building or structure which is to be converted to a housing cooperative must meet all city building code requirements which are in effect as of the date of filing of such statement of intent with the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 7-567; Ord. No. 2790, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 7-483. - Inspection of structure. 
    Upon the filing of such statement of intent with the city clerk, the city clerk shall promptly furnish a copy of such statement, including the as built plans, to the city building official. The city building official shall promptly conduct all necessary site and building inspections to determine whether the existing structure meets all city building code requirements described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-568; Ord. No. 2790, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 7-484. - Issuance of certificate of compliance or noncompliance. 
    Within 60 days of the date of filing of such statement of intent with the city clerk, the city building official shall either: 
(1)  Issue to the housing cooperative which has filed such statement of intent a certificate of compliance of the existing structure, if the existing structure meets all city building code requirements described in this article; or 
(2)  Issue to the housing cooperative which has filed such statement of intent a certificate of noncompliance of the existing structure, stating with specificity wherein the existing structure does not meet the city building code requirements described in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 7-569; Ord. No. 2790, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 8-1. - Wards and precincts. 
(a)  Division within city limits; boundaries defined. All the territory embraced within the city limits shall be and the same is hereby divided into five wards, each having three precincts, said wards to be called First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Wards, respectively, and the boundaries of said wards and precincts shall be the same are hereby established and defined as set out in this chapter. 
(b)  The First Ward. The First Ward shall embrace all the territory within the city limits described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the northeast corner of the city limits or the centerline of Leversee Road; thence southerly along a north-south leg of the east city limits line or the centerline of Leversee Road to the centerline of Lincoln Street; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line and along the southerly extension of Leversee Road to a westerly-southwesterly leg of the city limits; thence westerly-southwesterly along said city limits line to the centerline of the main channel of the Cedar River; thence northwesterly along the centerline of the main channel of the Cedar River to the centerline of Highway 58; thence west-southwesterly along the centerline of Highway 58 to the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Waterloo Road to the centerline of E. Fourteenth Street; thence southwesterly and westerly along the centerline of E. Fourteenth Street to the centerline of Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street to the centerline of Iowa Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Iowa Street to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. First Street; thence northerly along the extension of Hudson Road to the centerline of Theimer Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Theimer Street to the centerline of Ellen Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ellen Street to the centerline of South Park Road; thence westerly along the centerline of South Park Road to the centerline of Baker Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Baker Drive to the centerline of Forrest Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Forrest Road to the centerline of Westwood Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Westwood Drive to the centerline of River Bluff Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of River Bluff Drive to the centerline of Ravine Drive; thence northeasterly along the extension of Ravine Drive to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence northwesterly along the main channel of the Cedar River routing westerly of Deadman's Island to the intersection with an east-west leg of the city limits; thence easterly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of Fitkin Road or the north line of the city limits; thence easterly along the north line of the city limits to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct 1 of the First Ward. Precinct 1 of the First Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the northeast corner of the city limits or the centerline of Leversee Road; thence southerly along a north-south leg of the east city limits line or the centerline of Leversee Road to the centerline of Lincoln Street; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line and along the southerly extension of Leversee Road to a westerly-southwesterly leg of the city limits; thence westerly-southwesterly along said city limits line to the centerline of the main channel of the Cedar River; thence northwesterly along the main channel of the Cedar River routing westerly of Deadman's Island to the intersection with an east-west leg of the city limits; thence easterly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of Fitkin Road or the north line of the city limits; thence easterly along the north line of the city limits to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct 2 of the First Ward. Precinct 2 of the First Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of Franklin Street and W. First Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. First Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of W. Twelfth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to the centerline of College Street; thence southerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. First Street; thence northerly along the extension of Hudson Road to the centerline of Theimer Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Theimer Street to the centerline of Ellen Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ellen Street to the centerline of South Park Road; thence westerly along the centerline of South Park Road to the centerline of Baker Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Baker Drive to the centerline of Forrest Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Forrest Road to the centerline of Westwood Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Westwood Drive to the centerline of River Bluff Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of River Bluff Drive to the centerline of Ravine Drive; thence northeasterly along the extension of Ravine Drive to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence southeasterly along the centerline of the main channel of the Cedar River to the centerline of Center Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Center Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct 3 of the First Ward. Precinct 3 of the First Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of Franklin Street and W. First Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Franklin Street/Center Street to the centerline of the main channel of the Cedar River and the centerline of the Center Street bridge; thence southeasterly along the main channel of the Cedar River to the centerline of Highway 58; thence west-southwesterly along the centerline of Highway 58 to the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Waterloo Road to the Centerline of E. Fourteenth Street; thence southwesterly and westerly along the centerline of E. Fourteenth Street to the centerline of Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street to the centerline of Iowa Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Iowa Street to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the centerline of College Street; thence northerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of W. Twelfth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of W. First Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. First Street to the point of beginning. 
(c)  The Second Ward. The Second Ward shall embrace all of the territory within the city limits described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the centerline of Greenhill Road and a north-south leg of the city limits or the east city limits line; thence southerly along the said east city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue to a north-south leg of the city limits line; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the south city limits line; thence westerly along said south city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence easterly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of Viking Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Viking Road to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits to the centerline of W. 27th Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. 27th Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of University Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of College Street; thence northerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of Grove Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Boulder Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Boulder Drive to the centerline of Idaho Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Idaho Road to the centerline of Tucson Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Tucson Drive to the centerline of Utah Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Utah Drive to the centerline of Dallas Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Dallas Drive to the centerline of Oregon Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Oregon Road to the centerline of South Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Greenhill Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Also, Cedar Falls Ward 2 precinct 2 shall consist of all Cedar Falls Township, or bounded by a line beginning at the intersection of North Butler Road and Westbrook Road and proceeding east along Westbrook Road until it intersects the corporate limits of the city, thence proceeding south and then west and then south and then east and then south and then east and then south and then west and then south and then west and then south and then east and then south along the corporate limits of the city until it intersects W. Ridgeway Avenue, thence proceeding west along W. Ridgeway Avenue to its intersection with University Avenue, thence proceeding west on University Avenue until it intersects North Butler Road, thence proceeding north along North Butler Road to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct 1 of the Second Ward. Precinct 1 of the Second Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of Hudson Road and W. 27th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the intersection of University Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of University Avenue to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. 27th Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. 27th Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct 2 of the Second Ward. Precinct 2 of the Second Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: 
a.  Beginning at the centerlines of University Avenue and Hudson Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of College Street; thence northerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of Tremont Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Tremont Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of S. Main Street to where it intersects with the centerline of U.S. Highway 58; thence southwesterly and southerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 58 to the centerline of Greenhill Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to an east-west leg of the city limits or the south city limits line; thence westerly along said south city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence easterly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of Viking Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Viking Road to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to the centerline of University Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the point of beginning. 
b.  Also, Cedar Falls Ward 2 precinct 2 shall consist of all Cedar Falls Township, or bounded by a line beginning at the intersection of North Butler Road and Westbrook Road and proceeding east along Westbrook Road until it intersects the corporate limits of the city, thence proceeding south and then west and then south and then east and then south and then east and then south and then west and then south and then west and then south and then east and then south along the corporate limits of the city until it intersects W. Ridgeway Avenue, thence proceeding west along W. Ridgeway Avenue to its intersection with University Avenue, thence proceeding west on University Avenue until it intersects North Butler Road, thence proceeding north along North Butler Road to the point of beginning. 
(5)  Precinct 3 of the Second Ward. Precinct 3 of the Second Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of Greenhill Road and Hudson Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to the centerline of U.S. Highway 58; thence northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 58 to where it intersects with the centerline of S. Main Street; thence northerly along the centerline of S. Main Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Tremont Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Tremont Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of Grove Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Boulder Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Boulder Drive to the centerline of Idaho Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Idaho Road to the centerline of Tucson Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Tucson Drive to the centerline of Utah Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Utah Drive to the centerline of Dallas Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Dallas Drive to the centerline of Oregon Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Oregon Road to the centerline of South Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Greenhill Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to a north-south leg of the city limits or the east city limits; thence southerly along the said east city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Ridgeway Avenue to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits or the south city limits line; thence westerly along said south city limits line to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the point of beginning. 
(d)  The Third Ward. The Third Ward shall embrace all the territory within the city limits described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the centerlines of Hudson Road and W. Eighteenth Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. First Street; thence northerly along the extension of Hudson Road to the centerline of Theimer Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Theimer Street to the centerline of Ellen Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ellen Street to the centerline of South Park Road; thence westerly along the centerline of South Park Road to the centerline of Baker Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Baker Drive to the centerline of Forrest Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Forrest Road to the centerline of Westwood Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Westwood Drive to the centerline of River Bluff Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of River Bluff Drive to the centerline of Ravine Drive; thence northeasterly along the extension of Ravine Drive to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence northwesterly along the main channel of the Cedar River routing westerly of Deadman's Island to the intersection with an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Twelfth Street, thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence easterly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of Campus Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Campus Street to the centerline of W. 19th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. 19th Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct 1 of the Third Ward. Precinct 1 of the Third Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of Hudson Road and W. Eighth Street; thence north along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. First Street; thence northerly along the extension of Hudson Road to the centerline of Theimer Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Theimer Street to the centerline of Ellen Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ellen Street to the centerline of South Park Road; thence westerly along the centerline of South Park Road to the centerline of Baker Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Baker Drive to the centerline of Forrest Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Forrest Road to the centerline of Westwood Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Westwood Drive to the centerline of River Bluff Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of River Bluff Drive to the centerline of Ravine Drive; thence northeasterly along the extension of Ravine Drive to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence northwesterly along the main channel of the Cedar River routing westerly of Deadman's Island to the intersection with an east-west leg of the city limits line; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits to the centerline of W. First Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. First Street to the centerline of Magnolia Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Magnolia Drive to the centerline of Crescent Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Crescent Drive to the centerline of Damascus Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Damascus Drive to the centerline of W. Fourth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Fourth Street to the centerline of Cedar Crest Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Cedar Crest Drive to the centerline of Fireside Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Fireside Drive to the centerline of Hearthside Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Hearthside Drive to the centerline of W. Eighth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Eighth Street to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct 2 of the Third Ward. Precinct 2 of the Third Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of W. Eighth Street and Hudson Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Twelfth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to the centerline of Lexington Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Lexington Drive and its southerly extension to the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north south city limits line to an east-west leg of the city limits; thence westerly along said east-west city limits line to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. Twelfth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to a north-south leg of the city limits; thence northerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of W. First Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. First Street to the centerline of Magnolia Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Magnolia Drive to the centerline of Crescent Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Crescent Drive to the centerline of Damascus Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Damascus Drive to the centerline of W. Fourth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Fourth Street to the centerline of Cedar Crest Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Cedar Crest Drive to the centerline of Fireside Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Fireside Drive to the centerline of Hearthside Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Hearthside Drive to the centerline of W. Eighth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Eighth Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct 3 of the Third Ward. Precinct 3 of the Third Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of W. Twelfth Street and Hudson Road; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twelfth Street to the centerline of Lexington Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Lexington Drive and its southerly extension to the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-seventh Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of Campus Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Campus Street to the centerline of W. 19th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. 19th Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the point of beginning. 
(e)  The Fourth Ward. The Fourth Ward shall embrace all the territory within the city limits described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the centerline of Highway 58 and the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Highway 58 to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence southeasterly and northeasterly along the centerline of the Cedar River to the east line of section 7, T89N, R13W which is also a north-south leg to the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad; thence northwesterly along the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad to the centerline of Park Drive; thence westerly and southerly along the centerline of Park Drive to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence southeasterly and southerly along the centerline of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Rainbow Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Rainbow Drive to the centerline of Rownd Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence northwesterly and westerly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Grove Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of College Street; thence southerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of Campus Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Campus Street to the centerline of W. 19th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. 19th Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the centerline of Iowa Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Iowa Street to the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street to the centerline of Main Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of Fourteenth Street; thence easterly and northeasterly along the centerline of E. Fourteenth Street to the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Waterloo Road to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct 1 of the Fourth Ward. Precinct 1 of the Fourth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerline of Highway 58 and the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Highway 58 to the centerline of the Cedar River; thence southeasterly and northeasterly along the centerline of the Cedar River to the east line of section 7, T89N, R13W which is also a north-south leg of the city limits; thence southerly along said north-south city limits line to the centerline of the former Chicago Rock Island & Pacific railroad; thence northwesterly along the centerline of the former Chicago Rock Island & Pacific railroad to the centerline of Park Drive; thence westerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Park Drive to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence southeasterly and southwesterly along the centerline of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Rainbow Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Rainbow Drive to the centerline of Rownd Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence northwesterly and westerly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Grove Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of Main Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of Fourteenth Street; thence easterly and northeasterly along the centerline of E. Fourteenth Street to the centerline of Waterloo Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Waterloo Road to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct 2 of the Fourth Ward. Precinct 2 of the Fourth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of W. Seventeenth Street and Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of Seerley Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Seerley Boulevard to the centerline of College Street; thence northerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of Merner Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Merner Avenue to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the centerline of Iowa Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Iowa Street to the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Seventeenth Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct 3 of the Fourth Ward. Precinct 3 of the Fourth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerlines of W. Eighteenth Street and Merner Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Merner Avenue to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of College Street; thence southerly along the centerline of College Street to the centerline of University Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Twenty-third Street to the centerline of Campus Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Campus Street to the centerline of W. 19th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of W. 19th Street to the centerline of Hudson Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Hudson Road to the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of W. Eighteenth Street to the point of beginning. 
(f)  The Fifth Ward. The Fifth Ward shall embrace all the territory within the city limits described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the centerline of Rownd Street and University Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of Rainbow Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Rainbow Drive to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence northerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Park Drive; thence northeasterly and easterly along the centerline of Park Drive to the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad; thence easterly along the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad to the east line of section 18, T89N, R13W which is also a north-south leg of the city limits line; thence southerly, easterly, northerly easterly, southerly, easterly, southerly and easterly along said city limits line to a north-south leg of the Cedar Falls-Waterloo city limits line; thence southerly along said city limits line to the centerline of Greenhill Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to the centerline of South Main Street; thence northerly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Oregon Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Oregon Road to the centerline of Dallas Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Dallas Drive to the centerline of Utah Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Utah Drive to the centerline of Tucson Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Tucson Drive to the centerline of Idaho Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Idaho Street to the centerline of Boulder Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Boulder Drive to the centerline of University Avenue; thence easterly and southeasterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct 1 of the Fifth Ward. Precinct 1 of the Fifth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerline of Rownd Street and University Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of Rainbow Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Rainbow Drive to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence northeasterly and northwesterly along the centerline of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Park Drive; thence northeasterly and easterly along the centerline of Park Drive to the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad; thence easterly along the centerline of the former Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railroad to the east line of section 18, T89N, R13W which is also a north-south leg of the city limits line; thence southerly, easterly, northerly easterly, southerly, easterly, southerly and easterly along said city limits line to a north-south leg of the Cedar Falls-Waterloo city limits line; thence southerly along said city limits line to the centerline of Greenhill Road, thence westerly along the centerline of Greenhill Road to the centerline of Cedar Heights Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Cedar Heights Drive to the centerline of University Avenue; thence northwesterly and westerly along the centerline of University Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct 2 of the Fifth Ward. Precinct 2 of the Fifth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerline of University Avenue and Cedar Heights Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Cedar Heights Drive to an extension of the centerline of Greenhill Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of the easterly extension of Greenhill Drive to the centerline of Hillside Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Hillside Drive to the centerline of Valley High Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Valley High Drive to the centerline of Clearview Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Clearview Drive to the centerline of Primrose Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Primrose Drive to the centerline of Rownd Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of Primrose Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Primrose Drive to the centerline of Maryhill Drive; thence south and southwesterly along the centerline of Maryhill Drive to the centerline of Carlton Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Carlton Drive to the centerline of Orchard Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Orchard Drive to the centerline of South Main Street; thence northerly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Oregon Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Oregon Road to the centerline of Dallas Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Dallas Drive to the centerline of Utah Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Utah Drive to the centerline of Tucson Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Tucson Drive to the centerline of Idaho Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Idaho Road to the centerline of Boulder Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Boulder Drive to the centerline of University Avenue; thence easterly and southeasterly along the centerline of University Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct 3 of the Fifth Ward. Precinct 3 of the Fifth Ward shall consist of all the area described as follows: Beginning at the centerline of Greenhill Road and Cedar Height Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Cedar Heights Drive to an extension of the centerline of Greenhill Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of the easterly extension of Greenhill Drive to the centerline of Hillside Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Hillside Drive to the centerline of Valley High Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Valley High Drive to the centerline of Clearview Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Clearview Drive to the centerline of Primrose Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Primrose Drive to the centerline of Rownd Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Rownd Street to the centerline of Primrose Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Primrose Drive to the centerline of Maryhill Drive; thence south and southwesterly along the centerline of Maryhill Drive to the centerline of Carlton Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Carlton Drive to the centerline of Orchard Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Orchard Drive to the centerline of South Main Street; thence southerly along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of Greenhill Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenhill to the point of beginning. 
(Code 2017, § 10-2; Ord. No. 2571, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2752, 8-8-2011; Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 8-2. - Municipal election day. 
    A regular municipal election shall be held in the city on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year, and elective officers shall thus be chosen biennially to succeed officers whose terms expire at 12:00 noon on January 1 which is not a Sunday or legal holiday, following a regular city election. 
(Code 2017, § 10-4) 
Sec. 8-3. - Runoff elections. 
    The city does hereby elect to hold a runoff election when a position for an office within the city is unfilled because of a failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in a regular city election, all as provided in Iowa Code §§ 376.6 and 376.9, as amended. 
(Code 2017, § 10-5) 
Sec. 8-4. - Special municipal elections. 
    Special municipal elections shall be held at such places in each ward in the city as the council shall direct, and at the time and in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 2017, § 10-6) 
Sec. 8-5. - Disturbing election; interfering with election officers. 
    No person shall disturb any election by loud noise, fighting or otherwise, or hinder voters from voting by obstructing the passage to and from the ballot box, or do any act to delay or disturb the officers of an election in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 2017, § 10-8) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 9-19. - International Fire Code adoption. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K published by the International Code Council, Inc., and all standards referenced therein, except as such codes and standards are amended in this article, are hereby adopted by reference, and are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in this section. 
(b)  An official copy of the code adopted by this article, including a certificate by the clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in the office of the clerk, in either a hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 11-26; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-20. - International Fire Code amendments. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, adopted by section 9-19, is amended as provided in this section. 
(1)  Section 103.2, Appointment, and section 103.3, Deputies, are deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
103.2 Appointment. The chief of the fire operations division may designate a member of the fire operations division to exercise the powers and perform the duties set forth in this code. This person shall be known as the fire marshal. 
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the fire code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy fire code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. The fire code official with the approval of the director of public safety services may appoint and designate such members of the fire operations division who are reserve police officers as fire investigators upon being certified by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. Fire investigators shall have the powers of a peace officer in performing their duties under this code, including full powers of arrest to effectuate their duties of enforcing city ordinances and state statutes. Notwithstanding his status as a peace officer, a fire investigator shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the department of public safety services for all purposes, and shall perform such functions as assigned by the fire code official with the approval of the director of public safety services. 
(2)  Subsection 105.2 Applications , is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the subsection: 
Application for an operational permit shall be submitted with all required information not less than 30 days prior to the event requiring a permit. 
(3)  Subsection 105.6.30, Open Burning , is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Subsection 105.6.36, Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material , is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
Subsection 105.6.36 Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material. The council, upon written request for an application, may grant a permit for the display of fireworks to amusement parks, organizations or groups of individuals as approved by the council when satisfied that such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator and that adequate protection for public safety has been provided and that adequate fire extinguishing equipment is available. Accident liability protection in an amount of not less than $2,000,000.00 may be required. Additional reference will be found in State Code of Iowa § 727.2. 
(5)  Subsection 106.2 Inspections , is amended by adding the following to the end of the subsection: 
The fire code official at the official's sole discretion may send plans to a qualified agency for review. The fire code official shall designate the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency. 
(6)  Subsection 106.2 is amended by adding the following subsection 106.2(a): 
106.2(a) All fire protection systems (sprinkler/fire alarm systems) with a square footage over 10,000 feet shall require a third party review. The third party shall be approved by the fire code official. 
Any building which contains fire pumps, or stand pipes, regardless of square footage, shall require a third party review. The third party shall be approved by the fire code official. 
(7)  Section 106 is amended by adding subsection 106.5, Commercial Operations , as follows: 
106.5 Commercial Operations. All new commercial business and all new commercial business in existing buildings shall have initial pre-inspection conducted by fire code official before business is open to the general public, and records updated to reflect new business owners. 
(8)  Section 108, Board of Appeals , including subsections 108.1 through 108.3 , is deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
Section 108 Board of Appeals. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and type of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this code, the board of appeals shall render decisions upon pertinent matters. The fire chief shall be an ex-officio member of the board. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the fire chief with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the city council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. The board of appeals referred to in this section is the board of appeals created by the building code, as adopted by the city. 
(9)  Section 110.1.2 is deleted in its entirety and the following substituted therefor: 
110.1.2 Unsafe Conditions. The code official is authorized to order an operation or use stopped, or the evacuation of any premises, building, or vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a fire, life safety or health hazard. 
(10)  Section 202, General Definitions , is amended by adding the following definitions: 
Code official. 
The chief officer of the fire operations division, the fire marshal, or the fire chief's authorized representative. 
Cross aisles. 
Required aisles which permit egress from one main aisle to gather through an allowable use area. 
Crowd management. 
Crowd management meshes the design features of a facility, the established operating features of that facility, and an understanding expected natural behavior of the occupants in that facility for a specific type of event. 
Emergency communications center. 
Black Hawk County Consolidated Communications Dispatch Center. 
Exhibits. 
A space or portable structure used for the display of products or services. 
Flame effect. 
The combustion of flammable solids, liquids, or gases to produce thermal, physical, visual, or audible phenomena before an audience. 
Main aisle. 
That area designated to accommodate the required means of egress width located between the farthest projections of the area designated for use by a tenant and the allowable use area. 
Maze. 
A labyrinth of paths throughout a confined area accessible by walking or mobile 
Mobile catering. 
Business of selling prepared food from some sort of vehicle. 
Mobile food truck. 
A vehicle equipped to cook and sell food. 
Outdoor assembly event. 
Private and public events conducted outdoors including, but not limited to, beer gardens and mazes, having a projected attendance of 500 or more persons throughout the event, or confining 50 or more attendees by the permanent or temporary installation of barricades or fencing. 
Special event. 
An assembly of persons with a common purpose to watch or participate in an activity that is different than the normal course of business for the location. The event is for a specific time and location. Events may involve entertainment, food/beverage or alcohol services, use of temporary fencing, stands, structures, or power. Events may include, but not be limited to, concerts, circuses, fairs, festivals, parades, tradeshows, exhibits, mazes, or similar celebrations. Special events may also increase, impact, or disrupt normal traffic flow or involved road closures. 
(11)  Section 307, Open Burning and Recreational Fires , is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Subsection 315.3.3 is amended by adding the following sentence at the end of the subsection: 
Combustible material storage shall be confined to approved storage areas, such that the presence of incidental storage in any other area of the building does not constitute a hazard. 
(13)  Section 401, Emergency Planning and Preparedness , is amended by adding subsection 401.9 as follows: 
401.9 Building Evacuation. Upon activation of the building fire alarm system or upon notification by other means of detecting and reporting unwanted fire, all building occupants shall promptly evacuate the building. Exception: When the emergency evacuation plan, as approved by the fire code official, does not require the immediate total evacuation of the building. 
(14)  Section 403.2 is amended by adding subsection 403.2.4.1 , as follows: 
403.2.4.1 A-2 Occupancy Crowd Managers. Group A-2 occupancies shall be provided with a minimum of one trained crowd manager anytime occupancy reaches 50 or more. Where the occupant load exceeds 250, additional trained crowd managers shall be provided at a ratio of one crowd manager for every 250 occupants. The crowd manager shall annually receive training approved by the fire code official in crowd management techniques. 
(15)  Subsection 405.2 is amended by adding the following at the end of the subsection: 
Fire and evacuation drills in Group E occupancies shall be conducted in accordance with section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa. Fire Drills in Group R, Division 2, Fraternities and Sororities, shall be conducted once per academic semester. 
(16)  Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads , is amended by adding subsection 503.2.9 , as follows: 
503.2.9 Thickness. Fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and shall comply with Iowa DOT Class C or Class M mix meeting the requirements of Materials I.M. 529. The concrete access road shall be a minimum of seven inches thick over compacted soil. 
(17)  Section 506, Key Boxes , is amended by adding the following subsections 506.3, 506.3.1, 506.3.2, 506.4, 506.4.1, and 506.4.2 thereto: 
Subsection 506.3 A fire operations division key box shall be installed in each commercial or industrial building in the city which is equipped with a fire detection, fire alarm, or fire suppression system that is monitored by an alarm company with direct connection to the dispatch center of the city, and in each building equipped with an unsupervised local alarm system, and where immediate access to the interior of the building by fire operations division personnel is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes. A fire operations division key box shall also be installed in each residential property consisting of three or more residential dwelling units. Each fire operations division key box shall be of a type and shall be installed in a location that is approved by the fire chief or his designee, and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Each application for a fire operations division key box shall be submitted to the fire chief or his designee. 
The cost of purchase and installation of each fire operations division key box shall be paid by the building owner. 
Each fire operations division key box shall contain the following keys: 
a.  Keys to each locked point of egress, whether on the exterior or interior of the building. 
b.  Keys to each locked mechanical room in the building. 
c.  Keys to each locked electrical room in the building. 
d.  Keys to other areas as determined by the fire chief or his designee. 
A "fire operations division key box" means a secure box installed on the exterior of a building, containing keys to various locks on the premises of the building, to which only the fire chief or his designee has access. 
If the building owner changes or causes to be changed any locks such that the keys located in the fire operations division key box will not unlock any of the locks described in this section, it shall be the responsibility of the building owner to furnish to the fire chief or his designee replacement keys to be placed in the fire operations division key box, at the owner's expense. 
Subsection 506.3.1 Elevator Knox Box 
A fire operations division elevator key box shall be installed in each commercial, industrial and residential building in the city which is equipped with an elevator system. Each fire operations division elevator key box shall be of a type and shall be installed in a location that is approved by the fire chief or his designee, and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
Subsection 506.3.2 Fire Department Connection Caps (FDC) 
A fire operations division connection (FDC) for water supply to a building from a fire truck shall have locking Knox cap plug installed on all new piping and existing piping, in all sprinkled buildings within the city. Each fire operations division connection locking cap shall be of a type and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
Subsection 506.4 Locking Wall File Cabinets. 
Generic locking wall file cabinets shall be mounted by the fire alarm control panel. The cabinets shall contained information for fire operations division use. Locking file cabinets shall be approved by the fire operations division official. The key to file cabinet shall be placed into the key box. 
Subsection 506.4.1 Contents. 
The cabinets shall contain the following files: 
1.  Fire alarm as built plans. 
2.  Sprinkler plans. 
3.  Emergency contacts. 
4.  Any other info required by the code official. 
Subsection 506.4.2 Mounting Height. 
Cabinets shall be mounted no higher than 51/2 feet measured from the floor. 
(18)  Section 507, Fire Protection Water Supplies , is amended by adding the following thereto: 
Subsection 507.5.1.2 FDC Connections. Where a facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction requiring a fire suppression system shall have a fire hydrant located within 100 feet of the buildings FDC connection as measured by an approved route by the fire code official. 
(19)  Subsection 507.5.1 is amended by deleting exceptions 1 and 2. 
(20)  Subsection 507.5.1.1 is amended by deleting exception. 
(21)  Subsection 507.5.5 is amended by adding the following subsection 507.5.5(a) : 
507.5.5(a) Fire protection equipment and fire hydrants shall not be hidden by vegetation or other means as determined by fire code official. 
(22)  Subsection 507.5 is amended by adding the following new subsections: 
Subsection 507.5.7. Fire hydrants shall be marked by approved method for quick response as determined and approved by fire code official. (Marker flags) 
Subsection 507.5.8. Fire hydrant outlet direction: Fire hydrants shall be positioned so that the 41/2-inch port connection is facing in a direction as determined by fire code official. 
(23)  Subsection 510.1 is amended by deleting exception 1. 
(24)  Subsection 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems , is amended by adding a new subsection as follows: 
903.1.2. Water Supply Safety Margin. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed with a minimum of 10 percent or five psi safety margin (whichever is greater) above static pressure in the fire protection systems hydraulic calculations. 
(25)  Subsection 903.4.2 is deleted in its entirety and the following new subsection 903.4.2 substituted therefor: 
903.4.2. An approved weatherproof horn/strobe device shall be mounted directly above the remote fire operations division connection (FDC) between seven and ten feet in height above grade. 
(26)  Section 903 is amended by adding a new subsection as follows: 
903.7 Zones. Automatic sprinkler systems zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and a water flow device for each normally occupied floor. The location of sprinkler control valves must be approved by the fire code official. 
(27)  Subsection 904.13 is deleted in its entirety. 
(28)  Subsection 906.1, Where Required , is amended by deleting the exception. 
(29)  Subsection 906.3, Size and Distribution , is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the subsection: 
The minimum rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class A, B, C, D hazard shall be 2A-10BC. 
(30)  Subsection 907.1.4, Conduit Color , is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following subsections 907.1.4 through 907.1.4.6: 
907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels and Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels. Installation of fire alarm control panels and fire alarm annunciator panels shall be installed in accordance with section 907.1.4.1 through 907.1.4.6 
907.1.4.1 Fire Alarm Panel Height: Installation of a fire alarm panels shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the floor to the top of panel. Exception panel height may be altered by the code official. 
907.1.4.2 Number of Fire Alarm Panels in Buildings. Only one listed fire alarm control panel shall be allowed per building and shall lock in the alarm until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible-alarm silencing switch. This control panel shall only receive alarms signals from the fire protection equipment. 
907.1.4.3 Combination Fire/Security Alarm Systems Panels. A listed combination fire/security alarm system panel that meets all the requirements of this code and amendments may be permitted by approval of the fire code official. The fire/security panel shall be capable of providing a signal that can differentiate between the fire and security alarm. 
907.1.4.4 Password/PIN Protection Prohibited: Fire alarm control panels and/or fire alarm annunciator panels that require a password/PIN to silence an alarm/supervisory/trouble signal and/or to reset an alarm/supervisory/trouble signal shall prohibited 
907.1.4.5 Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels: The fire code official can require the addition of fire alarm annunciator panels abased on the size of building and access to the building. These panels shall meet the requirements of section 907.1.4 and 907.2. 
907.1.4.6 Fire Alarm Panels: All Fire alarm panels shall be the addressable type system. 
(31)  Subsection 907.2.1 is amended by deleting the exception contained therein. 
(32)  Subsection 907.2.3 is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the first paragraph: 
New and existing educational occupancies shall have a monitored fire alarm system. 
(33)  Subsection 907.2.9.1 is amended by deleting exception 2. 
(34)  Subsection 907.2.11.2 is amended by adding a fourth subparagraph, as follows: 
4.  Supervised smoke alarms shall be installed in all common corridors and at the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in groups R-2, R-4, and I-1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within 15 feet of the end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is located for each 30 feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by the code. 
(35)  Subsection 907.2.13.2 is deleted. 
(36)  Subsection 907.3 is amended by adding the following subsection 907.3(d): 
(d) High Velocity Low Speed Fans (HVLSF) Fan shall shut down upon activation of fire alarm system 
(37)  Subsection 907.4.2 is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the subsection: 
Where in the opinion of the code official manual fire alarm boxes may be used to cause false fire alarms, the code official is authorized to modify the requirements for manual fire alarm boxes. 
(38)  Subsection 907.6.4 is amended by deleting the exception and inserting the following exception in lieu thereof: 
Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA13 and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and water flow device for each normally occupied floor. 
(39)  Subsection 907.6.4 is amended by adding the following subsection 907.6.4.3 : 
907.6.4.3 Zone and address location labeling. Fire alarm and/or annunciator panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and permanently labeled as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building. 
(40)  Subsection 907.6.6 is amended by adding the following at the end of the subsection: 
Each address point identification shall have an alpha/numeric descriptor location. Alpha/numeric descriptor locations area required to be reported to the emergency communications center upon activation of alarm conditions as specified by the fire code official. Supervisory alarm conditions are required to be reported to the fire code official by an approved manner. 
(41)  Section 912, Fire Department Connections , is amended by adding the following thereto: 
(42)  Subsection 912.1.1 The fire operations division connections(s) shall be a five inch Storz type connector(s) compatible with hose couplings currently used by Cedar Falls Fire Rescue. 
(43)  Section 912 is amended by adding the following subsections: 
912.8. FDC size minimum fire operations division connection size shall be 5 inch locking storz with a locking Knox cap on commercial buildings and 21/2 inch Cedar Falls thread on residential buildings with a locking Knox cap. 
912.9. Any building three stories or higher shall have a remote fire operations division connection. 
Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials General Provisions 
(44)  Subsection 5003.5 is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the subsection: 
Signs shall also comply with the requirements of the Iowa Right to Know Law. 
Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids 
(45)  Subsection 5704.2.13.2 is amended by adding the following new subsection: 
5704.2.13.2.4. Existing Aboveground Tanks Hazards. Existing aboveground tanks installations, even if previously approved, that are determined to constitute a hazard by the code official, shall not be continued in service. Unsafe tanks shall be removed as required by the fire code official and in accordance with this code. 
(46)  Subsection 5705.5.1 is amended by adding the following thereto: 
6.  Corridor installations are prohibited in Group E occupancies. 
(Code 2017, § 11-27; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-21. - Penalty; abatement of violations. 
(a)  Any building, construction or structure and any addition to any building, construction or structure erected or in the process of erection contrary to the provisions of the codes adopted by this article shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article or the codes adopted by this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 11-28; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-22. - Enforcement. 
    The codes adopted by this article shall be enforced by the fire operations division. 
(Code 2017, § 11-29; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-23. - Modifications. 
(a)  The council shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article upon recommendation of the fire chief or the administration committee, or upon application in writing by an owner or lessor of property, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes adopted by this article, provided that the spirit of such codes shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(b)  The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the council thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the fire operations division, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 2017, § 11-30; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-24. - Authority to require additional permits. 
    The council, upon recommendation of the administration committee, shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those required by this article and other ordinances. 
(Code 2017, § 11-31; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-25. - Fees. 
    Fees for any inspections, reinspections, licenses, permits, certificates, approvals and any other functions performed or conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to the provisions of the codes adopted under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such fees may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 11-32; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 9-26. - Special events. 
(a)  Scope. Special events including trade shows and exhibitions, outdoor assembly events, outdoors mazes, special amusement buildings, and special scaffolding structures, shall comply with this chapter and section 1028 of the International Fire Code. Temporary indoor vehicle displays and vehicle competition or demonstrations shall comply with this chapter and section 314 of the International Fire Code. 
(b)  Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in sections 105.6 and 105.7 of the International Fire Code. 
(c)  Site plans. A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the fire code official with each permit application for approval. 
(1)  Outdoor events. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The means of egress; 
b.  Location and width of exits and aisles; 
c.  Location of exit signs; 
d.  Location of fencing or means used to confine attendees; 
e.  Total square footage of enclosed space; 
f.  Location and arrangement of all tents, booths or cooking equipment; 
g.  Locations of fire apparatus access roads; 
h.  Location of fire protection equipment; 
i.  Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable; and 
j.  Location of temporary staffed water stations and permanent water fountains. 
(2)  Trade shows and exhibitions. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The means of egress; 
b.  Location and width of exits and aisles; 
c.  Location of exit signs; 
d.  Total square footage of space; 
e.  Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment; 
f.  Location of all fire protection equipment; 
g.  Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable; and 
h.  Location of covered or multilevel exhibits or booths. 
(3)  Mazes. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The means of egress; 
b.  Location and width of exits and aisles; 
c.  Location of exit signs; 
d.  Total square footage of space; 
e.  Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment; 
f.  Location of all fire protection equipment; 
g.  Location of means to confine attendees; 
h.  Locations of fire apparatus access roads; 
i.  Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable; and 
j.  Location of structures. 
At time of permit application, the event coordinator shall submit a letter from the property owner authorizing the use of the site, the address of the site, dates and hours of operation and names and 24-hour phone numbers of at least two principals. 
(4)  Temporary indoor vehicle displays. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum of ten business days prior to the display of electric, liquid or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motorcraft. Site plans shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The means of egress; 
b.  Location and width of exits and aisles; 
c.  Location of exit signs; 
d.  Total square footage of space; 
e.  Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment; 
f.  Location of all fire protection equipment; 
g.  Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable; 
h.  Location and size of exhibits and booths; and 
i.  Location of structures. 
Exception: Auto dealerships. 
(d)  Definitions. The following terms are defined in section 202 of the International Fire Code, general definitions, of the code: 
(1)  Cross aisles. 
(2)  Exhibits. 
(3)  Flame effect. 
(4)  Main aisle. 
(5)  Maze. 
(6)  Outdoor assembly event. 
(7)  Special event. 
(8)  Temporary structures. 
(9)  Trade shows or exhibitions. 
(e)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Access for firefighting and medical services. Approved vehicle access for firefighting and medical services shall be provided in accordance with section 503 of the International Fire Code. 
(2)  Combustible storage. Combustible materials stored at special events shall be stored in approved locations and containers. 
(3)  Crowd managers. Crowd managers shall be provided where the fire code official determines that an indoor or outdoor gathering warrants crowd control. Crowd managers shall be in accordance with section 403 of the International Fire Code. 
(4)  Decorative materials and furnishings. Curtains, drapes and decorations including, but not limited to signs, banners, acoustical materials, cotton, hay, fabric, paper, straw, moss, split bamboo and wood chips shall be flame resistant as demonstrated by testing in accordance with NFPA 701. Materials that cannot be treated for flame retardancy shall not be used unless approved by the fire code official. This includes, but is not limited to, oilcloth, tarpaper, nylon, plastic cloth and other plastic materials. 
(5)  Fire protection equipment clearance. Clearance around all fire protection equipment shall be in accordance with section 901.10 of the International Fire Code. 
(6)  Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with section 906 of the International Fire Code and NFPA 10. 
(7)  Fire watch. Fire watch shall be in accordance with sections 115 and 403.1 of the International Fire Code. 
(8)  Fireworks and pyrotechnics. Fireworks and pyrotechnics shall comply with chapter 56 of the International Fire Code. 
(9)  Lasers. Lasers shall comply with state regulations. 
(10)  Housekeeping. The special event area and related areas shall be kept free from combustible debris at all times. 
(11)  LP-gas heaters. Fuel supplies for liquefied-petroleum gas-fired heaters shall comply with chapter 61 of the International Fire Code and the International Fuel Gas Code. 
(12)  Open-flame devices. Open-flame devices shall comply with section 308 of the International Fire Code. 
(13)  Waste disposal. Combustible debris shall not be accumulated at special events. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall be removed from special events at the end of each shift of work. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall not be disposed of by burning on the site unless approved. 
(Code 2017, § 11-33; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 9-26-9-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BONFIRES AND RECREATIONAL FIRES AND BURNING OF LEAVES AND GRASS CLIPPINGS 

Sec. 9-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bonfire is the open burning of cut trees, vegetation other than leaves or grass clippings, or lumber, with a total fuel area from three to five feet in diameter and from two to five feet in height. 
    Garbage means all organic refuse created in the preparation of food, or decayed or spoiled animal or vegetable food from any source, other than leaves or grass clippings. 
    Health hazard means a condition which is likely to result in death or injury to, or illness of, humans. 
    Recreational fire means the burning of materials other than rubbish, leaves or grass clippings where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit, and which consists of a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes. 
    Rubbish means all combustible nonorganic waste material such as papers, paper goods, cardboard and similar materials originating from ordinary household or business operations. 
(Code 2017, § 11-51; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 7-26-2004) 
Sec. 9-55. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of this article is a municipal infraction punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 11-52; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-56. - Presumption regarding violations. 
    Any fire ignited or burning in violation of any of the provisions of this article, whether on private property or on public property adjacent to private property, shall be presumed to be set by or with the permission of the owner of the private property and shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption in any proceeding charging a violation of the provisions of this article. For the purposes of this article, an owner is defined as the titleholder or contract purchaser or tenant in possession of any private property located within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 11-53; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-57. - Authority to prohibit fires. 
    The fire chief or his designee may prohibit any and all bonfires, recreational fires and fires of any other type upon complaint, or when atmospheric or local conditions within the city create a fire hazard or a health hazard. 
(Code 2017, § 11-54; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-58. - Burning prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall kindle or burn or maintain a bonfire on any open privately owned land except as follows: 
(1)  An approved incinerator is a metal incinerator with a maximum capacity of 30 gallons, constructed of fire-resistive material, including a lid and containing ventilation holes no larger than 11/2 inches in diameter. 
(2)  When an incinerator is used for burning as authorized by this article, the incinerator must be covered at all times by a lid and is to be placed when so used not less than 20 feet from any building. 
(3)  Fires in incinerators and outdoor bonfires, other than recreational fires, authorized by this article shall be permitted only between the hours of 12:00 noon and darkness, unless a special permit is first obtained from the fire chief or his designee. Darkness, for the purposes of this article, shall be determined to commence when the photoelectric controlled street lights in the city are turned on. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in section 9-59, fires for the open burning of plant material, other than leaves or grass clippings, grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements shall be permitted only between the hours of 12:00 noon and darkness. The fires must not be less than 20 feet from any building, and must be contained within a fire pit, incinerator or other confined area. For the purposes of this section, plant material includes branches from all plants or trees not exceeding 11/2 inches in diameter, but excludes leaves and grass clippings. 
(5)  All burning authorized by this article shall be supervised by a competent person at all times, and shall not be left unattended until the fire is completely extinguished. 
(Code 2017, § 11-55; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 2482, § 2, 7-26-2004) 
Sec. 9-59. - Demolition of buildings and clearing of land; burning for agricultural, maintenance or ecological purposes. 
(a)  Whenever any person within the city limits proposes to raze or demolish a building or destroy trees and brush for the purpose of clearing land, the person shall first request, in writing, permission to do so. The request shall be submitted to the office of the fire chief. Within 72 hours after the receipt of the request, the fire chief or his designee shall make an inspection of the property to determine the feasibility of such request. After the inspection, the fire chief or his designee shall, in writing, either grant or deny the request, and if the request is granted the chief or his designee shall state the conditions under which the proposed burning shall be permitted. In addition, before any building is burned, approval of the building official must be obtained. 
(b)  Whenever any person within the city limits proposes to burn vegetation other than leaves or grass clippings on: 
(1)  Land that is used predominantly for agricultural purposes; or 
(2)  Land that must be burned for maintenance or ecological reasons, such as gardens, prairie preserves, ditches, groves, woodlands, fence rows, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way; 
the person shall first request, in writing, permission to do so. The request shall be submitted to the office of the fire chief. Within 72 hours after the receipt of the request, the fire chief, or his designee, shall make an inspection of the property to determine the feasibility of such request. After the inspection, the fire chief or his designee shall, in writing, either grant or deny the request, and if the request is granted the chief or his designee shall state the conditions under which the proposed burning shall be permitted. The chief or his designee shall consider the atmospheric, environmental and other conditions present, to determine if such burning may be permitted, without creating a fire hazard or a health hazard. 
(Code 2017, § 11-56; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-60. - Other permitted fires. 
    The following types of fires are permitted within the city limits, as long as such fires do not involve the burning of leaves or grass clippings, and to the extent such types of fires are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Fires used solely for the cooking of food. 
(2)  Recreational fires subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 20 feet of a structure or combustible material unless contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread to within 20 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition; 
b.  Buckets, shovels, garden hoses or a fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating shall be readily available for use; 
c.  The fire shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguisher equipment required by subsection (2)b of this section until such fire has been extinguished; and 
d.  The fire chief is authorized to require that recreational fires be immediately discontinued if such fires are determined by the fire chief to constitute a hazardous condition. 
(3)  Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction or training of public or private employees in the method of firefighting. 
(4)  Bonfires, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Bonfires shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a bonfire to spread to within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition; 
b.  Buckets, shovels, garden hoses or a fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating shall be readily available for use; 
c.  The fire shall be constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguisher equipment required by subsection (4)b of this section until such fire has been extinguished; and 
d.  The fire chief is authorized to require that bonfires be immediately discontinued if such fires are determined by the fire chief to constitute a hazardous condition. 
(Code 2017, § 11-57; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 2482, §§ 3, 4, 7-26-2004) 
Sec. 9-61. - Burning of garbage or rubbish. 
    No person shall kindle or burn any garbage or rubbish within the city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 11-58; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-62. - Fires prohibited on streets and in certain zoning districts. 
    No person shall kindle or burn or maintain any open bonfire or authorize any such fires to be kindled or burned or maintained in any of the following locations or zoned areas within the city without written permission from the fire chief or his designee: 
(1)  Zones S-1 Shopping Center District. 
(2)  Zones C-1, C-2 and C-3 Commercial District. 
(3)  Zone M-2 Heavy Industrial District. 
(4)  In or upon any street, alley or boulevard. 
(Code 2017, § 11-59; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 9-63. - Prohibition on burning of leaves and grass clippings. 
    No person shall kindle or burn leaves or grass clippings or maintain, allow or authorize the burning of leaves or grass clippings within the city at any time or under any circumstances. 
(Code 2017, § 11-61; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 5-27-2003) 
Secs. 9-64-9-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-85. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automatic sprinkler system means an arrangement of piping, sprinklers and devices designed to discharge water automatically on a fire and to sound an alarm at the site at such time as water is so discharged. Such a system shall comply with all applicable International Fire Code and National Fire Protection Association standards as adopted herein. 
(Code 2017, § 11-76; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 4-22-1996) 
Sec. 9-86. - Required in boardinghouses and roominghouses. 
    In addition to other occupancies requiring automatic sprinkler systems under this article or other ordinances of the city, or other building and fire codes adopted herein, an approved monitored automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and thereafter maintained in all boardinghouses and roominghouses as follows: 
(1)  In basements, cellars, stairways and corridors. 
(2)  Throughout the building or house if over two stories in height. 
(3)  Each existing boardinghouse and roominghouse shall have until December 31, 2013 to comply with this section. 
(Code 2017, § 11-77; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 2537, § 5, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 2740, § 3, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 9-87. - Connection to water main. 
(a)  Any person desiring to open a connection with a water main which is used for city fire protection, for the purpose of supplying automatic fire sprinkler equipment, shall have such connection made under the direction and subject to the approval of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Supply connection for sprinkler system shall be adequate for the building size and contents. 
(c)  All connections for supplying automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be equipped with a shutoff valve which shall be located in a place of easy access and at a distance of not less than 100 feet from the building so equipped. 
(d)  The keys to the shutoff valve of each connection for the purpose of supplying automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be accessible to the chief of the fire operations division, who shall have authority to close such valves whenever he deems it necessary. 
(e)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article by not complying with the provisions of this section in making connection for automatic fire sprinkler equipment, or who permits any person to make such connection for him without complying with this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and be punished, on conviction thereof, pursuant to section 1-8. Such fines are enforceable by civil action. 
(Code 2017, § 11-79; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 2537, § 6, 8-8-2005) 
Sec. 9-88-9-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FEES FOR SERVICES TO NONRESIDENTS 

Sec. 9-106. - Fees for certain services to nonresidents. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon every person who is not a resident of the city and not a resident of any area that is under a contract with the city for fire suppression services, a fee for the following services rendered by the fire department of the city either within the city, or within any area that is under a contract for services with the fire department of the city: 
(1)  Clean-up of nonhazardous fluid spills on the streets, sidewalks or other public areas of the city or of areas under a contract for services with the fire department of the city. 
(2)  Provision of emergency medical services (first responders services), excluding ambulance services. 
(3)  Extrication or removal of persons from a motor vehicle following a motor vehicle accident. 
(4)  Suppression of a fire in a motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks or other public areas of the city or of areas under a contract for services with the fire department of the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, any jurisdiction or area that has in effect a fire mutual aid agreement with the fire department of the city shall not be considered an area that is under a contract for services with the fire department of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 11-81; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 6-26-2006) 
Sec. 9-107. - Amount of fees. 
(a)  Fees for all services described in section 9-106 shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such fees may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Fees for services established by resolution of the city council from time to time shall cover the provision of services by the fire department of the city for a period of not in excess of one hour. Services which cover a period in excess of one hour shall result in imposition of additional fees equal to the actual cost incurred by the fire department of the city for the period in excess of the first one hour of service, as determined by the fire chief. 
(c)  An invoice for all fees incurred under this article shall be promptly mailed by the city clerk or fire chief to the responsible party at such party's residence or business address, and shall be paid in full by the responsible party within 30 days of the invoice date. 
(Code 2017, § 11-82; Ord. No. 2582, § 1, 6-26-2006) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business units means each separate establishment for carrying on a gainful occupation. 
    Garbage means solid waste consisting of animal, grain, fruit or vegetable matter used or originally intended for use as food. 
    Household units mean each dwelling unit as defined in section 11-30. 
    One-sided collection area means a group of dwellings, trailers, apartments or business establishments that have been designated by the director of public works as beneficial for collection of publicly owned garbage and yard waste containers in a single pass. 
    Person means each single person or head of each family occupying a separate dwelling unit, or each person, firm or corporation operating a separate business unit. 
    Premises means the property occupied by a separate household or business unit, whether or not the property is separately owned. 
    Refuse means all combustible inorganic waste material and rubbish such as papers, sweepings, rags, ashes, cinders and similar materials originating from ordinary household or business operations. 
    Yard waste means organic debris such as grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc., that is produced as part of commercial or residential yard or garden operation, development or maintenance. The term "yard waste" does not include: 
(1)  Tree stumps. 
(2)  Garbage. 
(3)  Floral and decorative products, manufactured or fabricated, or the waste byproducts incidental to their manufacture or fabrication, which include organic materials and other nonorganic wastes which are not practically separable. This exemption includes, but is not limited to, things such as flower arrangements, decorated potted plants, wreaths, bouquets, garlands and small bedding flats. 
(Code 2017, § 12-1; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 10-2. - Use of city collection service. 
    Garbage and refuse and voluntary yard waste disposal service shall be extended to every household and business establishment residing within the corporate limits of the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Owners or occupants of acreages and farms engaged in agriculture and the raising of livestock who agree to feed or otherwise dispose of their garbage and keep their premises free from the accumulation of refuse and yard waste shall be exempt from this service. 
(2)  The city, in its sole judgment, shall have the right to refuse such service to anyone whose premises are not easily accessible or are so far removed from a well-settled area as to make such service impractical. 
(3)  Business establishments shall have the right to have a private licensed collector remove garbage and refuse, or under special permit they may remove such garbage and refuse themselves in accordance with section 10-4. 
(4)  Owners of apartment buildings of four or more units and owners of mobile home courts shall have the option to use the garbage and refuse and yard waste disposal service of the city, provided that such owners meet city sanitation standards regarding garbage and refuse and yard waste disposal. Should owners of apartments of four or more units or mobile home courts not meet city sanitation requirements for garbage and refuse and yard waste disposal, the city will require garbage and refuse disposal service therefor. The director of municipal operations and programs may determine whether or not proper sanitary conditions are being maintained and, at his discretion, may place special containers on an owner's premises to hold refuse in an acceptable manner. 
(Code 2017, § 12-2; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 2896, § 3, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 10-3. - Containers; placement for collection; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Every owner or occupant of any private dwelling, trailer, apartment or business establishment shall have all garbage drained and bagged for deposit and placed in a publicly owned container, unless otherwise exempted from use of city collection service by the director of public works pursuant to section 10-2(3) and (4). All yard waste shall be placed in special publicly owned yard waste containers for automated pickup, except for leaves made available for a special fall leaf pickup on such schedule and in such manner as shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by the director of public works, publicly owned garbage and yard waste containers shall be placed in a neat and orderly manner in the front of the premises at or near the curb line so as to allow the most convenient collection. All privately owned garbage and refuse containers shall likewise be placed in a neat and orderly manner in the front of the premises at or near the curb line or at the rear of the premises or near the edge of an alley, as the case may be. No publicly or privately owned garbage container, and no publicly owned yard waste container, shall be so placed prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection and the same must be removed not later than 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection or as otherwise directed by the director of public works. 
(c)  In areas designated by the director of public works as one-sided collection areas, all publicly owned garbage and yard waste containers shall be placed as provided for in subsection (b) of this section except that such containers shall be placed at or near the same curb line on the same side of the street or alley as indicated in the designation. 
(d)  The director of public works shall have the authority to designate the proper placement for collection, if other than as provided for in subsection (b) of this section, of publicly and privately owned garbage containers and publicly owned yard waste containers for every private dwelling, trailer, apartment or business establishment, provided that the owner or occupant is given at least 30 days' advance notice prior to the effective date of the designation. 
(Code 2017, § 12-3; Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 2896, § 2, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 10-4. - Disposal by business establishments; special fee for University of Northern Iowa. 
    Any place of business may, in lieu of having the city collect its garbage and refuse, have the garbage and refuse collected by a private licensed collector, or it may apply to the mayor or director of sanitation for a special permit to haul its own garbage and refuse to the city disposal area; provided, however, that no person conducting a business and holding such a permit shall haul any garbage and refuse for any other person, nor from the residence of such permit holder or the residence of any officer, member, employee or agent of such permit holder. A holder of such permit shall pay the fee or charge for depositing garbage and refuse in the place provided therefor in accordance with the fee established by the city, except that the fee for the University of Northern Iowa for depositing its solid waste at the city transfer station shall be $42.25 per ton, rather than $57.50 per ton as provided in section 10-5(g). 
(Code 2017, § 12-4; Ord. No. 2656, § 2, 5-27-2008) 
Sec. 10-5. - Service charges-Established. 
(a)  Household units. The expense of garbage and refuse service and automated yard waste service shall be a charge against the owner or occupant of every household unit within the city in the amount of: 
(1)  Thirteen dollars per month for non-automated garbage truck routes. This base charge allows the placement of two garbage units for weekly pickup. A garbage unit may be either a plastic bag or a commercial manufactured garbage can with a lid. The maximum size for a garbage unit shall not exceed 33 gallons or weigh more than 60 pounds. Each garbage unit in excess of the two allowed each week must have a city garbage bag tag attached in order to be picked up. 
(2)  Automated garbage refuse collection fees shall be as follows: $9.00 per month for a city-issued 32 gallon garbage container, $17.00 per month for a city-issued 68 gallon garbage container or $26.50 per month for a city-issued 95 gallon container. One additional garbage unit may be placed on top of the automated cart if said unit has a city garbage bag tag attached and meets the size limits defined in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Automated yard waste collection fees shall be as follows: $7.00 per container per dump for a city-issued 95 gallon yard waste container, increasing to $10.00 per container per dump effective on and after July 1, 2013; provided, however, that effective on and after January 1, 2014, and during such time periods in the spring and fall of each year as shall be determined by the director of public works and announced to the public, such charge shall be one-half of the regular $10.00 per container per dump fee, that is, $5.00 per container per dump. 
(4)  Effective on and after July 1, 2013, bulk items left at the curb for city pick-up if the city is called for pick-up, shall be $5.00 per stop, plus the per-unit charge for appliances, CRT monitors, and automobile, truck and tractor tires and rims, as provided in the chart in subsection (g) of this section. There shall be no charge for bulk items, other than appliances, brought to the city transfer station, except that the per-unit charge for appliances, CRT monitors, and automobile, truck and tractor tires and rims, as provided in the chart in subsection (g) of this section, shall apply. 
(5)  The owner or occupant of any household unit within the city may request one additional city-issued, 95-gallon yard waste container for such household unit, at a one-time, non-refundable fee of $50.00. Such additional yard waste container shall at all times remain the property of the city. No more than a total of two yard waste containers shall be allowed for any household unit in the city. 
(b)  Residential units. The expense of garbage and refuse service and automated yard waste service shall become a charge against the owner or occupant of every residential unit, at the same rate as is provided for household units in subsection (a) of this section, on a per-residential-unit basis or part thereof. A residential unit, for purposes of this subsection, shall consist of four people unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(c)  Churches and similar institutions. The expense of garbage and refuse service and automated yard waste service shall become a charge against each church or similar institution which uses the garbage and refuse service or the automated yard waste service of the city, at the residential unit rate as established in subsection (a). 
(d)  Penalty for late payment. There shall be assessed a penalty if the bill for garbage and refuse service or the automated yard waste service is not paid at the time indicated on the consumer's regular monthly utility bill. The penalty shall be in the same amount as authorized for municipal utilities under state law. 
(e)  Reduction for low-income households. The owner or occupant of every household unit which meets the low-income requirement, as set by the U.S. Government, contained in the Section 8 Housing Assistance Program of the city, may apply annually to the director of public works for, and be granted, a 50 percent reduction in the monthly garbage and refuse service charges as established in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(f)  Collection of garbage and refuse at commercial or apartment buildings through the use of dumpsters. The dumping fee for the use of dumpsters used to collect garbage and refuse at commercial or apartment buildings shall be in the amount of $35.00 per dump. 
(g)  Garbage and refuse and yard waste service charges. 
Christmas tree tags purchased for disposal of trees for pick-up at curb $1.25/each Appliances brought to the city transfer station $7.50/each Cathode ray tube monitors (computer and television monitors) $5.00/each Automobile tire $2.50/each With rim $5.00/each Truck or tractor tire $6.50/each With rim $9.00/each Purchase of empty bags for sand at the city transfer station $0.50/each Yard waste containers (other than city-issued containers) brought to the city transfer station $0.75/each Garbage bag tags placed on top of cart at curb $1.25/each Dumping of commercial or apartment dumpsters $35.00/per dump Three yard containers $35.00/per dump Solid waste disposal bags brought to the city transfer station $0.75/each Demolition $59.15/ton Solid waste $57.50/ton Yard waste $29.50/ton Scale charge $3.00 Cart delivery; exchanging automated carts (this charge will be implemented if resident continues to change sizes) $20.00 Leaf vacuum service $50.00 Asphalt shingles free of contaminants brought to shingle recycling site at city transfer station $30.00/ton Minimum tipping fees at the city transfer station: Solid waste up to 260 pounds $7.00/dump Yard waste up to 400 pounds $7.00/dump Demolition dumping at the city transfer station $59.15/ton Asphalt shingles containing contaminants dumped at shingle recycling site at city transfer station $59.15/ton plus $10.00/ton service charge Additional yard waste container (no more than a total of two; non-refundable fee) $50.00  
(h)  The placing of or failure to remove garbage or yard waste container within specified time limits. The placing of or failure to remove a garbage or yard waste container as required in section 10-3(b) shall result in a service charge of $5.00 per occurrence to be assessed to the owner or occupant of any private dwelling, trailer, apartment or business establishment, the same to be collected as provided in section 10-6. 
(i)  Asphalt shingle recycling. An asphalt shingle recycling site at the city transfer station shall be provided in order to accept asphalt shingles for recycling. Asphalt shingles which are free of contaminants which include, but are not limited to, wood, metal flashing, shingle wrappers, trash or other debris, shall be accepted for recycling at the city transfer station at a favorable tipping fee, as set forth in the table contained in subsection (g) of this section. However, asphalt shingles containing contaminants which are dumped at the shingle recycling site at the city transfer station shall be subject not only to the normal tipping fee for demolition dumping at the city transfer station, but shall also be subject to a $10.00 per ton service charge all as set forth in the table contained in subsection (g) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 12-5; Ord. No. 2795, § 1, 6-24-2013; Ord. No. 2821, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2840, §§ 1, 2, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2896, § 4, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 3 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 10-6. - Service charges-Collection; disposition of proceeds. 
    The municipal utilities office is hereby authorized and directed to render and collect fees or service charges for garbage and refuse service and automated yard waste service in accordance with the fees established in section 10-5. The charge shall be collected with the consumer's regular monthly utility bill and shall be shown as a separate item on the bill. The owner or manager of a private dwelling, apartment building, trailer park or business establishment who provides and pays for the electric, gas, water and sewer consumption charges of the tenants shall also be responsible and pay for the garbage and refuse service charge of the tenants. Collection policies shall be the same as for the other utility services. Amounts collected for the garbage and refuse service and the yard waste service shall be deposited in the garbage collection appropriation of the sanitation fund of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 12-6; Ord. No. 2795, § 2, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 10-7. - Authorized disposal areas. 
    Disposition of garbage and refuse and yard waste shall be in areas designated by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 12-7; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 10-8. - Unsanitary accumulations, unsightly trash, refuse, yard waste, oil or grease recycling containers or dumpsters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public property in the city, such quantities of garbage and refuse, or of yard waste, either in containers or not, as shall, in the opinion of the county board of health, constitute a health or sanitation hazard. All trash, refuse, yard waste must be kept entirely within an approved refuse container. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to exist on any private premises, improved or vacant, or on any public property in the city, any trash, refuse, yard waste, or oil or grease recycling container, or trash dumpster, privately owned or publicly owned, in an unsightly condition, whereupon the director of public works or designee may, in his or her discretion, require such person to erect or construct an enclosure to screen such unsightly container or dumpster from public view. 
(Code 2017, § 12-8; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 2880, § 1, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2896, § 5, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 10-9. - Deposit on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage or refuse or any yard waste in any park or street, or on any other property within the city, unless such garbage, refuse or yard waste is deposited in containers, the size, type and location of which are as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 12-9; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 10-10. - Disposal at solid waste transfer station. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who does not pay the fees as required by the city to dump or dispose of any garbage, refuse, yard waste or other material at the city solid waste transfer station or the city-owned premises surrounding the station. 
(Code 2017, § 12-10; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 10-11. - Deposit of yard wastes in county landfill. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any yard wastes in the county landfill. 
(Code 2017, § 12-11; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 10-12. - Transport of waste material. 
(a)  No person shall haul, transport or otherwise convey any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, yard waste, building material, tree or shrubbery branches or limbs or other waste material within the city unless the material is contained in covered receptacles or is otherwise secured either to or within the vehicle so that the garbage, rubbish, trash, yard waste, building material, tree or shrubbery branches or limbs or other waste material does not fall off or blow off or out of the vehicle hauling the material. If any of the garbage, rubbish, trash, waste, building material, tree or shrubbery branches or limbs or other waste material falls off or blows off or out of the vehicle, the person hauling the material shall clean up all of the waste material. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate this section, or any provision of any part of this article, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and upon being adjudged by a court to have committed such violation, shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). 
(Code 2017, § 12-12; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 2423, § 2, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 10-13. - Privately owned or leased trash dumpsters or receptacles in city parking lots. 
(a)  Any person who desires to place a privately owned or leased trash dumpster or receptacle upon a space in a municipally owned or leased off-street parking lot within the city shall first file an application for a permit with the city clerk, and shall pay an annual permit fee therefor, in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. The application and an accompanying diagram or site plan shall be submitted by such person, and shall show the size of the trash dumpster or receptacle, and the location of the proposed placement of the trash dumpster or receptacle within the municipal parking lot. 
(b)  Issuance of an annual permit for a private trash dumpster or receptacle by the city clerk shall be subject to approval of the city director of municipal operations and programs. A permit issued under this section shall be issued for a period of one year, and may be renewed by the permit holder upon filing of an application for renewal of the permit before its expiration, and by payment of the required annual fee. The application for renewal shall state whether or not any of the terms of the original application or permit is proposed to be revised, and if so, the particulars of the proposed revisions. 
(c)  The city shall designate certain spaces or areas, within various municipally owned or leased off-street parking lots within the city, upon which such trash dumpsters or receptacles may be placed. Such designation shall include appropriate painting on the parking lot surface and/or appropriate signage, delineating the area and use for such space. The city may limit the number and size of such spaces or areas within a particular lot or lots in the city, and the number of permits issued under this section, and may completely exclude provision for any such spaces or areas within a particular lot or lots, in its sole discretion, if deemed necessary to maintain adequate access, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the municipal parking lot or the surrounding area, to preserve space for vehicular parking, or for any other valid public purpose or purposes. 
(d)  The director of public works or designee shall order the immediate removal of any trash receptacle or dumpster owned or leased by a permit holder, in the event that the permit for such trash dumpster or receptacle has expired, or the annual fee has not been paid to the city, or in the event such trash dumpster or receptacle is causing a hazard to public safety, health, or welfare, or is causing damage to public property, including damage to the surface or curbing of the parking lot or of any publicly-owned fixtures located thereon, or is in any other manner interfering with proper maintenance of the parking lot, including removal of ice and snow from the municipal lot or other adjacent public property. If any such trash receptacle or dumpster is in an unsightly condition, the director of public works or designee may, in his or her discretion, require the permit holder to erect or construct an enclosure to screen such unsightly trash receptacle or dumpster from public view. 
(e)  The city shall have no responsibility regarding the depositing of trash within any privately owned or leased trash dumpster or receptacle which is placed on a municipal lot as provided in this section, shall have no responsibility for removal of the trash from such dumpster or receptacle (unless the permit holder has made arrangements for removal of such trash by the city as provided in this article), and shall have no responsibility for determining any arrangements for rental, use, maintenance, repair, or replacement of such dumpster or receptacle, all of which shall be the responsibility of either the permit holder or the private firm responsible for removal of the trash therefrom. 
(f)  Any person who places, or causes to be placed, a privately owned or leased trash dumpster or receptacle in or upon any municipally leased or owned off-street parking lot within the city in any way contrary to the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and shall be subject to a civil penalty as punishable as provided in section 1-9(a). 
(Code 2017, § 12-13; Ord. No. 2770, § 1, 7-9-2012; Ord. No. 2880, § 2, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2896, § 6, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 10-14-10-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS 

Sec. 10-45. - Use. 
    Persons operating restaurants, cafeterias, clubs, boardinghouses or eating houses, lunch counters or other business establishments within the corporate limits of the city may dispose of garbage through collectors licensed by the county. 
(Code 2017, § 12-41; Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
Sec. 10-46. - License required. 
    Any person desiring to haul and dispose of garbage from those persons enumerated in section 10-45 and to use the streets of the city for the hauling thereof shall first obtain a license from the county therefor. 
(Code 2017, § 12-42; Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
Sec. 10-47. - Violation of article. 
    Anyone licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article who fails or refuses to gather and carry away, in covered boxes or receptacles, any deposit of garbage in the proper manner from any place where the garbage is deposited for removal by him or who violates any other provision of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and upon being adjudged by a court to have committed such violation, shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). 
(Code 2017, § 12-43; Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
Sec. 10-48. - Frequency of collection; collection vehicles; place of disposal. 
(a)  Those persons licensed in accordance with this article shall collect the garbage at least once a week, and more frequently if required for health reasons. 
(b)  Licensees shall haul garbage in vehicles containing tightly covered boxes or receptacles, and all garbage shall be removed and disposed of outside the city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 12-44; Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
Sec. 10-49. - Fee for disposal of garbage and refuse by private contractors at city owned locations. 
    The city council shall annually by resolution establish a fee to be charged to private contractors that dispose of garbage and refuse at city owned locations. 
(Code 2017, § 12-45; Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
Secs. 10-50-10-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY DUMPING GROUNDS 

Sec. 10-72. - Authority to establish. 
    The council may provide and establish, by ordinance or resolution, certain places as burying, dumping and burning grounds to be used as burying grounds for dead animals and as dumping and burning grounds for all garbage matter, offensive materials and substances and other refuse and rubbish accumulating within the limits of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 12-61) 
Sec. 10-73. - Unlawful dumping; filling on private land. 
    Any person who shall use any lot, open space, street or roadway in the city, instead of the burying, dumping and burning ground provided for and established by the council, for the dumping or depositing of dead animal matter, garbage matter, offensive materials and substances and other refuse or rubbish shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8; provided, however, that any person owning a lot or tract of ground which is low and in need of being filled may file with the city clerk a bond in the amount of $200.00 guaranteeing that such person will keep the lot or tract of ground in a sanitary and sightly condition, and may then have such lot or tract of ground filled by dumping rubbish such as ashes, earth and stones thereon on the approval of the bond by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 12-64) 
Chapter 11 - HOUSING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Administrative bodies. 
(a)  The city elects to have its powers in connection with the low rent housing law as defined in Iowa Code ch. 403A, as amended, exercised by the city and by the city council. 
(b)  There is hereby created in the city a "Housing Commission of Cedar Falls," with such housing commission to be governed by the city council, and a board of commissioners to the extent of the authority granted by the city council. Such commission shall serve in an advisory capacity only. 
(c)  There is hereby created such board of commissioners of the housing commission consisting of seven citizens of the city, who shall be qualified by knowledge, experience and background to act in matters pertaining to low rent housing for the citizens of the city. An attempt shall be made to secure membership from varying income groups, especially low income, to a maximum of three. The members of the board of commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. The term of office for each commissioner shall be two years. The mayor shall designate a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the commissioners. Vacancies occurring on the board caused by resignation or otherwise shall be filled by the mayor and approved by the council for the unexpired term. All members of the board shall serve without compensation except necessary expenses, including travel expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties. 
(d)  A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising such powers as delegated to them by the city council as well as for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the commission upon a vote of a majority of the commissioners present, unless in any case the bylaws shall require a larger number. Such board may adopt rules, bylaws and regulations governing its organization and procedures as may be deemed necessary and subject to the approval of the city council. 
(e)  The board of commissioners shall be responsible initially to undertake and carry out studies and analyses of the housing needs and of the meeting of such needs and to make the results of such studies and analyses available to the public as well as to recommend proposed projects in the area of low rent housing for the citizens of the city. Any proposed low rent housing projects shall be subject to specific approval by the city council and any project requiring a referendum as provided in Iowa Code ch. 403A, as amended, shall be submitted to the voters of the city in accordance with such chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-2. - International Residential Code and International Building Code-Adoption. 
(a)  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, and the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter collectively called "building code" in this chapter has been adopted by the city, and such building code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in this section. The building code adopted by this subsection will regulate the maintenance of housing, under this chapter. 
(b)  An official copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code and the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, including a certificate by the clerk of the city as to their adoption and the effective date, is on file in the office of the city clerk, in either a hardbound or electronic version, available for public inspection. 
(Code 2017, § 14-2; Ord. No. 2744, § 1, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-3. - International Residential Code and International Building Code-Inspection fees. 
(a)  The fees for inspections conducted under the International Residential Code and the International Building Code shall be as established by resolution. 
(b)  All the inspection fees provided for in this section shall be assessed to and paid by the owner of record of the rental units, except that a tenant shall pay the initial inspection fee when such tenant requests an inspection within 12 months of a prior inspection. 
(c)  Inspections to be conducted under the International Residential Code and the International Building Code shall be scheduled by the fire operations division of the department of public safety services. A fee will be charged for each unit that is inaccessible to the rental housing inspector at the time of the scheduled inspection without prior notification to said rental housing inspector, said fee to be in such amount as established by resolution. 
(Code 2017, § 14-3; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2643, § 2, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2812, § 1, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 11-4. - Applicability of codes. 
    The following codes, adopted by reference for the city in the sections of this Code indicated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section, are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in this section. The codes adopted by this section shall, to the extent applicable, regulate the maintenance of housing under this article. The codes adopted by this section shall, to the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of article II of this chapter, also regulate the maintenance of rental housing under article II of this chapter. 
(1)  The National Electrical Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 7-49; 
(2)  The Uniform Plumbing Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 7-169; 
(3)  The International Mechanical Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 7-413; 
(4)  The International Fire Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 9-19; 
(5)  The International Building Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 11-2; 
(6)  The International Residential Code, adopted by reference for the city in section 11-2. 
(Code 2017, § 14-4; Ord. No. 2744, § 2, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2812, § 2, 4-28-2014; Ord. No. 2836, § 1, 2-16-2015; Ord. No. 2885, § 1, 10-3-2016) 
Secs. 11-5-11-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM RENTAL-HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-27. - Title; applicability. 
    The regulations set out in this article, together with the codes referred to in sections 11-2 and 11-4, shall be known as the "Cedar Falls Minimum Rental-Housing Code," and may be cited as such. To the extent any of the provisions of the codes adopted by reference in section 11-2 and in section 11-4(1) through (6) are inconsistent with the provisions of this article, then the provisions of this article shall apply, and the conflicting provisions of such other codes shall not apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1(14-31), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-28. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof within the jurisdiction of the city which are non-owner occupied and which are used or intended to be used for human occupancy, unless otherwise specified. Except as otherwise provided in this article, such occupancy in existing buildings may be continued as provided in International Residential Code, section R102.7, and International Building Code, section 102.6, as adopted by the city. Additionally, all accessory buildings or structures are hereby subject to all applicable sections regarding health, safety and maintenance thereof, as contained in the city building code. Nothing contained in this article is intended to apply to persons under 18 years of age, nor the familial status of any person. 
(1)  Exception 1. Newly constructed buildings for which permits have been issued, and which have passed final inspections, all in accordance with the applicable provisions of the codes referred to and incorporated by reference in section 11-4 shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 11-116 through 11-125, inclusive, and section 11-127. The final decision as to whether such newly constructed buildings meet the requirements of this Exception 1 shall be made by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee. 
(2)  Exception 2. Existing buildings for which permits have been issued and which have passed final inspections, all in accordance with the applicable provisions of the codes referred to and incorporated by reference in section 11-4 shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 11-116 through 11-125 inclusive and section 11-127. The final decision as to whether such existing buildings meet the requirements of this Exception 2 shall be made by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1(14-32), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-29. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use, occupancy and maintenance of all residential rental buildings and related structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1(14-33), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-30. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "boardinghouse," "roominghouse," or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Acceptable or approved means in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is not used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Appurtenance means that which is directly or indirectly connected or accessory to some other structure. 
    Basement means the lowest story of the building, just beneath the main floor, wholly or partly underground. 
    Bath means a bathtub or shower stall connected with hot and cold water lines. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or other overnight lodging facility where, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided by the building owners or managers for resident boarders with meals for all resident boarders provided in a central kitchen facility within said building. Said boarding facility shall be distinctive from transient lodging facilities such as hotels, beds and breakfasts, other overnight lodging facilities or public eateries. Residents within said boardinghouse facility shall be accommodated with weekly, monthly, or yearly tenant agreements or leases. 
    Communal means used or shared by or intended to be used or shared by the occupants of two or more rooming units or two or more dwelling units. 
    Condominium means a dwelling unit which is in compliance with the requirements of Iowa Code ch. 499B, as amended. 
    Cooperative means a dwelling unit which is in compliance with the requirements of Iowa Code ch. 499B, as amended. 
    Court means an open unoccupied space which is more than 50 percent enclosed by buildings. 
    Dining room means a habitable room used or intended to be used for the purpose of eating, but not for cooking or the preparation of meals. 
    Dwelling means any building or structure containing one or more units used, intended, or designed for occupancy by persons, including any attached appurtenances. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means any structure containing three or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-unit, means a structure containing one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-unit, means a structure containing two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, two-unit conversion, means a structure that was originally constructed as a single-unit dwelling, but which was subsequently converted to a two-unit dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any building, room, or group of adjoining rooms providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the inspector. 
    Garbage means animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, and shall also mean combustible waste material. The term "garbage" also includes paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings and other combustible materials. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed space having a minimum of 70 square feet of total floor area within a dwelling unit or rooming unit used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms, pantries, laundries, foyers, corridors, closets, storage spaces and stairways. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests in such quantities as would be considered unsanitary. 
    Inspection, follow-up, means one of a number of reinspections of a dwelling unit following an initial inspection, designed to determine and achieve compliance with deficiencies noted in the initial and any other follow-up inspections. 
    Inspection, initial, means a periodic inspection of a dwelling unit conducted to determine compliance with the provisions of this article, whether initiated by the inspector or by written complaint. 
    Inspector means the official of the city delegated the responsibility to administer the provisions of this article, together with his duly authorized representatives or agents. 
    Kitchen means a habitable room used or intended to be used for cooking and the preparation of meals. 
    Kitchenette means a food preparation area of not less than 40 square feet. 
    Lavatory means a handwashing basin which is connected to both hot and cold water lines, which is separate and distinct from a kitchen sink. 
    Minimum rental housing occupancy permit means a document issued by the city evidencing authority to occupy a dwelling unit. 
    Occupant means any person, including the owner or operator, living in, sleeping in, eating, or cooking in or having actual physical possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who rents to another or who has custody or control of a building or parts thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let, and who has custody and control of the premises. 
    Owner means any person who has control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or roominghouse by virtue of a contractual interest in or legal or equitable title to the dwelling, dwelling unit or roominghouse. An owner who has sold the premises on contract but retains legal title shall not be deemed an owner under this article. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust or estate. 
    Plumbing means any or all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, water heating devices, catchbasins, drains, vents and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas service. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including all buildings thereon. 
    Refuse means waste materials, except human waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rooming unit means any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit, with facilities which are used or intended to be used primarily for living and sleeping. A rooming unit shall have a bath and toilet facilities available for exclusive use by the occupant. 
    Roominghouse means an owner-occupied or manager-occupied single dwelling unit wherein individual sleeping rooms are provided to not less than three resident tenants aged 18 years or older. Each rooming unit within the roominghouse shall have a bath and toilet facilities available for exclusive use by the occupant. Not more than one kitchen facility shall be established within said structure wherein meals may be prepared by resident tenants. Said rooming facility shall be distinctive from transient lodging facilities such as hotels, beds and breakfasts, other overnight lodging facilities or public eateries. Residents within said roominghouse facility shall be accommodated with weekly, monthly, or yearly tenant agreements or leases. 
    Rubbish means inorganic waste material consisting of primarily noncombustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1(14-34), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-31. - Violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a). 
(1)  Violations in general. Any person who violates any provision of this article other than sections 11-81(a), 11-116(b)(3), and 11-119, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to civil penalty as provided in section 1-9, unless another penalty is expressly provided for such violation by this article. 
(2)  Violations of sections 11-81(a), 11-116(b)(3), and 11-119. Any person who violates section 11-81(a), 11-116(b)(3), or 11-119 shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the following civil penalties, plus court costs and for such other relief as is provided in section 1-9(a)(3): 
a.  First offense for such person: $500.00; 
b.  Second offense for such person: $750.00; plus the occupancy permit shall be revoked for the dwelling unit with respect to which such second offense violation occurred, for a period of three months; 
c.  Third and subsequent offense for such person: $900.00; plus the occupancy permit shall be revoked for the dwelling unit with respect to which such third or the most recent subsequent offense violation occurred, for a period of six months. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1(14-35), 12-18-2017) 
Secs. 11-32-11-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 11-51. - Authority of inspector and code enforcement officer. 
    The inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this division. For such purposes, the inspector shall have the authority of the law enforcement officer. Any code enforcement officer or other employee of the city appointed by the mayor or by the mayor's designee, including the chief of police and the fire chief, is also authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-51; Ord. No. 2643, § 6, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 11-52. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this division, or whenever the inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation of this division which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the inspector may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or perform any duty imposed upon the inspector by this division; provided that if such building or premises is occupied the inspector shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such building or premises is unoccupied he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the inspector has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail to neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-52; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Secs. 11-53-11-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 11-78. - Building permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure regulated by this division without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the building official. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the International Residential Code or International Building Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make an application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-71; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2643, § 7, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2812, § 5, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 11-79. - Permit fees. 
    Whenever a building permit is required by this division, the appropriate fees shall be paid to the building official at the rate established by resolution from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 14-72; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-80. - Inspections. 
    All buildings or structures within the scope of this division and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this division and section R105, permits, and section R106, construction documents, of the International Residential Code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-73; Ord. No. 2643, § 8, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 11-81. - Occupancy permit. 
(a)  Application. Before allowing a dwelling unit to be occupied, every owner shall apply for and obtain a minimum rental housing occupancy permit from the city for such dwelling unit. Each owner shall take all steps required by this division to keep the occupancy permit valid and in effect at all times. 
(b)  Issuance. When the owner has complied with all requirements of this division relating to a dwelling unit, and has paid all fees required by this division, the inspector shall issue a minimum rental housing occupancy permit to the owner for such dwelling unit. 
(c)  Expiration. An occupancy permit for a dwelling unit issued under subsection (b) of this section shall be valid until the next initial inspection of the dwelling unit has been conducted as provided in this division, at which time such occupancy permit shall expire. No new occupancy permit shall be issued with respect to such dwelling unit until the owner has complied with all requirements of subsection (b) of this section, provided, however, that the inspector may grant the owner a temporary occupancy permit under subsection (g)(2) of this section, in order to afford the owner an opportunity to bring the dwelling unit into compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(d)  Location. The owner shall cause the occupancy permit to be placed in each unit where it is readily available for examination by prospective tenants, tenants, and the inspector at all times. If the permit is not available for examination during any inspection, the owner shall be required to immediately replace such permit at the owner's expense. 
(e)  Contents of permit. The occupancy permit shall contain the following information: the property address of the dwelling unit; the unit number of the dwelling unit; the owner's name, address and telephone number; the name and address and telephone number of the owner's agent, if the owner is not a resident of Black Hawk County, Iowa; the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit, not to exceed four; the date of issuance of the occupancy permit; and the expiration date of the occupancy permit, if the permit is a temporary occupancy permit issued under subsection (g) of this section. 
(f)  Inspection prior to issuance. Except as provided in subsection (g)(1) of this section, prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any dwelling unit, the inspector shall inspect the dwelling unit to ensure that it complies in all respect with all codes made applicable to dwelling units by the provisions of this division. No minimum rental housing occupancy permit shall be issued until all such requirements have been complied with, and all inspection, registration and other fees have been paid. 
(g)  Temporary permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (f) of this section, the inspector may, but is not required to, issue a temporary occupancy permit under either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the inspector determines that it is impractical to inspect a dwelling unit within a reasonable time after an owner makes application for an occupancy permit. In such case, the inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit which shall be valid for the minimum reasonable period of time which the inspector determines is needed in order to complete the inspection of the dwelling unit; or 
(2)  If an occupancy permit previously issued with respect to a dwelling unit has expired under subsection (c) of this section, by reason of the next initial inspection of the dwelling unit having been conducted, and if the dwelling unit does not then comply with all of the requirements of this division. In such case, the inspector may, but is not required to, issue a temporary occupancy permit for the minimum reasonable period of time which the inspector determines is needed by the owner to bring the dwelling unit into compliance with all of the requirements of this division. 
In either case, the expiration date of the temporary occupancy permit shall be stated on the face of the permit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-74; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2186, § 1, 3-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-82. - Initial inspections of dwelling units. 
    An initial inspection of every dwelling unit shall be conducted no less often than every five years, computed from the date of the previous most recent initial inspection of the dwelling unit. An initial inspection of a dwelling unit may also be conducted either at the request of a tenant of the dwelling unit as provided in section 11-3(b), or if the inspector receives a written complaint which, if verified, would establish a violation of any provision of this division. Upon compliance with all requirements noted in the initial inspection report, and upon payment of all necessary fees, the inspector shall issue a minimum rental housing occupancy permit with respect to such dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-75; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-14-1997) 
Sec. 11-83. - Annual registration of dwelling units. 
(a)  Registration fee. Every owner shall apply for and pay a registration fee for each dwelling unit. A validation seal shall be issued upon the receipt of the registration fee which the owner shall cause to be placed on the occupancy permit as proof of registration. The registration fee shall be determined as provided in section 11-84. 
(b)  Posting of registration receipt. The owner shall cause the current validation seal to be placed on the occupancy permit in each unit where it is readily available for review by prospective tenants, tenants, and the inspector at all times. 
(Code 2017, § 14-76; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2190, § 1, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 2744, § 5, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-84. - Fee schedule. 
    All initial inspection fees, follow-up inspection fees, registration fees, and any other fees assessed pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be in such amounts as are set annually by resolution of the city council. All such fees shall be published in a fee schedule which shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk, and made available for distribution to the public at no cost. 
(Code 2017, § 14-77; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-14-1997) 
Sec. 11-85. - Effect of issuance of occupancy permit or registration receipt. 
    The issuance of a minimum rental housing occupancy permit or a registration receipt for a dwelling unit shall not be construed to mean that the dwelling unit complies with the provisions of this division or with any of the provisions of any other chapters of this Code, including, but not limited to, chapter 26. After issuance of a minimum rental housing occupancy permit or a registration receipt for a dwelling unit, if it is determined that the dwelling unit, or the structure of which the dwelling unit is a part, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this division, the inspector is authorized and directed to require the owner to bring said dwelling unit or structure into compliance with all of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-78; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2270, § 4, 7-12-1999) 
Secs. 11-86-11-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RENTAL UNIT QUALITY AND STRUCTURAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 11-114. - Sanitary requirements. 
    The dwelling unit shall include its own sanitary facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. 
(1)  Toilets and lavatory basins. At least one toilet and one lavatory basin shall be supplied for each four persons or fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit, including members of the operator's family whenever they share such facilities, unless more restrictive code provisions apply to a dwelling, in which case the more stringent requirements shall govern. 
(2)  Baths. At least one bath shall be supplied for each four persons or fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit. 
(3)  Kitchens. An approved kitchen sink with hot and cold running water shall be supplied, with adequate space for the storage and preparation of food. Unless approved by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
a.  Exceptions. 
1.  Where specifically approved in writing by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee. 
2.  Coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances. 
b.  Structural requirements. 
1.  Connection to water and sewer system. Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin and bath shall be properly connected to an approved water and sewer system as provided for in the applicable city regulations. 
2.  Separation of bathroom facilities from other rooms. Every toilet, bath and lavatory basin shall be contained within a room which will afford privacy to the user, and shall be separated from a food preparation area by a tightfitting door; except that the lavatory may be immediately adjacent to the toilet room. 
3.  Communal toilets and baths. Communal toilets and baths shall be located on the same floor or the floor immediately above or below the rooming unit. 
4.  Communal kitchen. If a communal kitchen is supplied, it shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  The minimum floor area of communal kitchens shall be 70 square feet. 
(ii)  Floor area in communal kitchens which permits roomers to prepare and eat meals shall be 100 square feet. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of three feet between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
(iii)  The kitchen shall contain adequate food storage capacity, an approved sink and a stove or range. 
(iv)  The kitchen shall include at least one cabinet of adequate size suitable for the storage of food, and eating and cooking utensils. 
(v)  The kitchen shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the facilities if a communal dining room is not supplied. 
(vi)  Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen, without going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. 
5.  Communal dining rooms. Every dwelling within which the occupant is permitted to prepare meals or cook within a communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area shall contain communal dining room which complies with the following requirements: 
(i)  Every communal dining room shall be located on the same floor as the communal kitchen and located as nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable. 
(ii)  Accessibility to the communal dining room by occupant shall be the same as requirements for communal kitchens. 
(iii)  The communal dining room shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the facilities. 
(iv)  The communal dining room shall contain not less than 70 square feet of floor area. 
c.  Acceptability criteria. All sanitary units should be fully functional and in proper operating condition, shall be free from leaks and mineral buildup, and shall be clean to normally accepted household cleanliness standards. Drainage shall be complete in lavatories and sinks, and all units must meet the requirements of the city plumbing code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-91; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2744, § 6, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2881, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 11-115. - Food preparation; garbage disposal. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The dwelling unit shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and garbage, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary. 
(b)  Structural requirements. Structural requirements for food preparation and garbage disposal facilities shall be as provided in section 11-114, pertaining to sanitary requirements. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of three feet between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Refrigerators, cooking stoves or ranges and other food preparation equipment shall be in proper operating order. Areas shall be clean to normally acceptable household cleanliness standards. Temporary and permanent garbage receptacles shall be free of leaks, shall be covered, and should not show buildup of deposits due to lack of cleaning. If plastic bags are used for garbage disposal, they should be placed in a container indoors. Full bags should be placed in a holding area other than the food preparation area. 
(Code 2017, § 14-92; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2881, § 3, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 11-116. - Space and security. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The dwelling shall afford the residents adequate space and security. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Floor area per occupant for efficiency units. Every efficiency unit shall contain at least 120 square feet of floor space for the first occupant; at least 220 square feet of floor space for two occupants; and at least 320 square feet for three occupants. In determining the maximum permissible occupancy, the floor area of that part of a room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered when computing the total floor area of the room. The efficiency unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this division shall be provided. 
(2)  Floor area per occupant for sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms and every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant. 
(3)  Ceiling height. 
a.  The ceiling height in every habitable room shall be at least seven feet. Obstructions of space by such items as water and gas pipes, cabinetry, etc., shall be permitted when such obstructions are located in such a fashion that they do not interfere with normal or emergency ingress and egress and are approved by the inspector. In no event may an obstruction be located nearer than six feet four inches to the floor. 
b.  Exceptions to requirements in this subsection (b)(3) and subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section are as follows: 
1.  In one- and two-unit dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting a maximum of six inches below the required ceiling height. 
2.  Basement rooms in one- and two-unit dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of six feet eight inches with a minimum clear height of six feet four inches under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
3.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purpose and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of five feet shall be included. 
(4)  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be not less than seven feet in any plan dimension. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. The dwelling shall conform to subsection (b) of this section, pertaining to structural requirements. Sleeping areas should have doors latchable or lockable from within for privacy and safety. Latches or locks should be of the type to permit swift emergency exit in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-93; Ord. No. 2643, § 9, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2836, § 5, 2-16-2015; Ord. No. 2881, § 4, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 11-117. - Access. 
(a)  Performance requirements. Access to each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not require first entering any other dwelling unit or rooming unit, except that access to rooming units may be through a living room or kitchen of a unit occupied by the owner or operator of the structure. 
(b)  Structural requirements. No dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by the occupant of more than one sleeping room can be gained only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be gained only by going through another sleeping room. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. The dwelling unit shall be usable and capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private properties. Further requirements are contained in section 11-120, pertaining to exits. 
(Code 2017, § 14-94; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-118. - Lighting in public halls and stairways. 
(a)  Performance requirements. Public passageways and stairways in dwellings accommodating two or more dwelling units or rooming units shall be provided with a convenient wall-mounted light switch which activates an adequate lighting system. 
(b)  Structural requirements. Switches shall be placed both at the top and bottom of stairwells, and must be of the types which meet the electrical code of the city. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria shall be the requirements set out in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 14-95; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-119. - Fire safety. 
(a)  Performance requirements. All rental housing shall be provided with fire protection equipment as follows: 
(1)  All dwelling units shall be provided with a sufficient number of fire extinguishers which are approved by the fire marshal. Fire extinguishers shall be properly mounted and accessible to all occupants. Fire extinguishers shall comply with National Fire Protection Association, Standard 10. Minimum size shall be 2A:10B:C. Fire extinguishers shall be equipped with a sight gauge to indicate pressure and shall be maintained in accordance with National Fire Protection Association, Standard 10. 
(2)  All dwelling units shall be provided with smoke detectors as defined in International Fire Code, 2015 Edition section 907.2.11. In multiple unit dwellings, there shall be smoke detectors in common hallways accessible to two or more units. Detectors shall also be located in cellars or basements when such cellars or basements are used for storage, laundry equipment or central heating units. 
a.  Effective January 1, 2014, all dwelling units shall be equipped with dual sensor smoke detectors as defined in Iowa Code § 100.18 and 661 Iowa Admin. Code 210.1. 
b.  Effective January 1, 2015, all dwelling units that have attached garages or within which fuel-fired appliances exist, shall have an approved carbon monoxide alarm installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. Single station carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed as complying with UL 2034 and shall be installed in accordance with this code and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Dual sensor smoke detectors that have carbon monoxide and smoke detection sensors which are listed to UL 2034 and UL 217, shall be allowed. 
c.  Effective January 1, 2018, all newly registered rental dwelling units and those changing ownership that do not contain hardwired provision for electric detection shall be provided with ten-year battery tamper proof dual sensor smoke detectors or ten-year battery tamper proof combination dual sensor smoke detectors/carbon monoxide detectors that comply with this section. 
d.  Effective January 1, 2018, each time a smoke detector in a rental dwelling unit that is hardwired for electric detection is replaced, repaired, or removed, or is ordered to be replaced, repaired or removed, it shall be replaced with a dual sensor smoke detector that is hardwired for electric detection that complies with this section. Each time a smoke detector in a rental dwelling unit that is not hardwired for electric smoke detection is replaced, repaired, or removed, or is ordered to be replaced, repaired, or removed, it shall be replaced with ten-year battery tamper proof dual sensor smoke detectors that comply with this section. 
1.  Effective January 1, 2021, all rental units that do not contain hardwired provision for electric smoke detection shall be provided with ten-year battery tamper proof dual sensor smoke detectors that comply with this section. 
2.  In accordance with 661 Iowa Admin. Code 210.3(11), smoke detectors shall be located as follows: 
(i)  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. 
(ii)  In each room used for sleeping. 
(iii)  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwelling unit with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one story below the upper level. 
A.  All new smoke detectors are required to be a "dual sensor smoke detector" as defined in 661 Iowa Admin. Code 210.1; 
B.  The term "dual sensor smoke detector" means a smoke detector which contains both an ionization sensor and a photoelectric sensor and which is designed to detect and trigger an alarm in response to smoke detected through either sensing device, or a smoke detector which has at least two sensors and is listed to Underwriters Laboratory Standard 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms, or to another standard approved by the state fire marshal. 
3.  Carbon monoxide alarms. Effective May 1, 2011, all new registered dwelling units that have attached garages or within which fuel-fired appliances exist, shall have an approved carbon monoxide alarm installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. Single station carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed as complying with UL 2034 and shall be installed in accordance with this Code and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(3)  Every floor above the first story used for human occupancy shall meet the exit requirements of section 11-120. If the structure cannot meet such exit requirements because it has only one approved means of egress, fire escape stairs will be permitted to serve as part of the second approved means of egress, provided such second means of egress meets all of the following performance standards in addition to all other requirements for a means of egress: 
a.  Fire escape stairs must serve an occupant load of ten or less or a single dwelling unit or guestroom; and 
b.  There must be access to the fire escape stairs from each dwelling unit on each story served by the fire escape stairs, by means of either an approved exit or an approved balcony. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to vary the provisions of section 11-120(b)(1) requiring emergency escape or rescue windows in every sleeping room, or the provisions of section 11-117(a) through (c) regarding access to dwelling units and between the various rooms of dwelling units. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Fire escape stairs must not pass in front of any building opening below the unit being served. 
(2)  The means of activating the escape device must be accessible to the rental unit or balcony being served. 
(3)  Installation of fire escape stairs must not cause a person to pass within six feet of external electrical wiring. 
(4)  Fire escape stairways and balconies must support the dead load plus a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot. Stairway pitch shall be more than 60 degrees, with a minimum width of 18 inches. Stair treads shall not be less than four inches, and the rise between treads shall not exceed ten inches. All horizontal and balcony rails shall support a horizontal force or not less than 50 pounds per linear foot of railing. 
(5)  Fire escape stairs must reach the ground or be equipped with counterbalanced extensions which will allow them to extend to the ground. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance and structural requirements. In addition, fire escapes must be kept clear and unobstructed and must be in good operating order. 
(Code 2017, § 14-96; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2270, § 5, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 2643, § 10, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2744, §§ 7, 8, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-120. - Exits. 
(a)  Performance requirements. Every rental dwelling and rooming unit shall have access to two independent, unobstructed means of egress remote from each other. Except for a dwelling or rooming unit on the first story or below grade, neither means of egress shall consist solely of a window approved for emergency escape or rescue. At least one mode shall be an exit which discharges directly to a corridor, stairway or public way. If both exits are to a common corridor, they shall permit emergency egress in two directions. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Sleeping rooms shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside without resorting to separate tools. Doorways shall be at least six feet, four inches high by at least 36 inches wide. Escape or rescue windows shall have a minimum net opening of 5.7 square feet. The minimum net opening height shall be 24 inches, with a minimum net opening width of 20 inches and a maximum sill height of 44 inches from the floor. 
(2)  Stairways having more than four risers shall be equipped with a substantial and safely constructed handrail of a height not less than 34 inches and not more than 38 inches above front nosing of stair tread. The stairway rise height shall be uniform, and each tread shall be of uniform width to allow uniform stepping motion for traversing the stairway. 
(3)  Porches, balconies or raised floor surfaces located more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards not less than 36 inches in height. Open sides of stairs with a total rise of more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards not less than 34 inches in height measured vertically from the nosing of the stair treads. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance and structural requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 14-97; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2270, § 6, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 2643, § 11, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 11-121. - Natural light, natural ventilation and mechanical ventilation. 
(a)  Performance requirements. 
(1)  All habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms, with a minimum of ten square feet. All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than of the floor area of such rooms, with a minimum of one square feet. 
(2)  All habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than of the floor area of such rooms, with a minimum of five square feet. 
(3)  In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all habitable rooms. One-fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside, capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Every window or other device with an opening to the outdoor space which is capable of being used for ventilation purposes shall be maintained in a good state of repair. This will include screens, if applicable. 
(2)  Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to the outdoor space shall fit reasonably tightly within its frame and shall be maintained in good order and a good state of repair. 
(3)  Additional structural requirements are set out in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Every dwelling unit or rooming unit shall have natural light and natural ventilation. Mechanical ventilation may be substituted in lieu of natural ventilation. Exterior openings or mechanical systems shall be maintained in good working condition to ensure an appropriate climate for a healthy living environment. 
(Code 2017, § 14-98; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-122. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Performance requirements. 
(1)  Every dwelling and rooming unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) at a distance of three feet above the floor level at all times. The heating facilities shall be so designed and equipped that heat, as specified in this subsection, is available for all dwelling units and rooming units. 
(2)  Every fuel-burning heating unit or water heater shall be effectively vented in a safe manner to a chimney or duct leading to the exterior of the building. The chimney or duct shall be of such design as to ensure proper draft, and shall be adequately supported. 
(3)  Every central heating unit, space heater, water heater and cooking appliance shall be located and installed in such a manner as to afford reasonable protection against involvement of egress facilities or egress routes in the event of uncontrolled fire in the structure. 
(4)  No fuel-burning furnace or water heater shall be located within any sleeping room or bathroom unless there is adequate combustion air, an automatic shutoff is provided and the continuing operation of the furnace or water heater poses no threat to the occupants, as determined by the city mechanical inspector. 
(5)  Every steam or hot water boiler and every water heater shall be protected against overheating by appropriate automatic pressure and temperature limit controls. 
(6)  Every fuel-burning space heating unit and water heater shall be equipped with an electronic ignition device or with a pilot light and a control to interrupt the flow of fuel to the unit in the event of failure of the ignition device. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Such equipment shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with applicable codes and manufacturer's specifications. 
(2)  Installation of natural gas and associated equipment shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 7. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance and structural requirements. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. Unvented room heaters which burn gas, oil or kerosene are unacceptable. 
(Code 2017, § 14-99; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2744, § 9, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-123. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Performance requirements. Each room shall have adequate electrical equipment to permit normal indoor activities and to support the health and safety of occupants. Sufficient electrical sources shall be provided to permit use of essential electrical appliances while ensuring safety from fire or electrical failure. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Electrical lighting. 
a.  Every habitable room and bathroom shall contain at least one wall switch and an electric light fixture. In rooms other than kitchens, one or more electrical receptacles controlled by wall switches may be permitted. 
b.  All nonhabitable rooms such as furnace rooms, utility rooms, hallways, stairways, exterior and interior entrances and attached garages shall be provided with an electrically operable light fixture to illuminate such areas. 
c.  Cellars, basements, attics and crawl spaces containing service equipment or used for storage purposes shall contain an electric light fixture for illumination to facilitate checking, servicing and general personal safety. 
d.  Hallways, interior and exterior stairways and interior and exterior entrances may be provided with automatically controlled electrical lighting if manual electrical switching is provided. Switches shall be provided at both ingress and egress areas to provide safe unobstructed use of such areas. 
(2)  Electric convenience outlets. 
a.  Every habitable room shall contain at least two double electric convenience outlets. 
b.  Every bathroom and kitchen where the receptacles are installed to serve the counter-top surfaces, shall be provided with an approved ground fault interrupter circuit. 
c.  Other nonhabitable rooms shall be provided with electrical convenience outlets as required for use. 
(3)  Maximum overcurrent protection of branch circuits is 15 amperes, except that laundry room, kitchen and dining room outlets, when provided with no. 12 A.W.G. or larger, shall be in accordance with the electrical code of the city. 
(4)  Overcurrent devices shall be identified on the panel as to the circuits they protect. 
(5)  Service entrance conductors shall be properly installed with a main disconnect and overcurrent protection. The main disconnect shall be located as near as possible to the service entrance. The service shall be properly grounded by a continuous copper conductor to the street side of the water meter and bonded across the water meter to the house side. Units without city-supplied water shall have grounding by proper connection to a grounding rod. 
(6)  All occupants shall have ready access to all overcurrent devices supplying their respective areas. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance and structural requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 14-100; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-124. - Interior air quality. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The dwelling unit shall be free from pollutants in the air at levels which threaten the health of the occupants. 
(b)  Structural requirements. Structural requirements shall be as provided in section 11-122(a)(1), pertaining to thermal environment. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. The dwelling unit shall be free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sewer gas, fuel gas, dust and other harmful air pollutants. Air circulation shall be adequate throughout the unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-101; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-125. - Potable water supply. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The water supply shall be free from contamination. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Generally. The provisions of the city plumbing code shall apply to the water supply. 
(2)  Required water heating facilities. Every kitchen sink, bath and lavatory basin required in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be properly connected with supplied water heating facilities. Every water heating facility shall be properly connected and shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn on every kitchen sink and lavatory basin required at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (48 degrees Celsius). 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. The unit shall be served by an approved public or private sanitary water supply. Water heating facilities shall meet the requirements stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 14-102; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-126. - Shades, draperies and window coverings. 
(a)  Performance requirements. 
(1)  Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in rooming units and furnished dwelling units shall be supplied with shades, draperies or other devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupants. 
(2)  Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in unfurnished dwelling units shall be supplied with hardware necessary to support shades, draperies or other devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupants. 
(b)  Structural requirements. Structural requirements are the same as performance requirements. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 14-103; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-127. - Structure and materials. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The dwelling unit shall be structurally sound so as not to pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the environment. 
(b)  Structural requirements. 
(1)  Generally. Structural requirements shall be as provided in division 7 of this article. 
(2)  Lead based paints. The dwelling unit shall be in compliance with Housing and Urban Development lead based paint regulations, 24 CFR 35, issued pursuant to the Lead Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Action, 42 USC 4801, and the owner shall provide a certification that the dwelling is in accordance with such Housing and Urban Development regulations. If the property was constructed prior to 1950, the residents, upon occupancy, shall be furnished the notice required under the Housing and Urban Development lead based paint regulations, and procedures regarding the hazards of lead based poisoning, the symptoms and treatment of lead poisoning and the precautions to be taken against lead poisoning. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. Ceilings, walls and floors shall not have any serious defects such as severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface materials, severe buckling or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts or other serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm and the roof shall be weathertight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall surface shall not have any serious defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging, cracks, holes, loose siding or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior and exterior stairways, halls, porches, walkways, etc., shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators shall be maintained in safe and operating condition. In the case of a mobile home, the home shall be securely anchored by a tie-down device which distributes and transfers the loads imposed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind forces and prevent the mobile home from overturning and sliding. 
(Code 2017, § 14-104; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-128. - Site and neighborhood. 
(a)  Performance requirements. The site shall be reasonably free from disturbing noises and reverberations and other hazards to the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Structural requirements. Buildings should be maintained so as not to present a deteriorated condition indicating a blighted area. The site should be free of trash and maintained in conformance with accepted standards within the neighborhood. Parking should be organized, and parking rules shall be enforced. Garbage receiving areas shall be maintained and kept clean, and shall not provide access by rodents and vermin. 
(c)  Acceptability criteria. The site shall not be subject to serious adverse environmental conditions, natural or manmade, such as dangerous walks, steps, poor drainage, septic tank backups, sewage hazards, mudslides, dust, smoke, excessive accumulation of trash, vermin or rodent infestation or fire hazards. 
(Code 2017, § 14-105; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-129. - Occupancy standards. 
(a)  Performance requirements. No occupant shall allow the occupancy of any dwelling unit or rooming unit within which he lives to violate either the occupancy standards outlined in section 11-116 and division 6 of this article pertaining to occupant's responsibilities, or the occupancy requirements of division 10 of this article. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. No owner shall knowingly allow the occupancy of any dwelling unit or rooming unit he owns to violate either the occupancy standards outlined in section 11-116, or the occupancy requirements of division 10 of this article. 
(c)  Occupancy permit. No person shall occupy, nor shall the owner allow the occupancy of, any dwelling unit which does not then have a valid minimum rental housing occupancy permit in effect. 
(d)  Registration receipt. No person shall occupy, nor shall the owner allow the occupancy of, any dwelling unit which does not then have a valid registration receipt in effect. 
(e)  Structural requirements. Structural requirements are as provided in section 11-116. 
(f)  Acceptability criteria. Acceptability criteria are the same as performance and structural requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 14-106; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2836, §§ 6, 7, 2-16-2015) 
Secs. 11-130-11-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 11-157. - General authority exercised over division. 
    The owner's responsibilities under this article are as set out in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-126; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-158. - Maintenance of structure. 
(a)  Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair, step, elevator, handrail, porch, guardrail, sidewalk and appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition and shall be capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(b)  Every foundation, floor, exterior wall, interior door, window and roof shall be maintained in a reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and insectproof condition. 
(c)  Every door and window, to include all hardware associated with every door and window, shall be maintained in good and functional condition and shall fit reasonably well within its frame. 
(d)  Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling and other interior surface shall be maintained so as to permit it to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and where appropriate shall be capable of providing privacy. 
(Code 2017, § 14-127; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-159. - Maintenance of accessory structures. 
    Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window, exterior door and appurtenance of every accessory structure shall be so maintained as to prevent the structure from becoming a harborage for rats or other vermin and shall be maintained in a reasonably watertight, structurally sound condition capable of withstanding imposed wind and snow loads. 
(Code 2017, § 14-128; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-160. - Drainage. 
(a)  Rainwater drainage. Rainwater shall be directed away from the building so as to prevent water damage to the structure. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. Every premises shall be graded and drained so no stagnant water will accumulate or stand thereon. 
(c)  Exception. This section shall not affect the existence or maintenance of approved stormwater detention systems. 
(Code 2017, § 14-129; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-161. - Chimneys. 
    Every chimney shall be adequately supported and maintained in a reasonably good state of repair. 
(Code 2017, § 14-130; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-162. - Protection of exterior wood surfaces. 
(a)  Generally. All exterior wood surfaces of a dwelling and its accessory structures, porches and similar appurtenances shall be protected from the elements against decay by a nonlead paint or other approved protective covering. 
(b)  Exception. Any exterior wood surface comprised of a type of species of wood which resists or which has been treated to resist decay and infestation shall be exempted from the requirement of subsection (a) of this section when approved by the inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 14-131; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-163. - Egress from structure. 
    Every means of egress shall be maintained in good condition and shall be free from obstruction at all times. 
(Code 2017, § 14-132; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-164. - Hanging screens and storm windows. 
    The owner or operator of the premises shall be responsible for hanging all screens and storm windows, except when there is a written agreement between the owner and the occupant to the contrary. Any such agreement shall be available to the inspector during the inspection of the dwelling. Screens shall be provided no later than May 1 of each year and storm windows shall be provided no later than November 1 of each year. 
(Code 2017, § 14-133; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-165. - Electrical system. 
    The electrical system of every dwelling or accessory building shall not, by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of insulation, improper fusing or for any other cause, expose the occupants to hazards of electrical shock. The owner should allow tenant access to fusing and electrical disconnect means. 
(Code 2017, § 14-134; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-166. - Maintenance of plumbing fixtures. 
    Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in a good and sanitary working condition. Water pressure shall be adequate to permit proper flow of water from all open outlets at all times except during maintenance and repair. 
(Code 2017, § 14-135; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-167. - Maintenance of gas appliances and facilities. 
(a)  Every gas pipe shall be sound and tightly put together and shall be free of leaks, corrosion and obstruction causing reduced pressure or volume. 
(b)  Gas pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open gas valves at all times except during maintenance and repair. 
(Code 2017, § 14-136; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-168. - Maintenance of heating and cooling facilities. 
    The heating equipment of each dwelling shall be maintained in a good, safe working condition and shall be capable of heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms located therein to the minimum temperature required by this division. However, heating and cooling equipment shall not be required to be maintained in operational condition during what is considered to be off-season periods. 
(Code 2017, § 14-137; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-169. - Floors. 
    Every toilet room floor surface, bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be maintained so as to permit them to be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition. 
(Code 2017, § 14-138; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-170. - Supplied facilities. 
    No supplied facility shall be removed, shut off or disconnected from any occupied dwelling unit or rooming unit except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs, replacements or alterations are being made, unless authorized by court order. 
(Code 2017, § 14-139; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-171. - Maintenance of sanitary facilities. 
    All toilets, baths and lavatory basins shall be maintained in good working condition. 
(Code 2017, § 14-140; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-172. - Fire protection. 
    All fire extinguishers and early warning fire safety systems shall be maintained in proper working order at all times. Anyone who fails to take immediate action to abate a hazard when notified by the code official shall be subject to citation. 
(Code 2017, § 14-141; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2744, § 10, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-173. - Pest extermination. 
    The owner or operator shall be responsible for extermination of pests when it is determined by the county health officer or his designated agent that the infestation is present in two or more dwelling units or rooming units within a dwelling. 
(Code 2017, § 14-142; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-174. - Units to be let only when clean and sanitary. 
    No owner or operator shall permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy. 
(Code 2017, § 14-143; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-175. - Garbage disposal. 
    Every owner or operator of a dwelling shall supply adequate facilities for the disposal of garbage in compliance with this Code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-144; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-176. - Cooking in rooming units. 
    No owner or operator shall knowingly allow the use of cooking equipment within any rooming unit except for specifically supplied kitchens or kitchenettes meeting the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-146; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-177. - Tornado shelter. 
    The owner of a dwelling unit shall identify and maintain a tornado shelter for use by occupants of each dwelling unit. The owner shall post a notice in each dwelling unit indicating the location of this site in relation to the dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-147; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-178. - Address numbers. 
    New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
(Code 2017, § 14-148; Ord. No. 2643, § 12, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 11-179. - Requirement that parking lots and parking areas be hard-surfaced. 
    The owner of each property upon which any residential rental dwelling unit or units is or are located shall have all driveways, parking lots, parking stalls or other parking areas serving said property hard-surfaced. For purposes of this section, the term "hard surface" means paving, as defined in section 19-212. Any such areas which are not hard-surfaced on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived must be brought into compliance with this requirement by no later than three years following the date of the first minimum rental housing code inspection of any dwelling unit on the property that occurs following the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 2017, § 14-149; Ord. No. 2836, § 8, 2-16-2015) 
Secs. 11-180-11-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OCCUPANT'S RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 11-197. - Cleanliness and sanitation. 
    The occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall keep in a clean, safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises thereof that he occupies and controls, to include the following: 
(1)  Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and sanitary. 
(2)  Every wall and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean and free of dirt or greasy film. 
(3)  No dwelling shall be used for storage or handling of refuse, except as provided in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-166; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-198. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    The occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the reasonable care, proper use and proper operation thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 14-167; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-199. - Extermination of pests. 
    The occupant of a single-unit dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests on the premises. The occupant of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or rooming units shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied by him whenever the unit is the only one infested. However, whenever it is determined by the county health officer or his designated agent that infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodentproof or insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Code 2017, § 14-168; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-200. - Storage and disposal of garbage. 
    The occupant of a dwelling shall dispose of rubbish, garbage and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied disposal facilities or containers required by this Code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-169; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-201. - Electrical wiring. 
    The occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall use no temporary wiring or extension cords except extension cords which run directly from portable electric fixtures to convenience outlets and which do not lie beneath floor coverings or extend through doorways, transoms or similar structural elements or are attached thereto. The occupant shall not knowingly overload the circuitry of the dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-170; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-202. - Supplied facilities. 
    The occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the reasonable care, proper use and proper operation thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 14-171; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2744, § 11, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 11-203. - Fire safety devices. 
    The occupant shall not tamper with or disable any fire extinguisher or early warning protection device or system. All tenants listed on the dwelling unit's lease agreement shall be held responsible for any tampering or disabling within the unit and shall be subject to citation. Anyone who fails to take immediate action to abate a hazard when notified by the code official shall be subject to citation. 
(Code 2017, § 14-172; Ord. No. 2744, § 12, 4-25-2011) 
Secs. 11-204-11-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SUBSTANDARD RENTAL UNITS 

Sec. 11-230. - General conditions. 
    Any rental unit or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the unit is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in this division, to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building. 
(Code 2017, § 14-191; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-231. - Substandard conditions. 
    Substandard conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower. 
(2)  Lack of or improper kitchen sink. 
(3)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures. 
(4)  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
(5)  Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating equipment. 
(6)  Lack of or minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this article. 
(7)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this article. 
(8)  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
(9)  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
(10)  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the health officer. 
(11)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
(12)  Lack of connection to the required sewage disposal system. 
(13)  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the health officer. 
(14)  Lack of a valid minimum rental housing occupancy permit for the dwelling unit. 
(15)  Lack of a current registration receipt for the dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-192; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-232. - Structural hazards. 
    Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(Code 2017, § 14-193; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-233. - Hazardous wiring. 
    Hazardous wiring shall include all wiring except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(Code 2017, § 14-194; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-234. - Hazardous plumbing. 
    Hazardous plumbing shall include all plumbing except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
(Code 2017, § 14-195; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-235. - Hazardous mechanical equipment. 
    Hazardous mechanical equipment shall include all mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Code 2017, § 14-196; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-236. - Faulty weather protection. 
    Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
(3)  Defective weather protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(Code 2017, § 14-197; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-237. - Fire hazards. 
    Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire operations division or his deputy, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause shall be deemed a fire hazard. 
(Code 2017, § 14-198; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-238. - Faulty materials of construction. 
    Faulty materials of construction shall include all materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this article and the building code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Code 2017, § 14-199; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-239. - Hazardous or unsanitary premises. 
    Hazardous or unsanitary premises shall include those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
(Code 2017, § 14-200; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-240. - Inadequate maintenance. 
    Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the building code of the city shall be deemed to be inadequately maintained. 
(Code 2017, § 14-201; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 11-241. - Inadequate exits. 
(a)  All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this article shall be deemed to have inadequate exits. 
(b)  When an unsafe condition exists through lack of or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
(Code 2017, § 14-202; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2270, § 7, 7-12-1999) 
Sec. 11-242. - Inadequate fire-resistive construction or firefighting equipment. 
(a)  All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction required by this article shall be deemed to have inadequate fire-resistive construction, except those buildings or portions thereof which the owner proves by clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence: 
(1)  Conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction, conversion to rental dwelling unit status, and increase in number of rental dwelling units; and 
(2)  Whose fire-resistive construction has been adequately maintained and improved with any increase in number of dwelling units or occupant load, and with any alteration, addition, or change in occupancy. 
(b)  All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by this article shall be deemed to have inadequate fire extinguishing systems or equipment. 
(Code 2017, § 14-203; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997; Ord. No. 2270, § 8, 7-12-1999) 
Sec. 11-243. - Improper occupancy. 
    Improper occupancy shall include any occupancy of a building or portion thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which was not designed or intended to be used for such occupancy. Improper occupancy shall also include the occupancy of, or allowing the occupancy of, any dwelling unit for which there is not in effect a valid and current minimum rental housing occupancy permit or a valid and current registration receipt with respect to said dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-204; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 2-24-1997) 
Secs. 11-244-11-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - APPEALS; VARIANCES 

Sec. 11-265. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person affected by any written notice or order of the rental housing inspector issued under the provisions of this division may appeal such notice or order to the board of appeals established under the International Residential Code and the International Building Code, which are adopted by reference in section 11-2. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of service of the notice or order of the rental housing inspector. 
(b)  The appeal may request that the notice or order be modified or revoked. The person filing the appeal shall be required to pay a fee for the processing of the appeal in such amount as shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The form of the appeal and the procedures for processing the appeal and for conducting the appeal hearing shall be governed by section IBC 113 and R 112, board of appeals, of section 7-20, amendments, except as otherwise provided in this section. The appeal shall be filed at the office of the city clerk, who will immediately forward a copy thereof to the fire chief of the city. The fire chief and the director of community development shall assign staff to review the appeal and prepare a staff review and report to the board of appeals at least five days prior to the hearing. One or more of such designated staff persons shall attend the hearing, and a representative of the city attorney's office shall represent city staff at the hearing. The board shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 60 days of the date of filing of the appeal with the city clerk. 
(d)  At the hearing on the appeal, the party who is appealing shall have an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such notice or order should be modified or revoked. The party who is appealing shall have the burden of proof to show that the notice or order should be modified or revoked. The proof shall be by clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence. 
(e)  The board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify or revoke the notice or order. 
(f)  The board shall determine whether the notice or order of the rental housing inspector properly and correctly interprets and applies the provisions of this division. The board shall issue a written decision in accordance with its findings of fact, based on the evidence presented on the record as a whole. 
(g)  Hearings conducted under this section shall be open to the public during the presentation of testimony and other evidence and during any argument or discussion the board may permit. Upon completion of the submission of evidence, the board shall make findings and a determination based thereon. The board may request assistance from the city attorney's office in formalizing its findings and determinations, which shall be issued in written form. Findings and determinations shall be made no later than 30 days after the hearing. 
(h)  Either the party who is appealing or the city may appeal the decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the date of the decision of the board. If the decision of the board is not appealed, it shall become final. 
(i)  A municipal infraction citation that is issued to any person for a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall not be the subject of an appeal under this division. All municipal infraction citations shall be governed by the provisions of section 1-9 and by Iowa Code § 364.22. 
(Code 2017, § 14-205; Ord. No. 2270, § 9, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 2643, §§ 13-15, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2812, § 6, 4-28-2014) 
Secs. 11-266-11-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ASSESSMENT OF INFRACTION POINTS; SUSPENSION OF RENTAL HOUSING OCCUPANCY PERMITS 

Sec. 11-294. - Suspension of rental housing occupancy permit. 
    A minimum rental housing occupancy permit issued to an owner of any dwelling unit under the provisions of this article may be suspended as provided in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 14-206; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-295. - Certifications by owner. 
    Prior to the city's issuance of either a minimum rental housing occupancy permit under section 11-81, or a registration receipt under section 11-83, to the owner of a dwelling unit, the owner shall be required to sign a certification in writing on a form furnished by the city that the owner shall comply with each of the following requirements with respect to such dwelling unit, for as long as such dwelling unit is subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  At the time of entering into an oral or written lease covering the dwelling unit, the owner shall furnish to the tenants who will occupy the dwelling unit one copy of each of the following documents: 
a.  The then-current version of Iowa Code ch. 562A, entitled, "Uniform Residential Landlord and Tenant Act." 
b.  The then-current version of article II, minimum rental-housing code, of this chapter 11, housing, of this Code; and 
c.  A pamphlet provided by the city containing guidelines for residential rental properties in the city. 
(2)  The owner shall cause the tenants to acknowledge in writing their receipt of the documents described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Failure of the owner to comply with the requirements of this section with respect to any dwelling unit owned by the owner shall be grounds for the assessment of infraction points covering such dwelling unit as provided in section 11-297(a)(24). 
(Code 2017, § 14-207; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-296. - Requirements imposed upon owner of dwelling unit; public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling unit that is subject to the provisions of this division to ensure that the use and occupancy of such dwelling unit does not unreasonably interfere with or adversely affect the rights of nearby residents to the quiet enjoyment of their property, and does not disturb the health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the occupants of surrounding properties. 
(b)  Any use or occupancy, or allowing the use or occupancy, of any dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this division in violation of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 2017, § 14-208; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-297. - Assessment of infraction points for founded complaint of violations. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this division at which a founded complaint of a violation of any of the following provisions of this Code occurs shall be assessed infraction points as a result of such founded complaint, in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  For over-occupancy of a minimum rental housing dwelling unit in violation of section 11-116(b)(3), five points; 
(2)  For occupancy of a dwelling unit without having obtained a minimum rental housing occupancy permit in violation of section 11-81, five points; 
(3)  For illegal creation of new dwelling units or creation of additional bedrooms within existing dwelling units, in violation of section 26-122 or 26-220, five points; 
(4)  For unauthorized building improvements requiring building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or zoning permits, in violation of chapter 7 or chapter 26, five points; 
(5)  For illegal front yard/side yard parking, in violation of section 26-220(g)(1) or (h)(1)b, three points for each violation; 
(6)  For creation of an unapproved parking area or parking lot or unauthorized expansion of an existing parking lot or parking area, in violation of section 26-220(e)(4), five points; 
(7)  For violations of the minimum rental housing code, in violation of this division, except those expressly provided for elsewhere in this section, three points for each violation; 
(8)  For failure to comply with any minimum rental housing code inspection schedule of corrections following initial inspection, in violation of section 11-81 or 11-82, five points for each re-inspection after the first re-inspection that may be required for occupancy permit approval; 
(9)  For loud parties, in violation of section 16-14, or for bootlegging, in violation of Iowa Code § 123.59, five points, but not five points for each of such violations if they arise out of the same act or occurrence; 
(10)  For improper use of furniture designed for use indoors that is placed in outdoor/yard areas or improper outdoor storage of miscellaneous debris items, in violation of section 18-2, three points; 
(11)  For failure to remove snow and ice from the public sidewalks within a reasonable time of a weather event producing snow and/or ice coverage, in violation of section 19-4 or 19-185, three points; 
(12)  For improper placement of discarded household "bulk" items (i.e., furniture, appliances, or other similar household items) at the street curb for more than 72 hours without arranging for proper refuse collection, in violation of section 15-2, three points; 
(13)  For junk and inoperable vehicles, including unlicensed vehicles, on the property, in violation of chapter 15, three points for each vehicle; 
(14)  For trash or litter in yard areas of the property, in violation of section 15-2, three points; 
(15)  For overflowing trash dumpsters or refuse cans which generate trash and litter, in violation of section 15-2, three points; 
(16)  For brush piles and other vegetative debris, in violation of section 15-2, three points; 
(17)  For illegal burning of trash, leaves or other vegetation, in violation of article III of chapter 9, three points; 
(18)  For unauthorized outdoor fires, in violation of article III of chapter 9, three points; 
(19)  For un-mowed grass or weeds, in violation of section 17-246, three points; 
(20)  For overgrown brush, tree branches or other vegetation planted and growing on private property that obstructs the public sidewalk, in violation of section 17-240(a), three points; 
(21)  For refuse containers/carts placed at the curb more than 24 hours before scheduled refuse pick-up or for failure to remove said containers or carts from the curb area and return to the residence more than 12 hours after refuse pick-up, in violation of section 10-3(b), two points; 
(22)  For making or causing noise in violation of article III of chapter 15, three points; 
(23)  For any other nuisance enumerated in section 15-2, two points; 
(24)  For failure of the owner to comply with the requirements set forth in section 11-295 relating to certifications of owner, three points; 
(25)  For failure of the owner of any property, or such owner's manager, to respond to a request from the city police department to come to a dwelling unit owned by such owner, after being personally notified and requested to do so, in connection with a police investigation of any incident at such dwelling unit upon which a founded complaint is based within one hour of being notified by the police to come to the dwelling unit, five points; 
(26)  For any violation of article II, International Fire Code, of chapter 9, fire prevention and protection, three points. 
(b)  Founded complaint defined. For purposes of this division, a complaint of a violation shall be considered a founded complaint if, upon investigation by the city, there is reasonable cause to believe that the conduct upon which the complaint is based actually occurred on or at a particular dwelling unit that is subject to the provisions of this article, and such conduct occurred within 90 days of the time the city became aware of such conduct. 
(Code 2017, § 14-209; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-298. - Assessment of infraction points; notice; appeal; record of assessment of infraction points. 
(a)  Following a determination by the city that a founded complaint has occurred with respect to a dwelling unit that is subject to the provisions of this division, such dwelling unit shall be assessed with the number of infraction points that correspond to the violation or violations that pertain to the founded complaint, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Infraction points not to be assessed under certain circumstances. 
(1)  If, in the reasonable judgment of the city, or, in the event of an appeal by the owner, in the reasonable judgment of the board of rental housing appeals established under section 11-301, the owner of the dwelling unit makes a good-faith, reasonable and timely effort to assist the city in correcting the problems that led to the founded complaint, the city shall not assess any infraction points against the owner of the dwelling unit with respect to which the founded complaint occurred. 
(2)  In order for the owner's effort to be considered to be timely, the owner must contact the city within three business days from the date the notice in subsection (c) of this section is given to the owner. 
(3)  In order for the owner's effort to be considered to be in good faith and reasonable, the owner shall take or shall have taken such steps as are: 
a.  Reasonable under all of the circumstances to correct the problems that led to the founded complaint; and 
b.  Reasonably calculated to prevent such problems from recurring with respect to that dwelling unit or those tenants in the future. 
(4)  Such steps may include, but are not limited to, either or both of the following steps: 
a.  Certifying in writing to the city that the owner, or the owner's manager or other agent, has communicated with the tenants of the dwelling unit in question, has explained to them the acts or conduct upon which the founded complaint is based, that such acts or conduct are in violation of one or more city ordinances listed in section 11-297(a), and has explained to the tenants the consequences of such violations under the city code involving municipal infractions, the consequences of such violations under this division, and the consequences, if any, under the lease between the owner and the tenants of the dwelling unit; or 
b.  Obtaining from the tenants of the dwelling unit in question a written statement that the tenants acknowledge that the acts or conduct upon which the founded complaint is based constitutes a violation of one or more city ordinances listed in section 11-297(a), and agreeing to refrain from such acts or conduct in the future. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this subsection (b) of this section shall be construed to prevent the assessment of infraction points by the city against the owner of the dwelling unit with respect to which the founded complaint is based, if the owner fails, in the reasonable judgment of the city, to make a good-faith, reasonable and timely effort to assist the city in correcting the problems that led to the founded complaint; or, despite the owner having made a good-faith, reasonable and timely effort to assist the city in correcting the problems that led to a founded complaint with respect to the dwelling unit, there is a recurrence of the same or a substantially similar violation of the ordinances described in section 11-297(a) that led to a founded complaint with respect to the same dwelling unit within the 12-month period immediately following the date of occurrence of that founded complaint. 
(c)  The code enforcement division of the department of community development shall cause a notice to be given to the owner of the dwelling unit against which any infraction points are assessed under this division. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail addressed to the owner of the dwelling unit at such owner's last known address. The notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. It shall be the responsibility of such owner to notify the city in writing of any change in the owner's mailing address from the address specified on the owner's application for minimum rental housing occupancy permit and on the owner's application for annual registration, and any failure of the owner to do so shall bar the owner from challenging the validity of any notice given by the code enforcement division of the department of community development to the owner which is mailed to the address specified by such owner on said application. 
(d)  Appeal. The owner may appeal the assessment of infraction points against the dwelling unit by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days of the date of mailing of the notice of assessment of infraction points, in the manner described in section 11-300. The failure of the owner to timely file an appeal of the assessment of infraction points shall constitute a waiver of the owner's right to contest the validity of the assessment of such infraction points against the dwelling unit for any purpose in all subsequent proceedings with respect to such dwelling unit, including any contest based upon such owner not having received the notice of assessment, if the notice was sent to the owner at the address specified on the owner's most recently filed application for minimum rental housing occupancy permit or application for annual registration, as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Record of assessment of infraction points. The code enforcement division of the department of community development shall keep a record of the assessment of infraction points against each dwelling unit under this division, and shall make such record available for public inspection during the hours the office of the department of community development is open. The record shall include the address of the dwelling unit, including unit number or apartment number; the date of the assessment of the infraction points against the dwelling unit; the number of assessment points assessed against the dwelling unit on each such date; and the name and address of the owner of the property upon which the dwelling unit is located. 
(Code 2017, § 14-210; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009; Ord. No. 2748, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 11-299. - Suspension of occupancy permit. 
(a)  Suspension for accumulation of infraction points. In the event any dwelling unit that is covered by this division is assessed 15 or more infraction points in any consecutive, 12-month period under the provisions of this division, the minimum rental housing occupancy permit covering such dwelling unit shall be subject to suspension as provided in this section for a period of six months if the occupancy permit has not been previously been suspended, or for 12 months, if the dwelling unit's occupancy permit has previously been suspended under this division. For purposes of this subsection and this division, any points assessed against a dwelling unit shall be deemed to have been assessed as of the date that the conduct upon which the founded complaint which led to the assessment of points actually occurred. 
(b)  Notice of suspension. If the occupancy permit covering any dwelling unit becomes subject to suspension as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall cause a notice of suspension to be given to the owner of the dwelling unit. The notice of suspension shall be mailed by certified mail addressed to the owner of the dwelling unit at such owner's last known address. The notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. It shall be the responsibility of such owner to notify the city in writing of any change in the owner's mailing address from the address specified on the owner's application for minimum rental housing occupancy permit and on the owner's application for annual registration. 
(c)  Appeal of suspension. The owner may appeal the notice of suspension by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 20 days of the date of mailing of the notice of suspension, in the manner described in section 11-298. The failure of the owner to timely file an appeal of the suspension shall constitute a waiver of the owner's right to contest the suspension of the occupancy permit for any purpose in all subsequent proceedings with respect to such dwelling unit, including any contest based upon such owner not having received the notice of suspension, if the notice was sent to the owner at the address specified on the owner's most recently filed application for minimum rental housing occupancy permit or application for annual registration, as provided in section 11-298(c). 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. Any suspension of an owner's minimum rental housing occupancy permit covering a dwelling unit shall become effective only at the end of the then-current lease covering the dwelling unit, unless the dwelling unit is vacant and the owner of the dwelling unit requests in writing that the suspension become effective immediately. 
(Code 2017, § 14-211; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-300. - Appeal. 
(a)  Filing of appeal. Any appeal of the assessment of infraction points or appeal of the suspension of an occupancy permit under this division shall be in writing, mailed or delivered to the office of the city clerk at 220 Clay Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa 50613, within the required time as provided in this division. 
(b)  Any notice of appeal under this division shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, current mailing address, and current telephone number, including area code, of the owner of the dwelling unit. 
(2)  The complete address, including apartment number, if any, of the dwelling unit to which the appeal relates. 
(3)  A copy of the notice to which the owner's appeal relates or, in lieu thereof, a description of the notice to which the appeal relates. 
(4)  A brief summary of the facts and circumstances in support of the owner's appeal. 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number, including area code, of the representative of the owner who will participate in the appeal if the owner is not a natural person. 
(c)  The city clerk shall send a written notice by ordinary mail to the owner at the owner's mailing address listed in the notice of appeal, of the date, time and location of the hearing on the owner's appeal at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. The notice of hearing on the appeal shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(d)  The hearing on the owner's appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 11-302. 
(Code 2017, § 14-212; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-301. - Board of rental housing appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board of rental housing appeals, consisting of seven members from the general public who own or rent property in the city. Board membership will seek a balance and diversity from the following categories: owner occupied residential property; single- or multi-unit rental investment residential property; residential student tenant; and residential non-student tenant, each person in the preceding categories of members to be appointed for a term of four years. The appointment of each such member shall be made by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The board shall hear and consider all appeals of assessment of infraction points and appeals of suspensions of occupancy permits under this division, and also all appeals under division 10, single-family rental dwelling unit occupancy limits, of this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 14-213; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009; Ord. No. 2856, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 11-302. - Hearing on appeals; decision; effect of decision. 
(a)  The hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled for a date that is within 30 days of the date of filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk. 
(b)  At the hearing on the appeal, the owner, or the owner's representative if the owner is not a natural person, may appear at the hearing. The owner may be represented by legal counsel at the owner's expense. 
(c)  At the hearing, the city shall be represented by a city officer or employee who was involved in the investigation of the founded complaint together with a representative of the city attorney's office. 
(d)  The party who is appealing shall have the opportunity to be heard and to present evidence as to why the notice of assessment of infraction points, or the notice of suspension of the occupancy permit, as the case may be, should be modified or denied. The party who is appealing shall have the burden of proof to show that the notice of assessment of points or the notice of suspension should be modified or denied by clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence. 
(e)  The city shall have the opportunity to be heard and may present evidence as to why the notice of assessment of infraction points, or the notice of suspension of the occupancy permit, as the case may be, should be sustained. 
(f)  The board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify or deny the assessment of infraction points or the suspension of the occupancy permit, as the case may be, in any manner deemed appropriate, including assessment of fewer infraction points against the dwelling unit than contained in the notice, or suspension for a lesser period of time than provided for in the notice or in this division. The board shall issue a written decision in accordance with its findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing on the record as a whole and based upon any relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the provisions of section 11-298(b). 
(g)  Hearings conducted under this division shall be open to the public during the presentation of testimony or other evidence and during any argument or discussion that the board may permit. Upon completion of the presentation of evidence, argument and discussion, the board shall make findings of fact and a determination based thereon, either at the hearing or within the time specified in this subsection. The board may request assistance from the city attorney's office in formalizing its findings and determinations, which shall be issued in written form. Such findings and determinations shall be made and issued within 30 days after the date of hearing. 
(h)  Either the owner or the city may appeal the decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction within 20 days of the date of the written decision of the board. If the decision is not appealed in a timely manner, it shall become final. 
(Code 2017, § 14-214; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-303. - Posting, mailing and filing of notice of suspension; record of suspensions. 
(a)  For any suspension of the minimum rental housing occupancy permit of a dwelling unit that becomes final either when no appeal is timely filed, or if an appeal is filed, then when the decision on appeal becomes final, the city clerk shall cause to be posted at the dwelling unit, mailed to the owner, mailed to the dwelling unit, and filed in the office of the recorder of the county a notice of suspension with the complete address of the dwelling unit, including its apartment number, and the legal description of the real property upon which the dwelling unit is located. The notice shall contain the effective date of the suspension, and its duration, and that the entering into an oral or written lease of the dwelling unit, the collection of rent on, or allowing the occupancy of or occupying, the dwelling unit during or applicable to the period of suspension is prohibited. 
(b)  The city clerk shall keep a record of each dwelling unit whose minimum rental housing occupancy permit has been suspended under this division, and shall make such record available for public inspection during the hours the office of the city clerk is open. The record shall include the address of the dwelling unit, including unit number or apartment number; the effect date of the suspension of the occupancy permit of such dwelling unit; the duration of such suspension; and the name and address of the owner of the property upon which the dwelling unit is located. 
(Code 2017, § 14-215; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-304. - Defense to suspension; retention of previous infraction points. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to a suspension proceeding if the owner has, prior to the date of filing of the notice of appeal, commenced and has made a good-faith effort to successfully complete all legal proceedings, including recovery of possession of the dwelling unit, necessary under Iowa law to evict all of the tenants who occupied the dwelling unit with respect to which the suspension relates at the time the founded complaint which resulted in the issuance of the notice of suspension occurred. The board may, in its sole discretion, grant a delay of not more than 30 days in scheduling the date of the hearing on the notice of suspension, if the owner presents documentation with the filing of the appeal demonstrating that such eviction proceedings have been initiated by the owner with respect to the tenants of such dwelling unit, and such proceedings are being diligently prosecuted by the owner. 
(b)  If a defense to a suspension proceeding is established under subsection (a) of this section, then the number of infraction points which had been assessed against the dwelling unit prior to the occurrence of the founded complaint upon which the notice of suspension was based shall remain in effect against the dwelling unit despite the establishment of the defense to the suspension. However, the board shall have discretion to remove some or all of the infraction points which have been assessed against the owner of the dwelling unit under appropriate circumstances, which include a finding by the board that: 
(1)  The owner has succeeded in evicting the tenants who occupied the dwelling unit at the time the infraction points in question were assessed to such dwelling unit, or such tenants have all voluntarily vacated the dwelling unit and the lease has been terminated; 
(2)  The owner has sold the property upon which the dwelling unit is located in an arm's length transaction to an unrelated party; 
(3)  Such other circumstances exist as, in the reasonable judgment of the board, justify removal of some or all of the infraction points theretofore assessed against the owner of the dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-216; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-305. - Unlawful to lease, collect rent on, or occupy dwelling unit whose occupancy permit has been suspended. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for the owner of a dwelling unit to enter into an oral or written lease of, collect rent on, or allow the occupancy of, any dwelling unit whose occupancy permit has been suspended under the provisions of this division, during or applicable to the period of suspension. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to occupy any dwelling unit whose occupancy permit has been suspended under the provisions of this division during the period of suspension, once the notice of suspension has been posted at the dwelling unit and mailed to the dwelling unit. 
(c)  Any violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of $750.00 for each violation, or $1,000.00 if the infraction is a repeat offense. 
(d)  Any violation of subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of $100.00, or $200.00 if the infraction is a repeat offense. 
(Code 2017, § 14-217; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-306. - Other relief. 
    In addition to any of the remedies or procedures set forth in this article, the city attorney is authorized to file for injunctive relief to abate any public nuisance that is based upon a founded complaint of a violation described in this division, or to enforce any suspension of an occupancy permit under this division, or to file any other legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this division, this article, or of this Code. 
(Code 2017, § 14-218; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 11-307. - Other penalties. 
    The city may issue a municipal infraction citation to the owner or any occupant of a dwelling unit, or both, for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of this Code, in addition to the assessment of infraction points against such dwelling unit under this division for the same conduct or incident which forms the basis of the municipal infraction citation or citations against the owner or occupants of such dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 14-219; Ord. No. 2680, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Secs. 11-308-11-332. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - SINGLE-UNIT AND CERTAIN TWO-UNIT RENTAL DWELLING UNIT OCCUPANCY LIMITS 

Sec. 11-333. - Existing occupancy limits retained; when terminated or modified. 
    The owner of any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling conversion in the city that held a minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and a minimum rental housing code registration receipt that were valid and current as of August 19, 2014, may continue to permit occupancy of up to four persons aged 18 years or older, for each dwelling unit located on such property, unless the property is sold or transferred, as defined in section 11-334(b), in which event the provisions of section 11-334 shall thereupon immediately become applicable to said property and any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling conversion on such property, or unless such occupancy and rental use terminates as provided for in section 11-336, in which event the provisions of section 11-335 shall thereupon immediately become applicable to said property and any such dwelling unit located on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-220), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-334. - Existing occupancy limits reduced or retained. 
(a)  Any property described in section 11-333, the occupancy of which by up to four persons aged 18 years or older per dwelling unit has not terminated as provided for in section 11-336(b) through (e), shall nevertheless be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  In the event any property described in subsection (a) of this section, on which any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling conversion is situated, is sold or transferred, as defined in this subsection, then the provisions of subsections (c) through (h) of this section shall thereupon automatically become applicable to any such dwelling unit located on such property. For purposes of this section, a property shall be deemed to have been sold or transferred if there is a conveyance, voluntary or involuntary, of any type whatsoever, of all or any interest in the property at any time after August 19, 2014, except by a voluntary transfer of the property by the person or persons who owned the property on August 19, 2014, to themselves, or to a corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, or general partnership, 100 percent of whose shares, membership interests, or partnership interests, as the case may be, are, immediately after such transfer, and for all times thereafter, owned only by the person or persons who owned the property on August 19, 2014. 
(c)  If a property described in subsection (b) of this section, upon which any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling conversion is located, has a lot width, measured at the building line, of less than 70 feet, or has a total lot area of less than 8,000 square feet, then no more than three persons aged 18 years or older may rent or occupy any dwelling unit located on such property. 
(d)  If a property described in subsection (b) of this section, upon which any single-unit dwelling or two- unit dwelling conversion is located, has a lot width, measured at the building line, of 70 feet or more and a lot area of 8,000 square feet or more, then no more than four persons aged 18 years of older may rent or occupy any dwelling unit located on such property. 
(e)  If a property described in subsection (b) of this section, upon which any single-unit dwelling or two- unit dwelling conversion is located, is situated on a city street that either has a street width of less than 31 feet (measured from back of curb to back of curb, or, if no curb exists, measured by the width of the hard surface of the street), or had in effect on August 19, 2014, a parking ordinance that prohibited parking on either one side, or on both sides, of such street, then no more than three persons aged 18 years or older may rent or occupy any dwelling unit located on such property, except as provided in subsection (f) or (g) of this section. 
(f)  If a property described in subsection (e) of this section meets the lot width and lot area requirements of subsection (d) of this section, and has then in place four off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit which is located on the property, which conform in all respects to all city off-street parking requirements, as provided in chapter 26, zoning, and also meets all other applicable provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to,, the applicable provisions of this article, of chapter 7, buildings and building regulations, chapter 9, fire prevention and protection, and this chapter 11, housing, then any dwelling unit located on the property may be rented to and occupied by no more than four persons aged 18 years or older. 
(g)  If the provisions of subsection (c) or (e) of this section limit any dwelling unit located on a property to being rented to or occupied by no more than three persons aged 18 years or older, then the owner of such property may appeal such limitation, and seek authorization to rent the dwelling unit to four persons aged 18 years or older, by filing an appeal with the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. Such appeal shall be considered using the same criteria as are set forth in section 11-335(e) with respect to a group rental permit, except that the occupancy limit therefor shall not exceed four persons aged 18 years or older. If the appeal is successful, the owner shall be authorized to rent such dwelling unit to four persons aged 18 years or older. 
(h)  If the provisions of subsections (c) through (g) of this section limit any dwelling unit located on a property to being rented to or occupied by no more than four persons aged 18 years or older, the owner of such property may appeal such limitation, and seek authorization to rent the dwelling unit to more than four persons aged 18 years of older, by filing an appeal with the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. Such appeal shall be considered using the same criteria as are set forth in section 11-335(f) with respect to a group rental permit. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-221), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-335. - Regulations for newly registered single-unit dwelling unit and two-unit dwelling unit rentals. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling, for which the owner of which property did not have, on August 19, 2014, a valid and then-current minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and minimum rental housing code registration receipt in effect for any such dwelling unit, or which property had such an occupancy permit and registration receipt in effect for any such dwelling unit on August 19, 2014, but which property thereafter became subject to any of the provisions of section 11-336(b) through (e). 
(b)  The owner of a property located in the city and described in subsection (a) of this section, upon which is located any single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling, may apply for a minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and a minimum rental housing code registration receipt for any dwelling unit located on such property, subject to the applicable provisions of this article, of chapter 7, building and building regulations, chapter 9, fire prevention and protection, chapter 11, housing, and chapter 26, zoning, and subject to the express provisions of this section relating to occupancy limits. 
(c)  Restrictive covenants contained in deeds of dedications of subdivision plats may affect the allowed rental status and occupancy level. 
(d)  Any dwelling unit described in subsection (a) of this section may be rented to, and may be occupied by two persons aged 18 years or older, if the property and all structures that comprise the single-unit dwelling or the two-unit dwelling, comply with the applicable provisions of this article, of chapter 7, building and building regulations, chapter 9, fire prevention and protection, chapter 11, housing, chapter 26, zoning, and has paved parking (see section 11-179); unless subsections (e) through (f) of this section apply. 
(e)  A dwelling unit described in subsection (a) of this section may be rented to, and occupied by three or four persons aged 18 years or older, if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  Three or four persons aged 18 years or older may rent and occupy a dwelling unit described in this section if a group rental permit is applied for and is issued as provided in this subsection (e)(1). 
(2)  The application for such a group rental permit shall be filed with the city and shall be reviewed by a committee composed of the city's fire chief, the city planner/zoning administrator, and the city building official. The application shall contain such information as shall be prescribed on an application form furnished by the city. 
(3)  The application for such group rental permit shall be evaluated by the city staff review committee, based upon the carrying capacity of the property upon which the single-unit dwelling or the two-unit dwelling is located, and based upon the carrying capacity of the neighborhood surrounding the property. Carrying capacity includes factors such as the density of occupancy by persons aged 18 years or older; the number of vehicles serving the persons aged 18 years or older; traffic generated by such vehicles; the amount of impervious surface on the property; the public infrastructure design and capacity serving the property and the surrounding neighborhood; the size of the structure in which the single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling is situated; and the width of the public street and the available on-street parking adjacent to the property. 
(4)  The criteria that shall be considered by the city staff review committee in evaluating the application for a group rental permit shall include, but shall not be limited to, the carrying capacity factors referenced in subsection (e)(3) of this section, and specifically including the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the character of the neighborhood surrounding the property would be diminished by the increase in density of occupants or by the increased number of vehicles that would result from the increased occupancy of the dwelling unit or dwelling units over and above two occupants per dwelling unit; 
b.  Whether the lot width and lot area of the property are sufficient to accommodate the density of occupants and vehicles that would result from the increased occupancy of the dwelling unit or dwelling units over and above two occupants per dwelling unit, as such lot width and lot area requirements are described in section 11-334(d), that is, a lot width of 70 feet or more and a lot area of 8,000 square feet or more; 
c.  Whether the property has paved and sufficient off-street parking spaces as required by chapter 26, zoning; 
d.  Whether the public infrastructure serving the property and the surrounding neighborhood is sufficient to accommodate the stormwater runoff, on-street parking, sanitary sewer flows, and other relevant impacts on public infrastructure, that would result from the increased occupancy of the dwelling unit or dwelling units over and above two occupants per dwelling unit; 
e.  Whether the adjoining properties are, or are required to be, properly buffered from any off-street parking area that is required under applicable city ordinances, to accommodate the increased occupancy of the dwelling unit or dwelling units over and above two occupants per dwelling unit; and 
f.  The record of the new property owner's compliance, or lack of compliance, with city codes dealing with property maintenance, nuisance, rental housing, building, fire, zoning, and other applicable city codes, for other properties located within the city and owned, or formerly owned, by such applicant. 
(5)  A group rental permit, if issued, shall be issued to the owner of the property upon which the dwelling unit or dwelling units is or are located, shall be personal to such owner, and shall not constitute a covenant that would run with the land that comprises the property. Upon any sale or transfer of the property, as defined in section 11-334(b), the existing group rental permit for each dwelling unit situated on the property shall automatically expire, and the transferee of the property shall be required to file an application for a new, separate group rental permit that shall be evaluated based on all criteria described in this section, as applied to the facts and circumstances existing at the time of filing of the new, separate application. 
(6)  Approval of a group rental permit may be conditioned upon the owner complying with reasonable performance standards and maintenance conditions to be specified in the permit, the violation of which shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit, effective upon termination of the then-current term of the lease of the dwelling unit for which the group rental permit had been issued. 
(7)  The permit, if granted, shall specify the maximum number of persons aged 18 years or older who may rent or occupy the dwelling unit. 
(8)  The permit may be revoked by the city upon written notice to the owner, for failure of the property owner to comply with the standards and conditions of the permit, or with any ordinances of the city to the extent such compliance is within the reasonable control of the owner and/or the owner's employees or agents. The revocation of the permit may be appealed by the owner by the filing of an appeal as provided in section 11-338. 
(9)  If the city staff review committee denies the application for such group rental permit, the applicant may appeal such denial as provided in section 11-338. 
(f)  A dwelling unit described in subsection (a) of this section may be rented to and occupied by more than four persons aged 18 years or older if requested, if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  A group rental permit is applied for and is issued for more than four persons aged 18 years or older as provided in subsection (e) of this section, excluding subsection (e)(4)d of this section. 
(2)  The property provides one paved parking space defined by chapter 26, zoning, for each permitted occupant aged 18 years or older. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-222), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-336. - Termination of nonconforming rental uses. 
(a)  Any residential rental use of a property located in the city under this article and under chapter 26, zoning, which use was in existence on August 19, 2014, including, but not limited to, a use that involves rental or occupancy of a single-unit dwelling unit or a two-unit dwelling unit situated on the property, by not to exceed four persons aged 18 years or older, shall constitute a legal, nonconforming use of the property, despite non-compliance with the provisions of this division and of the applicable provisions of chapter 26, zoning, unless such nonconforming use is terminated under any of the provisions of subsections (b) through (e) of this section. 
(b)  Any nonconforming use of property as described in subsection (a) of this section shall terminate and shall then become an invalid, nonconforming use in the event the owner of the property fails to register the owner's nonconforming use with the city clerk of the city within a period of six months following the date of enactment of this section. Failure to timely register the nonconforming use within said period shall result in the nonconforming use being automatically extinguished, and the property shall then be brought into compliance with the provisions of section 11-335, regulations for newly registered rentals, within a period of six months. The timely registering of the nonconforming use within the six-month period shall not constitute evidence that the nonconforming use was established in a legal manner. In order to register such nonconforming use, the owner shall timely file a registration application, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, that includes, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the property owner; 
(2)  The street address and legal description of the property; 
(3)  The number of dwelling units situated on the property; 
(4)  The number of persons aged 18 years or older to which each such dwelling unit was rented as of August 19, 2014, including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of each such person aged 18 years or older; 
(5)  A statement that the owner's nonconforming use was established prior to August 19, 2014, and in all respects in entire conformity with all applicable provisions of this Code; and 
(6)  Such other information as shall be required by the city and which shall be included on the registration form. 
(c)  If the owner of any property described in subsection (a) of this section held a minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and a minimum rental housing code registration receipt for any dwelling unit situated on such property that were valid and current as of August 19, 2014, but after said date, such occupancy permit and registration receipt either: 
(1)  Expired pursuant to the provisions of this article, and remained expired for a continuous period of six months; or 
(2)  Was suspended pursuant to the provisions of this article, and remained suspended for a continuous period of six months, such expiration or suspension, as the case may be, shall result in the nonconforming use automatically being extinguished, and the property shall then be brought into compliance with all of the provisions of section 11-335, regulations for newly-registered rentals, within a period of six months. 
(d)  If a structure in which a nonconforming use described in subsection (a) of this section is situated, is damaged to an extent of greater than 50 percent of its fair market value at the time of damage, by fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, riot or act of God, such nonconforming use shall automatically be extinguished, and the property shall then be brought into compliance with all of the provisions of section 11-335, regulations for newly-registered rentals, within a period of six months. 
(e)  A nonconforming use described in subsection (a) of this section shall be terminated as provided in this subsection (e). 
(1)  If the owner of a property described in subsection (a) of this section receives a written notice from the city as described in subsection (e)(2) of this section, then the owner of the property must demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the nonconforming use was, prior to August 19, 2014, established in full compliance with the applicable provisions of this article, of chapter 7, building and building regulations, chapter 9, fire prevention and protection, chapter 11, housing, and chapter 26, zoning. 
(2)  The city planner/zoning administrator, or his designee, may, at any time, give written notice to the owner of record of any property described in subsection (a) of this section, requiring such owner to demonstrate to the city that the residential rental use of the property or of any dwelling unit on the property, was established in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code as described in subsection (e)(1) of this section. The burden of proving that a nonconforming rental use existed on August 19, 2014, and that such use was established in a legal manner, that is, in compliance with all applicable city codes, shall be upon the property owner to prove by clear and convincing evidence. 
(3)  Upon the issuance of such a notice, the property owner shall have a period of 120 days from the date of such notice to furnish such evidence to the city. If the owner fails to furnish such evidence to the city within said 120-day period, or, if the owner furnishes evidence to the city within such period, but the city planner/zoning administrator, or his designee, finds that such evidence is not clear and convincing, then the city shall give written notice thereof to the property owner, and the use of the property shall be conclusively deemed to be an invalid, nonconforming use, and the property owner shall thereupon have a period of six months to bring the use of the property into full compliance with the provisions of section 11-335, that is, the provisions applicable to an application for a new minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and registration receipt. 
(4)  The property owner may appeal the finding of the city planner/zoning administrator, or his designee, that the property owner failed to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the use of the property was established in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. 
(f)  If the nonconforming use of any property described in subsection (a) of this section is terminated pursuant to the provisions of any of subsections (b) through (e) of this section, the property owner may apply to the city staff review committee established pursuant to section 11-335(e), for an extension of time not to exceed one year, to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of section 11-335, based on factors which include, but are not limited to, the nature and extent of the improvements to the property that are necessary to bring any dwelling unit on such property into compliance with the provisions of section 11-335, the time of year, and other relevant factors. The decision of the city staff review committee on said extension of time may be appealed to the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. 
(g)  If the nonconforming use of any property described in subsection (a) of this section is terminated pursuant to the provisions of any of subsections (b) through (e) of this section, the property owner may appeal such termination to the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. On any such appeal, the issue at the appeal hearing shall be limited to whether the grounds for termination of the nonconforming use have been established by the city by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-223), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-337. - Temporary occupancy permits issued during moratorium. 
    Any minimum rental housing code occupancy permit and minimum rental housing code registration receipt which was issued by the city to any property owner for any dwelling unit located in an R-1, R-1 SF, or R-2 zoning district in the city after August 19, 2014, and prior to the date of enactment of this division, shall terminate effective on the date of enactment of this division, and the owner of the property upon which any dwelling unit with respect to which any such temporary occupancy permit was issued shall thereafter bring the property into compliance with all the provisions of section 11-335 by no later than one year from the date of commencement of the term of the first residential dwelling unit lease entered into by the property owner with the occupants of any such dwelling unit after August 19, 2014. The holder of the temporary occupancy permit may apply to the city staff review committee established pursuant to section 11-335(e), for an extension of time not to exceed one year, to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of section 11-335, based on the same factors provided for under section 11-336(f). The decision of the city staff review committee on said extension of time may be appealed to the city clerk as provided in section 11-338. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-224), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-338. - Appeal. 
(a)  Filing of appeal. Any appeal of any matter provided for under this division shall be in writing, mailed or delivered to the office of the city clerk at 220 Clay Street, Cedar Falls, Iowa 50613, within 30 days of the action or decision which is being appealed. 
(b)  Any notice of appeal under this division shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, current mailing address, and current telephone number, including area code, of the owner of the dwelling unit. 
(2)  The complete address, including apartment number, if any, of each dwelling unit to which the appeal relates. 
(3)  A copy of the notice or decision to which the owner's appeal relates or, in lieu thereof, a description of the notice or decision to which the appeal relates. 
(4)  A brief summary of the facts and circumstances in support of the owner's appeal. 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number, including area code, of the representative of the owner who will participate in the appeal if the owner is not a natural person. 
(c)  The city clerk shall send a written notice by ordinary mail to the owner at the owner's mailing address listed in the notice of appeal, of the date, time and location of the hearing on the owner's appeal, to be sent at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. The notice of hearing on the appeal shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(d)  The hearing on the owner's appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 11-339. 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-225), 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 11-339. - Hearing on appeals; decision; effect of decision. 
(a)  The hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled for a date that is within 30 days of the date of filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk. 
(b)  At the hearing on the appeal, the owner, or the owner's representative if the owner is not a natural person, may appear at the hearing. The owner may be represented by legal counsel at the owner's expense. 
(c)  At the hearing, the city shall be represented by a city officer or employee who is involved in the matter to which the notice of appeal relates, together with a representative of the city attorney's office. 
(d)  The party who is appealing shall have the opportunity to be heard and to present evidence as to why the city notice or decision appealed from should be modified, denied or reversed. The party who is appealing shall have the burden of proof to show that the city notice or decision should be modified, denied or reversed, by clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence. 
(e)  The city shall have the opportunity to be heard and may present evidence as to why the city notice or decision should be sustained. 
(f)  The board of rental housing appeals established in section 11-301 shall hear the appeal. 
(g)  The board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify, deny or reverse the city notice or decision, in any manner deemed appropriate by the board. The board shall issue a written decision in accordance with its findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing on the record as a whole and based upon any relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the provisions of sections of this division governing the subject matter of the city notice or decision. 
(h)  Hearings conducted under this division shall be open to the public during the presentation of testimony or other evidence and during any argument or discussion that the board may permit. Upon completion of the presentation of evidence, argument and discussion, the board shall make findings of fact and a determination based thereon, either at the hearing or within the time specified in this subsection. The board may request assistance from the city attorney's office in formalizing its findings and determinations, which shall be issued in written form. Such findings and determinations shall be made and issued within 30 days after the date of hearing. 
(i)  The city clerk shall send a copy of the board's decision to the owner at the owner's address disclosed in the notice of appeal, by ordinary mail. 
(j)  Either the owner or the city may appeal the decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the date of mailing of the written decision of the board. If the decision is not appealed in a timely manner, it shall become final. 
(Code 2017, § 14-226; Ord. No. 2836, § 9, 2-16-2015; Ord. No. 2885, § 4(14-226), 10-3-2016; Ord. No. 2916, § 2(14-226), 12-18-2017) 
Chapter 12 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    It shall be the purpose of this chapter to establish a public policy of nondiscrimination in the city, to provide confidential investigation of complaints and conciliations, to hold necessary public hearings and to provide for educational programs to prevent and eliminate discrimination. 
(Code 2017, § 15-1; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the city human rights commission created by this chapter. 
    Commissioner means a member of the commission. 
    Court means the district court in and for the judicial district of the state in which the alleged unfair or discriminatory practice occurred, or any judge of such court if the court is not in session at that time. 
    Disability or handicap means the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial disability, and the condition of a person with a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related complex, or any other condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The inclusion of a condition related to a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result in the meaning of "disability" does not preclude the application of provisions to conditions resulting from other contagious or infectious diseases. 
    Discriminate or discriminatory means and includes any difference in treatment because of race, religion, creed, color, national origin, sex, age, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status, and shall include any or all of the unfair discriminatory practices contained in this chapter. 
    Employee means any person employed by an employer. 
    Employer means the city and any political subdivision, board, commission, department or institution thereof and the city community school district located within the city, and every other person employing employees within the city. 
    Employment agency means any person undertaking to procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person, or any persons holding themselves to be equipped to do so. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals under the age of 18 years domiciled with one of the following: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of the individual or individuals; 
(2)  The designee of the parent or the other person having custody of the individual or individuals with the written permission of the parent or other person; 
(3)  A person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of the individual or individuals; 
(4)  A person who is pregnant or who is in the process of securing legal custody of an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
    Gender identity means a gender-related identity of a person, regardless of the person's assigned sex at birth. 
    Labor organization means any organization which exists for the purpose in whole or in part of collective bargaining, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment. 
    Public accommodation. 
(1)  The term "public accommodation" means each and every place, establishment or facility of whatever kind, nature or class that caters or offers services, facilities or goods for a fee or charge to nonmembers of any organization or association utilizing the place, establishment or facility, provided that any place, establishment or facility that caters or offers services, facilities or goods to nonmembers gratuitously shall be deemed a public accommodation if the accommodation receives governmental support or subsidy. Public accommodation shall not mean any bona fide private club or other place, establishment or facility which is by its nature distinctly private; except that, when such distinctly private place, establishment or facility caters or offers services, facilities or goods to the nonmembers for a fee or charge or gratuitously, it shall be deemed a public accommodation during such period. 
(2)  The term "public accommodation" includes each state and local governmental unit or tax-supported district of whatever kind, nature or class that offers services, facilities or goods to the public, gratuitously or otherwise. This subsection shall not be construed by negative implication or otherwise to restrict any part or portion of the definition of the term "public accommodation" set out in subsection (1) of this definition. 
    Real property or housing accommodation means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupies as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Sexual orientation means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. 
    Unfair practice or discriminatory practice means those practices specified as unfair or discriminatory in article III of this chapter or Iowa Code ch. 216. 
(Code 2017, § 15-2; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-3. - Interpretation of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 2017, § 15-3; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-4. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The above notwithstanding, in the event of an allegation of discriminatory housing practice, an aggrieved person shall have the right to institute a civil action to enforce the ordinance, and such action shall be commenced within one year from the date of occurrence or termination of the alleged practice. An aggrieved person may recover in a civil action filed under this chapter for a discriminatory housing practice, actual and punitive damages, temporary or permanent injunctions, and reasonable attorney fees. A civil action may not be filed by an aggrieved person after the commission or its designee has commenced a hearing on the record. 
(Code 2017, § 15-4; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-5-12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 12-27. - Membership; appointment of members; term of office; and qualifications. 
(a)  The city human rights commission shall consist of nine members, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Appointees subsequent to the initial appointees shall serve for a term of three years, and thereafter until a successor has been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled within 60 days for the remainder of an unexpired term. Appointments shall take into consideration the various racial, religious, economic, cultural, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, physical disability and social groups in the city. 
(b)  In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the commission shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the commission upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the commission on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the commission until both the expiration of his current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
(Code 2017, § 15-31; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 2819, § 1, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 12-28. - Compensation of members. 
    The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, provided that they may receive actual and necessary expenses incurred, within the limits established by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 15-32; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-29. - Election of officers; vacancies. 
    The commission shall elect from its own membership, at its regular January meeting, its chairperson and at least one vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one year. It shall, at its regular January meeting, elect a secretary, who may be, but need not be, a member of the commission. The commission shall fill vacancies among its officers for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 2017, § 15-33; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-30. - Meetings; rules of procedure. 
(a)  The commission shall hold at least three regular meetings per year. It shall meet at a time and place to be announced in accordance with the state Open Meetings Act. Failure of a commission member to attend three consecutive meetings may be deemed a resignation unless attendance was excused. 
(b)  The chairperson, vice-chairperson, or any three members of the commission may call a special meeting by giving at least 24 hours' notice to every member of the commission. The call for a special meeting shall include an agenda, and only matters included in that agenda may be discussed at the meeting. 
(c)  A quorum of the commission shall consist of a simple majority of the members of the commission. A majority of the members present and voting shall be necessary for the passage of any motion. The chairperson shall vote as a member of the commission. 
(d)  The commission may adopt, amend or rescind such rules as may be necessary for the conduct of its business. 
(Code 2017, § 15-34; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-31. - Closed sessions; availability of records; restrictions on disclosure of information. 
(a)  The commission may hold closed sessions, but only as permitted by the Open Meetings Law, Iowa Code ch. 21. 
(b)  All records of the commission shall be public, except: 
(1)  Charges, complaints, reports of investigations, statements and other documents or records obtained in investigation of any charges shall be closed records. 
(2)  The minutes of any session which is closed under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be closed records. 
(c)  No member of the commission or of its staff shall disclose the filing of a charge, the information gathered during the investigation, or the endeavors to eliminate such discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, conciliation or persuasion, unless such disclosure is made in connection with the conduct of such investigation. This section does not prevent any complainant, respondent, witness or other person from publicizing the filing of a charge or complaint or the matter therein complained of. 
(Code 2017, § 15-35; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-32. - Appointment and duties of staff. 
    The commission shall appoint and prescribe the duties of its staff, subject to approval of the city council and may from time to time name a commission designee to assist the commission in its duties under this article. 
(Code 2017, § 15-36; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-33. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commission to: 
(1)  Seek to conciliate complaints, hold hearings when necessary and pass upon charges or complaints alleging unfair or discriminatory practices as provided in section 12-57 et seq. 
(2)  Investigate and study the existence, character, causes, extent and effects of discrimination in public accommodations, employment, apprenticeship programs, on-the-job training programs, educational curricula programs and housing in this city, and to attempt to eliminate such discrimination by education, conciliation and, if necessary, further steps pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Investigate possible areas of discrimination in city government. The commission shall request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from city departments as may be reasonably necessary to carry out its work. 
(4)  Formulate and carry out an educational program designed to prevent and eliminate discrimination. 
(5)  Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to govern, expedite and effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Render to the city council, not less than once a year, a written report of its activities and recommendations. 
(7)  Cooperate with federal, state, regional, county and city agencies, citizens, citizen organizations, the board of education and private schools in formulating and developing courses of education to accomplish the objectives of this article. 
(8)  Make recommendations to the mayor and council for such further ordinances concerning discrimination as it may deem necessary and desirable. 
(b)  The commission may also initiate complaints, seek judicial action, and issue and seek enforcement of subpoenas in the furtherance of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 15-37; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-34. - Cooperation with other agencies. 
    The commission shall cooperate with the state civil rights commission, the United States Civil Rights Commission, the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and other agencies with similar purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 15-38; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-35-12-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-57. - Aiding or abetting discriminatory practice; discrimination against person opposing unlawful practice. 
    It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally aid, abet, compel or coerce another person to engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by this article. 
(2)  Discriminate against another person in any of the rights protected against discrimination on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion, familial status or disability by this article because such person has lawfully opposed any practice forbidden under this article, obeys the provisions of this article, or has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this article. Further, it shall be a violation of this article to engage in conduct that constitutes interference, coercion, threat or intimidation of anyone exercising, or having exercised, any substantive rights granted by this article. An employer or employment agency or their employees, servants or agents may offer employment or advertise for employment to only the disabled, when other applicants have available to them other employment compatible with their ability which would not be available to the disabled because of their handicap. Any such employment or offer of employment shall not discriminate among the disabled on the basis of race, religion, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 2017, § 15-56; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-58. - Exceptions for certain benefits provided by employer. 
(a)  The provisions of this article relating to discrimination because of age do not apply to a retirement plan or benefits system of an employer unless the plan or system is a mere subterfuge adopted for the purpose of evading this article. However, a retirement plan or benefit system shall not require the involuntary retirement of a person under the age of 70 years because of that person's age. This subsection does not prohibit the involuntary retirement of a person who has attained the age of 65 years and has, for the two prior years, been employed in a bona fide executive position or high policy-making position and who is entitled to an immediate, nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit sharing, savings or deferred compensation plan of the employer which equals $27,000.00. This retirement benefit test may be adjusted according to the regulations prescribed by the United States Secretary of Labor pursuant to PL 95-256, section 3. 
(b)  A health insurance program provided by an employer may exclude coverage of abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or where medical complications have arisen from an abortion. 
(c)  An employee welfare plan may provide life, disability or health insurance benefits which vary by age, based on actuarial differences, if the employer contributes equally for all the participating employees, or may provide for employer contributions differing by age if the benefits for all the participating employees do not vary by age. 
(Code 2017, § 15-57; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-59. - Promotion or transfer of disabled individual. 
    After a person with a disability is employed, the employer shall not be required under this article to promote or transfer the person to another job or occupation unless, prior to such transfer, the person with the disability, by training or experience, is qualified for such job or occupation. Any collective bargaining agreement between an employer and a labor organization shall contain this section as a part of such agreement. 
(Code 2017, § 15-58; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-60. - Filing of complaints. 
(a)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair practice within the city may, individually or with an attorney, make, sign and file a verified written complaint of discriminatory practice. The commission, a member of the commission, the city attorney or the state civil rights commission may, in like manner, make, sign and file such complaint. Any place of public accommodation, employer, labor organization or other person who has any employees or members who refuse or threaten to refuse to comply with the provisions of this article may, in like manner, make, sign and file such complaint. 
(b)  A verified copy of a complaint filed with the state civil rights commission under the provisions of Iowa Code ch. 216, as amended, shall be a sufficient charge for the purpose of this article, if it alleges either in the text thereof or in accompanying statements that the alleged discriminatory practices occurred within the city. 
(c)  Charges may be filed with any member of the commission, with the director or secretary of the commission or with the city clerk. 
(d)  Any complaint filed under this article shall be so filed within 300 days after the most recent act constituting the alleged discriminatory or unfair practice. 
(e)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved or about to be aggrieved related to a housing discriminatory or unfair practice within the city may, individually or with an attorney, make, sign and file a verified written complaint of discriminatory practice. The commission, a member of the commission, the city attorney or the state civil rights commission may, in like manner, make, sign and file such complaint. Any place of public accommodation, employer, labor organization or other person who has any employees or members who refuse or threaten to refuse to comply with the provisions of this article may, in like manner, make, sign and file such complaint. 
(Code 2017, § 15-59; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-61. - Notice to state civil rights commission. 
    The secretary of the commission shall notify the state civil rights commission in writing of the filing of a complaint under this article, and shall provide such other and further information thereon as from time to time the commission shall deem proper. The complaint may be cross-filed with the state Iowa Civil Rights Commission unless the complainant specifically instructs the commission not to cross-file with the state commission. 
(Code 2017, § 15-60; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-62. - Proceedings after filing complaint. 
(a)  After the filing of a verified complaint under this article, a true copy of the complaint shall be served within ten days by certified mail on the person against whom the complaint is being filed, along with a statement advising such respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of respondents under this title; and respondent shall have ten days in which to respond to the complaint. The commission or its designee may extend these timelines when necessary to effectuate justice but, in any event, must initiate the investigation within 30 days of the filing of the complaint. 
(b)  Upon receipt of respondent's answer, or after the expiration of ten days, the commission may offer mediation/conciliation to the parties. Such mediation/conciliation shall be conducted by a qualified mediator. 
(c)  While informal mediation/conciliation may be available to the parties at any step of the complaint process, if both parties accept mediation/conciliation, a formal mediation/conciliation session shall be held within 30 days of the date on which such acceptance is received by the commission unless otherwise agreed to by the parties and the commission. 
(d)  In the event formal mediation/conciliation is declined by either party, or is unsuccessful in resolving the claim of discrimination, the complaint file shall be assigned for fact-finding/investigation. The assignment for fact-finding investigation does not prohibit mediation/conciliation from being undertaken at any stage of the case processing. 
(e)  The commission shall complete such fact finding/investigation within 100 days after the filing of the complaint, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the commission is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days after filing of the complaint, the commission shall notify complainant and respondent, in writing, of the reasons for not doing so. In any event, the commission shall make final administrative disposition of the complaint within one year from the date of receipt of the complaint, unless impracticable. Written notification of the reasons for failure to complete processing within one year shall be provided to the complainant and respondent. 
(Code 2017, § 15-61; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-63. - Proceedings related to the investigation. 
(a)  A fact-finding team of one or more commissioners or the commission designee shall meet with the complainant and the respondent and shall make a determination as to probable cause. If the matter is resolved during the fact-finding process, the commission shall issue an order setting forth the terms of the resolution. Such order shall be delivered by certified mail to the complainant and the respondent and shall become final ten days after the date of mailing. 
(b)  If the fact-finding team finds that no probable cause exists with respect to a complaint filed under this article, the commission shall issue an order dismissing the complaint and shall promptly mail a copy to the complainant and to the respondent by certified mail. If the complainant fails to object in writing to the order finding no probable cause within ten days of mailing of such written notice, the order shall become final. The secretary of the commission shall report such fact to the state civil rights commission. 
(c)  If the complainant shall timely object, in writing, to such findings, the claim shall be re-evaluated by the fact-finding commission(s) or designee to determine if the claim should be reopened or whether the no probable cause finding should be the final decision. If the fact-finding again determines that the finding is no probable cause, the complainant, respondent, and the state's commission shall be notified in writing of the finding. The complaint shall then be closed. 
(d)  At the end of each investigation under this section, the commission or commission's designee shall prepare a final investigative report containing the following information to the extent it was gathered in the investigation process: 
(1)  The names and dates of contacts with witnesses; 
(2)  A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent; 
(3)  A summary description of other pertinent records; 
(4)  A summary of witness statements; and 
(5)  Answers to interrogatories, if applicable. 
(e)  At any time 60 days after the filing of the complaint, the complainant may request a right-to-sue letter. Upon receipt of the complainant's written request for a right-to-sue letter, the commission or its designee shall issue the right-to-sue letter. Upon the issuance of the right-to-sue letter, the commission shall close its file and notify the respondent and the state commission of the issuance of the right-to-sue letter. 
(f)  The commission or its designee may elect after a preliminary investigation of a complaint to close a complaint as an administrative closure. In the event of an administrative closure, the commission shall issue a right-to-sue letter allowing a complainant to initiate court proceeding in the Iowa District Court within 90 days of the date of the administrative closure. 
(Code 2017, § 15-62; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-64. - Proceedings after probable cause determination. 
    In the event of a failure to eliminate an unfair or discriminatory practice by means of conciliation within 90 days of a finding of probable cause by the commission, the commission shall hold a public hearing. The commission shall notify the state civil rights commission of the failure of the conciliation efforts and that the complaint will proceed to public hearing. The duty to hold a hearing within 90 days may be extended by agreement of the commission and the parties. 
(Code 2017, § 15-65; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-65. - Public hearing. 
(a)  The chairperson may designate three or more commissioners, not including any commissioner who may have been directly involved as a fact finder or conciliator, to act as hearing commissioners. One of those designated shall be named the presiding member. In the alternative, the chairperson may retain a person to act as the administrative law judge, or commission designee, or to assist the commission with the process of conducting the hearing and rendering a decision at the commission's expense. 
(b)  The commission or designee shall serve on the respondent a notice of the charge and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be a public record. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after the issuance of the notice and must be held in a building open to the public in the city. The hearing commissioners or designee may adjourn the hearing from time to time. 
(c)  Formal pleadings are not required, but the respondent may file an answer. The respondent shall also have the right to appear at the hearing in person, or to be represented by an attorney or any other person, and to examine and cross examine witnesses and to present evidence in the respondent's own behalf. The complainant shall have the right to intervene and participate in the hearing. 
(d)  The commission shall have the power to reasonably and fairly amend the complaint, and the party charged shall have the power to reasonably and fairly amend the answer at any time before a final order is entered in the case. 
(e)  The city attorney, commission attorney or an attorney designated by the commission shall conduct the case on behalf of the commission. If the city attorney is unable to conduct the case by reason of conflict of interest or otherwise, the city council may appoint a special attorney to conduct the case on behalf of the commission. 
(f)  The complainant and respondent may introduce further evidence to support or defend the claims alleged in the complaint, either in person or by attorney. 
(g)  If the respondent shall fail to appear in person or by attorney at the hearing, the hearing commissioners or designee shall proceed to consider the testimony offered and shall base their decision thereon. 
(h)  The evidence shall be taken under oath. The commission or designee shall apply the rules of evidence used in administrative hearings in the State of Iowa. 
(i)  The public hearing shall be tape recorded by the commission or designee. Duplicate tapes shall be available to all parties at no cost. The tapes shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office for a period of five years. In the alternative, the commission or its designee may appoint a certified court reporter in lieu of tape recording at the commission's expense. 
(Code 2017, § 15-66; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-66. - Action by commission. 
(a)  If, upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the commission or its designee determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice, the commission or its designee shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take the necessary remedial action as in the judgment of the commission will carry out the purposes of this article. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the respondent, to the complainant and to any other public officers and persons as the commission deems proper. Such order: 
(1)  Shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts upon which the commission has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur if the basis of the claim is housing; and 
(2)  Shall be based on the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(b)  If the commission determines that the matter involves the legality of any state or local zoning or other land use law or ordinance, the commission shall immediately refer the matter to the attorney general for appropriate action. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section and pursuant to the provisions of this article, the term "remedial action" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees with or without pay. Interim earned income and unemployment compensation shall operate to reduce the pay otherwise allowable. 
(2)  Admission or restoration of individuals to a labor organization or admission to or participation in a guidance program, apprenticeship training program, on-the-job training program or other occupational training or retraining program, with the utilization of objective criteria in the admission of individuals to such programs. 
(3)  Admission of individuals to a public accommodation or an educational institution. 
(4)  Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real property to an individual. 
(5)  Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment of the advantages, facilities, privileges and services of the respondent denied to the complainant because of the discriminatory or unfair practice. 
(6)  Reporting as to the manner of compliance. 
(7)  Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of business in a form prescribed by the commission, and inclusion of notices in advertising material. 
(8)  Payment to the complainant of damages for an injury caused by the discriminatory or unfair practice, which damages shall include, but are not limited to, actual damages, court costs and reasonable attorney fees. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies provided in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section, the commission or its designee may issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take such affirmative action as in the judgment of the commission will carry out the purposes of this article as follows: 
(1)  In the case of a respondent operating by virtue of a license issued by the city or a political subdivision or agency, if the commission or its designee, upon notice to the respondent with an opportunity to be heard, determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice and that the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the respondent or by an officer or executive agent acting within the scope of his employment, the commission or its designee shall so certify to the licensing agency. Unless the commission finding of a discriminatory or unfair practice is reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of discrimination is binding on the licensing agency. If a certification is made pursuant to this section, the licensing agency may initiate licensee disciplinary procedures. 
(2)  In the case of a respondent who is found by the commission to have engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice in the course of performing under a contract or subcontract with the city or a political subdivision or agency, if the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the respondent or by an officer or executive agent acting within the scope of his employment, the commission shall so certify to the contracting agency. Unless the commission's or its designee's finding of a discriminatory or unfair practice is reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of discrimination is binding on the contracting agency. Upon receiving a certification made under this section, a contracting agency may take appropriate action to terminate a contract or portion thereof previously entered into with the respondent, either absolutely or on condition that the respondent carry out a program of compliance with the provisions of this article, and assist the city and all political subdivisions and agencies thereof to refrain from entering into further contracts. 
(e)  The terms of a conciliation agreement reached with the respondent may require him to refrain in the future from committing discriminatory or unfair practices of the type stated in the agreement, to take remedial action as in the judgment of the commission will carry out the purposes of this article, and to consent to the entry in an appropriate district court of a consent decree embodying the terms of the conciliation agreement. Violation of such a consent decree may be punished as contempt by the court in which it is filed, upon a showing by the commission of the violation at any time within 18 months of its occurrence. In all cases where a conciliation agreement is entered into, the commission shall issue an order stating its terms and furnish a copy of the order to the complainant, the respondent and such other persons as the commission deems proper. At any time, in its discretion, the commission may investigate whether the terms of the agreement are being complied with by the respondent. Upon a finding that the terms of the conciliation agreement are not being complied with by the respondent, the commission shall take appropriate action to ensure compliance. 
(Code 2017, § 15-67; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-67. - Judicial review. 
    Judicial review of the actions of the commission may be sought in district court as provided in Iowa Code § 216.17, as amended. 
(Code 2017, § 15-68; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-68. - Temporary injunctions. 
    If, at any time after the filing of a complaint under this article, it shall appear to the commission that there is reason to believe that the respondent has violated this article and there is reason to believe that the respondent is about to do acts which would make impossible his compliance with an order of the commissioner to alleviate the grievance, the commission may direct its attorney to seek a temporary injunction restraining the respondent from doing these acts pending completion of the proceedings under this article. 
(Code 2017, § 15-69; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-69. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  The commission or its designee shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance, to administer oaths and take the testimony of any person under oath, and to compel the parties to produce for examination any books and papers relating to any matter involved in a complaint. A subpoena may be issued upon the signature of a commission member. The commission shall issue subpoenas in the same manner and for the same purposes on behalf of the respondent upon request. Refusal to obey a subpoena issued by the commission is punishable by fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. If a witness either fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued by the commission, the commission may petition the district court having jurisdiction for issuance of a subpoena. Persons refusing to obey such subpoena may be subject to punishment for contempt. 
(b)  The commission or its designee shall also have the power to issue subpoenas and order discovery in aid of investigations and hearings of alleged unfair or discriminatory practices as described in this article. The subpoenas and discovery may be ordered to the same extent and are subject to the same limitations as subpoenas and discovery in a civil action in district court. 
(Code 2017, § 15-70; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-70. - Provision to be included in city public works contracts. 
    The city and all subdivisions and agencies thereof shall include in all public works contracts negotiated a provision obligating the public works contractor and employees, agents and subcontractors not to commit any of the unfair or discriminatory employment practices set forth in this article, and the provision shall also be included by the public works contractor in contracts with all subcontractors. 
(Code 2017, § 15-71; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-71-12-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CREDIT 

Sec. 12-99. - Prohibited credit practices. 
(a)  A creditor shall not refuse to enter into a consumer credit transaction or impose finance charges or terms or conditions more onerous than those which are usually extended by that creditor to consumers of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed, national origin, race, religion, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, physical disability or familial status. 
(b)  A person authorized or licensed to do business in this state pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 524, 533, 534, 536 or 536A shall not refuse to loan or extend credit or impose terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly extended to those persons of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed, national origin, race, religion, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, physical disability or familial status. 
(c)  A creditor shall not refuse to offer credit life or health and accident insurance because of color, creed, national origin, race, religion, marital status, age, physical disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or familial status. Refusal by a creditor to offer credit life or health and accident insurance based upon the age or physical disability of the consumer shall not be an unfair or discriminatory practice if such denial is based solely upon bona fide underwriting considerations not prohibited by Iowa Code title XIII, subtitle 1 (Iowa Code § 505.1 et seq.). 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed by negative implication or otherwise to narrow or restrict any other provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 15-91; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-100-12-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EDUCATION 

Sec. 12-127. - Prohibited education practices. 
(a)  It is an unfair or discriminatory practice for any educational institution to discriminate on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion, or disability in any program or activity. Such discriminatory practices shall include, but not be limited to, the following practices: 
(1)  Exclusion of a person or persons from participation in, denial of the benefits of, or subjection to discrimination in any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other program or activity except athletic programs; 
(2)  Denial of comparable opportunity in intramural and interscholastic athletic programs; 
(3)  Discrimination among persons in employment and the conditions of employment; 
(4)  On the basis of sex, the application of any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a person, or the exclusion of any person from any program or activity or employment because of pregnancy or related conditions dependent upon the physician's diagnosis and certification. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "educational institution" includes any preschool, elementary or secondary school, community college, area education agency, or postsecondary college or university and their governing boards. This section does not prohibit an educational institution from maintaining separate toilet facilities, locker rooms, or living facilities for the different sexes so long as comparable facilities are provided. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any bona fide religious institution from imposing qualifications based on religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose or any institution from admitting students of only one sex. 
(Code 2017, § 15-111; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-128-12-152. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 12-153. - Prohibited employment practices. 
    It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice: 
(1)  For any person to refuse to hire, accept, register, classify or refer for employment, to discharge any employee, or to otherwise discriminate in employment against any applicant for employment or any employee because of the age, race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability of such applicant or employee, unless based upon the nature of the occupation. If a disabled person is qualified to perform a particular occupation by reason of training or experience, the nature of that occupation shall not be the basis for exception to the unfair or discriminating practices prohibited by this subsection. 
(2)  For any labor organization or the employees, agents or members thereof to refuse to admit to membership any applicant, to expel any member or to otherwise discriminate against any applicant for membership or any member in the privileges, rights, or benefits of such membership because of the age, race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability of such applicant or member. 
(3)  For any employer, employment agency or labor organization or the employees, agents or members thereof to directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate or publicize that individuals of any particular age, race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability are unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or not solicited for employment or membership, unless based on the nature of the occupation. If a disabled person is qualified to perform a particular occupation by reason of training or experience, the nature of that occupation shall not be the basis for exception to the unfair or discriminating practices prohibited by this subsection. An employer or employment agency or their employees, servants or agents may offer employment or advertise for employment to only the disabled, when other applicants have available to them other employment compatible with their ability which would not be available to the disabled because of their handicap. Any such employment or offer of employment shall not discriminate among the disabled on the basis of race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or national origin. 
(4)  For any person to solicit or require as a condition of employment of any employee or prospective employee a test for the presence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus or to affect the terms, conditions or privileges of employment or terminate the employment of any employee solely as a result of the employee obtaining a test for the presence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus. An agreement between an employer, employment agency or labor organization or their employees, agents or members and an employee or prospective employee concerning employment, pay or benefits to an employee or prospective employee, in return for taking a test for the presence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus, is prohibited. The prohibitions of this subsection do not apply if the state epidemiologist determines and the director of public health declares, through the utilization of guidelines established by the Center for Disease Control of the United States Department of Health and Human Services, that a person with a condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome poses a significant risk of transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus to other persons in a specific occupation. 
(Code 2017, § 15-131; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-154. - Policies relating to pregnancy or childbirth. 
    Employment policies relating to pregnancy and childbirth shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  A written or unwritten employment policy or practice which excludes from employment applicants or employees because of the employee's pregnancy is a prima facie violation of this division. 
(2)  Disabilities caused or contributed to by the employee's pregnancy, miscarriage or childbirth and recovery therefrom are, for all job-related purposes, temporary disabilities, and shall be treated as such under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan available in connection with employment. Written and unwritten employment policies and practices involving matters such as the commencement and duration of leave, the availability of extensions, the accrual of seniority and other benefits and privileges, reinstatement and payment under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan, formal or informal, shall be applied to a disability due to the employee's pregnancy or giving birth on the same terms and conditions as they are applied to other temporary disabilities. 
(3)  Disabilities caused or contributed to by legal abortion and recovery therefrom are, for all job-related purposes, temporary disabilities, and shall be treated as such under any temporary disability or sick leave plan available in connection with employment. Written and unwritten employment policies and practices involving matters such as the commencement and duration of leave, the availability of extensions, the accrual of seniority and other benefits and privileges, reinstatement and payment under any temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan, formal or informal, shall be applied to a disability due to legal abortion on the same terms and conditions as they are applied to other temporary disabilities. The employer may elect to exclude health insurance coverage for abortion from a plan provided by the employer, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or where medical complications have arisen from an abortion. 
(4)  An employer shall not terminate the employment of a person disabled by pregnancy because of the employee's pregnancy. 
(5)  Where a leave is not available or a sufficient leave is not available under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan available in connection with employment, the employer of the pregnant employee shall not refuse to grant to the employee who is disabled by the pregnancy a leave of absence if the leave of absence is for the period that the employee is disabled because of the employee's pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions, or for eight weeks, whichever is less. However, the employee must provide timely notice of the period of leave requested and the employer must approve any change in the period requested before the change is effective. Before granting the leave of absence, the employer may require that the employee's disability resulting from pregnancy be verified by medical certification stating that the employee is not able to reasonably perform the duties of employment. 
(Code 2017, § 15-132; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-155. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This division shall not prohibit discrimination on the basis of age if the person subject to the discrimination is under the age of 18 years, unless that person is considered by law to be an adult. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, a state or federal program designed to benefit a specific age classification which serves a bona fide public purpose shall be permissible. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to age discrimination in bona fide apprenticeship employment programs if the employee is over 45 years of age. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any employer who regularly employs less than four individuals. For purposes of this subsection, individuals who are members of the employer's family shall not be counted as employees. 
(2)  The employment of individuals for work within the home of the employer, if the employer or members of his family reside therein during such employment. 
(3)  The employment of individuals to render personal service to the person of the employer or members of the employer's family. 
(4)  Any bona fide religious institution or its educational facility, association, corporation or society, with respect to any qualifications for employment based on religion, when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose. A religious qualification for instructional personnel or an administrative officer, serving in a supervisory capacity of a bona fide religious educational facility or religious institution, shall be presumed to be a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(Code 2017, § 15-133; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-156-12-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOUSING 

Sec. 12-179. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions found in section 12-2, the following definitions shall apply to sections 12-180 to 12-183: 
    Aggrieved person includes any person who: 
(1)  Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or 
(2)  Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
    Covered multi-unit dwelling: 
(1)  Building consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
    Family includes single individuals. 
    Person means and includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title II, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
(Code 2017, § 15-151; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-180. - Prohibited housing practices. 
    It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any person, owner, or person acting for an owner, of rights to housing or real property, with or without compensation, including, but not limited to, persons licensed as real estate brokers or salespersons, attorneys, auctioneers, agents or representatives by power of attorney or appointment, or any person acting under court order, deed of trust, or will: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, rent lease, assign, sublease, refuse to negotiate, or to otherwise make unavailable, or deny any real property or housing accommodation or part, portion or interest therein, to any person because of the race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status of such person. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person because of the person's race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status, in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or housing accommodation or any part, portion or interest in the real property or housing accommodation or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the real property or housing accommodation. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, that indicates a preference or limitation for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment, or sublease of any real property or housing accommodation or any part, portion or interest therein, by persons of any particular race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(4)  To discriminate against the lessee or purchaser of any real property or housing accommodation or part, portion or interest of the real property or housing accommodation, or against any prospective lessee or purchaser of the property or accommodation, because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, age, familial status, or national origin of persons who may from time to time be present in or on the lessee's or owner's premises for lawful purposes at the invitation of the lessee or owner as friends, guests, visitors, relatives or in any similar capacity. 
(5)  A person shall not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce another person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(6)  A person shall not represent to a person because of a particular race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when the dwelling is available for inspection, sale or rental. 
a.  A person shall not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to a buyer or renter because of a disability of any of the following persons: 
1.  That buyer or renter. 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available. 
3.  A person associated with that buyer or renter. 
b.  A person shall not discriminate against another person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of any of the following persons: 
1.  That person. 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available. 
3.  A person associated with that person. 
c.  For the purposes of this subsection only, discrimination includes any of the following circumstances: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications are necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises. In the case of a rental, a landlord may, where reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreement to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations are necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that meets the following requirements: 
(i)  The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons. 
(ii)  All doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs. 
(iii)  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
A.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling. 
B.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations. 
C.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars. 
D.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that a person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
d.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," satisfies the requirements of subsection (6)c.3(iii) of this section. 
e.  Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to a person whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(7)  A person, or other entity, whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions shall not discriminate against a person in making a residential real estate related transaction available or in terms or conditions of a residential real estate related transaction because of race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
a.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following: 
1.  To make or purchase loans or provide other financial assistance to purchase, construct, improve, repair, or maintain a dwelling, or secured by residential real estate. 
2.  To sell, broker, or appraise residential real estate. 
b.  Appraisal exemption. Nothing in this division prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, color, religion, national origin, disability or familial status. 
(8)  A person shall not deny another person access to, or membership or participation in a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation in such organization because of race, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(Code 2017, § 15-152; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-181. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any single-unit house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-unit houses at any one time; provided, further, That in the case of the sale of any such single-unit house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-unit house houses at any one time; provided further, that after December 31, 1969, the sale or rental of any such single-unit house shall be excepted from the application of this division only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 12-180; but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Dwellings containing no more than four independent dwelling units, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such dwelling units as his residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this division prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(c)  Nothing in this division limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Nor does any provision in this division regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
a.  Provided under any state or federal program is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or 
b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older; and 
1.  At least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older; 
2.  The housing facility or community publishes and adheres to policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent required under this subsection; and 
3.  The housing facility or community complies with rules issued by the secretary for verification of occupancy, which shall: 
(i)  Provide for verification by reliable surveys and affidavits; and 
(ii)  Include examples of the types of policies and procedures relevant to a determination of compliance with the requirement of subsection (c)(1)c.2 of this section. Such surveys and affidavits shall be admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings for the purposes of such verification. 
(2)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
a.  Persons residing in such housing as of the date of enactment of this Act who do not meet the age requirements as set forth above, provided that new occupants of such housing meet such age requirements; or 
b.  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements set forth in (c)(1) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 15-153; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-182. - Civil action for enforcement of housing complaint. 
    In a civil action under this division, if the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant as relief any relief which a court could grant with respect to such discriminatory housing practice in a civil action under 42 USC 3613. Any relief so granted that would accrue to an aggrieved person in a civil action commenced by the aggrieved person under 42 USC 3613 shall also accrue to that aggrieved person in a civil action under this subsection. If monetary relief is sought for the benefit of an aggrieved person who does not intervene in the civil action, the court shall not award such relief if that aggrieved person has not complied with discovery order entered by the court. The court may also award punitive damages, attorney fees, and civil penalties as defined in 12-183. 
(Code 2017, § 15-155; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-183. - Civil penalties in the administrative hearing. 
    In addition to any other remedies under this division, if the commission or its designee finds that a respondent has engaged in or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice, after the hearing on this matter it shall promptly issue an order for such relief as may be appropriate, which may include actual damages suffered by the aggrieved person and injunctive or other equitable relief. Such order may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty against the respondent: 
(1)  In an amount not exceeding $250.00 if the respondent has not been adjudged to have committed any prior discriminatory housing practice; 
(2)  In an amount not exceeding $500.00 if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed one other discriminatory housing practice during the five-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge; and 
(3)  In an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed two or more discriminatory housing practices during the seven-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge; except that if the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice that is the subject of the charges are committed by the same natural person who has been previously adjudged to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory housing practice, then the civil penalties set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section may be imposed without regard to the period of time within which any subsequent discriminatory housing practice occurred. 
(Code 2017, § 15-156; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Secs. 12-184-12-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS OR SERVICES 

Sec. 12-205. - Prohibited practices. 
    It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any owner, lessee, sublessee, proprietor, manager or superintendent of any public accommodation or any agent, or employee thereof to: 
(1)  Refuse or deny to any person, because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability, the accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges thereof, or otherwise to discriminate against any person because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability in the furnishing of such accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate or publicize that the patronage of persons of any particular race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion or disability is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or not solicited. 
(Code 2017, § 15-171; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Sec. 12-206. - Exemptions. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications the institution may impose based on religion, when such qualifications are related to bona fide religious purposes. 
(2)  The rental or leasing to transient individuals of less than six rooms within a single housing accommodation by the occupant or owner of such housing accommodation, if the occupant or owner resides therein. 
(Code 2017, § 15-172; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Chapter 13 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or proceeding in a manner different from or contrary to the mode and procedure stated in this chapter, or failing or refusing to procure a license when required to do so by the provisions of this chapter, or doing any of the acts for which a license is required in this chapter without such license, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter on separate and distinct days shall each be considered a separate and distinct offense. The violation by the licensee or his employees of any of the provisions of this chapter may be sufficient cause, upon conviction, for revocation of the license by the mayor or council. The penalties provided in this section are in addition to any fees, charges, forfeitures or liabilities otherwise imposed. 
(Code 2017, § 16-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Business license required. 
    No person shall engage in, transact, carry on or do or cause to be done any vocation, trade, business, profession, exhibition, entertainment, game or act described in this chapter within the city without having paid the required license fee and obtained a license. 
(Code 2017, § 16-2) 
Sec. 13-3. - Issuance of business license. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any person desiring a license from the city for any of the purposes referred to in this chapter, shall make application therefor to the city clerk on a blank furnished for that purpose, and upon payment of the license fee the city clerk shall issue to such person the proper license. 
(Code 2017, § 16-3; Ord. No. 2055, § 1, 4-25-1994) 
Sec. 13-4. - Contents of business license. 
    Each license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall bear the date of issuance thereof, and shall specify the person to whom issued and the purpose for which issued, shall describe the place where the business is to be carried on, the time of its expiration and the amount paid for the license, and shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 16-4; Ord. No. 2055, § 2, 4-25-1994) 
Sec. 13-5. - Transfer of business license. 
    No license provided for in this chapter shall be assignable or transferable except with the consent of the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 16-5; Ord. No. 2055, § 3, 4-25-1994) 
Sec. 13-6. - Operation of business restricted to location specified on license; exception. 
    All licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall specify the particular place in the city where the business, entertainment or affair thereby licensed is to be performed or carried on, to which location the licensee must confine himself under penalty of forfeiture of his license unless otherwise permitted in writing by the city clerk. This section shall not apply to any licensee whose duties require him to go from place to place within the city in pursuance of his work and duties under his license. 
(Code 2017, § 16-6; Ord. No. 2055, § 4, 4-25-1994) 
Sec. 13-7. - Expiration of business license. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all licenses issued in accordance with this chapter shall expire on December 31 in each year. 
(Code 2017, § 16-7; Ord. No. 2055, § 5, 4-25-1994) 
Secs. 13-8-13-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - MOBILE MERCHANTS 

Sec. 13-33. - Sales prohibited on public property. 
    No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall sell, rent, barter, display, or otherwise offer for sale, rent or barter, any services, merchandise or other materials on any sidewalk, street, public right-of-way, or public property without a valid permit or license. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-33), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-34. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile merchant includes any person engaged in selling, renting or bartering, or offering for sale, rent or barter, any services, food, beverages, goods, wares or other merchandise from a stand, cart, motor vehicle, trailer, vending machine or other form of temporary structure, or from no structure. The term "mobile merchants" includes, but is not limited to, persons referred to as peddlers, solicitors, vendors, transient merchants, and seasonal merchants, whether operating on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-34), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-35. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of a mobile merchant in the city without first obtaining a license, with the exception of those individuals and organizations identified in section 13-36. Only one natural person may engage in such activity under one license. 
(b)  Each mobile merchant shall also obtain the necessary licenses and/or permits as may be required by city, county, state and federal governing bodies. All mobile merchants shall at all times comply with all applicable city, county, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Each mobile merchant shall carry and display the current mobile merchant license applicable to the mobile merchant at the location and during all times when engaged in the particular activity for which the license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-35), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-36. - Exemptions. 
    Persons and organizations engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the requirement to obtain a mobile merchant license: 
(1)  The temporary sale of food, beverages, goods, wares or other merchandise by a permanent merchant on private property adjacent to the merchant's permanent place of business. 
(2)  The sale at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of resale. 
(3)  The sale or distribution of newspapers or similar tabloids. 
(4)  The sale of tangible personal property or services to business enterprises only. 
(5)  The sale of works of art or craft created by a permanent resident of the city or by a member of such permanent resident's immediate family if such sale is made at such permanent residence in the city. 
(6)  The sale of real estate or insurance by agents or brokers licensed by the state. 
(7)  The sale or delivery of goods or services through a permanent business located in the city, or sold to regular customers on established routes. 
(8)  The sale or distribution of fresh fruits or vegetables. 
(9)  The sale of food, beverages, goods, wares or other merchandise within an established farmers market or special event. 
(10)  The sale of tangible property at a garage, basement, or yard sale held at one of the seller's premises, but not more than two such sales events within any 12-month period. 
(11)  Solicitations and sales by charitable and nonprofit organizations defined and authorized by Iowa Code ch. 504 or 504A, or are authorized and organized under statutes or regulations of the U.S. Government, or approved by the Internal Revenue Service; all public and private schools and colleges; and nonprofit clubs and lodges that are not ordinarily conducted as a business that do not meet the requirements of Iowa Code ch. 504 or 504A. 
(12)  Auctions conducted by auctioneers licensed by the state. 
(13)  The sale of merchandise or services through an event sponsored by the U.S. Government, state government, or any governmental subdivision or at any event conducted on real estate owned or leased by such governmental unit. 
(14)  The sale of merchandise within a shopping center. 
(15)  Any and all activities specifically authorized in a valid contract with the city. 
(16)  The sale of consumer fireworks and novelties. 
(17)  The city council may by resolution grant exceptions to the license requirements of this division for just cause. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-36), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-37. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applicants for a license under this division shall complete and submit to the city clerk for review a mobile merchant business license application along with the appropriate fee and the following application information and materials: 
(1)  The full name, permanent address and phone number of the applicant, along with at least one form of identification that includes a photograph of the applicant. 
(2)  If operating a motor vehicle as part of the mobile merchant business, proof of a current operator's license. 
(3)  A detailed description of the items to be offered for sale. 
(4)  The business name and address as well as the addresses of all locations where the mobile merchant business is proposed to be operated. 
(5)  A detailed diagram and/or photograph of the mobile stand, cart, motor vehicle or other temporary structure to be used for the mobile merchant business, as well as any signage to be used which signs shall comply with chapter 3. 
(6)  A detailed site plan diagram if proposed in a stationary location which shall include provisions for patron parking. 
(7)  Written permission for use of the property from the owner if operating on private property or approval by the city council if operating on public property. 
(8)  Proof of valid food service license from the state and/or county health departments if selling/handling food and/or beverages for human consumption. 
(9)  Iowa sales tax permit. 
(10)  Insurance certificate as required in section 13-39. 
(11)  If operating from a vehicle, the make, model, year, state of registration and license number of the vehicle. 
(12)  Plans for disposal of liquid and solid refuse, waste, garbage, trash, and other material used in connection with the mobile merchant business. 
(b)  The following factors shall be taken into consideration in determining whether or not a license under this division shall be granted: 
(1)  Compliance with this division and all other provisions of this Code, as well as local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Zoning district of the proposed location. 
(3)  Availability of parking, pedestrian and vehicle access, utilities access, handicapped access and emergency vehicle access. 
(4)  Likelihood of undue congestion of a public area. 
(5)  Likelihood of excessive noise and other adverse impacts on surrounding areas. 
(c)  The city clerk shall refer such application to the appropriate city departments for review and report. 
(d)  Within 15 days after receipt of such documents, each such city official shall forward to the city clerk his approval or denial of the application, and in case of denial, the reason or reasons for denial. The applicant shall be notified of the results of the reviews and shall be afforded a period of 15 days to supplement, correct or modify the application to address the city officials' reasons for denial. 
(e)  If the city officials all approve the application, and the applicant has complied with all other requirements of this article, the city clerk shall issue a mobile merchant license to the applicant. 
(f)  After 30 days from the date of filing of the application, if the applicant has not received all necessary city staff approvals, or if the application has been denied, the application shall be considered denied. The applicant may file a written appeal of the denial to the administration committee of the city council within 45 days of the date of original filing of the application with the city clerk. The administration committee shall schedule a hearing within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date, time and place of hearing. The committee shall afford the applicant the opportunity to present information to the committee in support of the application. Within ten days after such hearing, the administration committee shall issue its decision, which may either affirm or reverse the denial of the application, or affirm the application subject to certain conditions. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. No new application for a mobile merchant license shall be submitted by the same applicant for the same location for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the administration committee denying any application. 
(g)  Any license granted by this division shall not be transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-37), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-38. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  The city council reserves the right to require a change in location of any mobile merchant in the event public safety or congestion so requires, at the discretion of the city council. A change of location will be required if the owner of the private property where the mobile merchant business is located revokes written permission. 
(b)  Mobile merchants who are engaged in business on private property may only do so in the following zoning districts as defined in chapter 26: C-1 Commercial District, C-2 Commercial District, C-3 Commercial District, M-1 Light Industrial District, M-2 Heavy Industrial District and S-1 Shopping Center District. 
(c)  No mobile merchant shall conduct business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant; create or become a public nuisance; increase traffic, congestion or delay; constitute a hazard to life, health or property; or obstruct adequate access for fire, police, sanitation or emergency vehicles. 
(d)  No mobile merchant may sell or attempt to sell to or from the travelled portion of a public street. 
(e)  No mobile merchant shall enter upon any residential premises in the city where the owner or lawful occupant has posted, at the entry to the premises or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or other words of similar import. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-38), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-39. - Insurance. 
    All mobile merchants shall provide proof of and maintain commercial general liability insurance having a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00. A certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the city clerk prior to the issuance of a license. The city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, and agents shall be named as additional insureds against any liabilities that may arise in connection with the operation of the mobile merchant business. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-39), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-40. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for licenses issued under this division shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  License fees will not be refunded unless the mobile merchant license is revoked by the city council, in which case license fees shall be refunded on a pro-rata basis. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-40), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-41. - Lights and noisemakers. 
    No mobile merchant, or anyone acting on the mobile merchant's behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, or use any other sound making device, including loud speakers or amplifiers, or use bright or flashing lights for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise that the mobile merchant offers for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-41), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-42. - Litter. 
    All garbage, trash, litter and other debris in the immediate vicinity of a mobile merchant's stationary location shall be picked up and collected on a daily basis and adequate receptacles shall be maintained for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-42), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-43. - Revocation of mobile merchant license. 
(a)  A mobile merchant license granted under this division shall be revoked if the mobile merchant does or allows to be done any of the following: 
(1)  Fails to maintain all necessary licenses and permits required for the operation of the mobile merchant business. 
(2)  Fails to comply with all of the provisions of this division, with all other city ordinances, and with county, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Fails to furnish proof of or maintain insurance required by this division. 
(4)  Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard or public nuisance under state law or city ordinance, in connection with the mobile merchant business. 
(5)  Refuses to allow or resists an inspection of the mobile merchant business by any authorized agent of the city. 
(6)  Furnishes any false information on the license application or other documents required under this division. 
(7)  Makes a false or misleading statement or representation regarding any article sold or offered for sale as to the source, condition, quality, weight, measure, original cost, or cost of any item sold or offered for sale. 
(8)  Operates the mobile merchant business in a manner which, in the reasonable determination of the city, does not adequately protect and preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of the city's residents. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of any of the events described in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall give the mobile merchant written notice of revocation of the mobile merchant license, and the mobile merchant shall thereupon immediately cease to operate the mobile merchant business. 
(c)  The mobile merchant may appeal revocation of the mobile merchant license by written notice of appeal mailed or delivered to the city clerk within ten days of the date of notice of revocation. During the pendency of the appeal, the mobile merchant shall not be allowed to operate the mobile merchant business. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall notify the chair of the administration committee of the city council of the appeal, and a hearing before the administration committee shall be scheduled within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The mobile merchant shall be notified in writing of the time and place of hearing on the appeal, and shall be afforded an opportunity to present any information to the administration committee. The administration committee shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing, either affirming or reversing the revocation of the mobile merchant business. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-43), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-44. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity violating this article shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 13-1. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-45), 4-3-2017) 
Secs. 13-45-13-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 13-62. - Definition. 
    Any person who loans or advances money on deposit of personal property, taken as security for such loan, or who engages in the purchase of personal property or goods on condition or agreement of selling the goods back at an agreed or stipulated price, or any person who displays, at his place of business, the sign of three gilt or yellow balls, generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, is declared to be a pawnbroker within the meaning of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-51), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-63. - License. 
(a)  Required; fee. No person shall carry on or engage in the business of a pawnbroker in the city without first procuring a license therefor and paying such sum as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Affidavit of applicant. Before any pawnbroker's license required by this division shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the city clerk an affidavit that he will observe and carry out the provisions of the ordinances of the city during the time his license is in force, in relation to pawnbrokers or their business, and also designating fully the location, as to street and number, where his business is to be transacted. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-52), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-64. - Bond. 
    Each applicant for a license required by this division shall, before the license is issued to him, file with the city clerk a bond with the sureties approved by the council, in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned that the applicant will comply with and observe the terms and conditions of all ordinances of the city relating to pawnbrokers or their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on account of failure to observe such ordinances, and will pay all damages resulting to any person by reason of the wrongful purchase or receiving on pledge or on deposit of any stolen property from any minor, which bond shall be approved by the council and filed by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 1(16-53), 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 13-65. - Register required; contents. 
    Each pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in which he shall keep a record showing a description of all property taken, purchased or received by him, including the number of any watch, bicycle or other article, the name or initials or any identification mark upon him, the name and residence and street and number of the person from whom such property is received or taken, the amount loaned on such property or paid to the person leaving or depositing the property, the interest charged or accruing to be paid by the person leaving or depositing such property, and the time when the loan falls due or when the contract made with the person depositing such property expires or matures. 
Sec. 13-66. - Inspection of register and property. 
    The pawnbroker's register required by this division shall at all times be open to inspection by the chief of police or any police officer of the city, the city attorney or his assistant, and anyone authorized in writing by the chief of police of the city for that purpose, which written authority shall be exhibited to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall also, upon request, show to any of the persons named in this section any articles purchased, taken or received by him or deposited with him and in his possession. 
Sec. 13-67. - Record of property purchased; retention period. 
    Each pawnbroker shall enter on the register required by this division the same data with reference to every article purchased or bought by him as is required for property subject to redemption, and shall keep the property in his place of business for a period of five days after its purchase. Such property shall be reported and shall be subject to inspection the same as property pledged or deposited with him subject to redemption. 
Sec. 13-68. - Ticket for property received. 
    To each person selling, negotiating, depositing or leaving any property with a pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall give a ticket upon which shall be printed or written a copy of all entries required by this division to be made in the pawnbroker's register with reference to the transaction with such person, for which ticket no charge shall be made by the pawnbroker. 
Sec. 13-69. - Receiving property from minors. 
    No pawnbroker shall purchase any personal property or receive property on deposit from any minor without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. 
Secs. 13-70-13-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRESS SALES 

Sec. 13-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Closing-out sale means the sale or an offer to sell at retail to the public goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the part of the seller, that the sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, wind-up, discontinuance, moving, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with the sale. It shall also include any sale advertised, either specifically or in substance, to be an adjustment sale, creditor's sale, trustee's sale, bankrupt sale, insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee sale, adjustor's sale, receiver's sale, loss of lease sale, forced out of business sale, going out of business sale or removal sale, and any and all sales advertised in such a manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued at its existing location. 
    License means a license issued pursuant to this division. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this division. 
    Publish, publishing, advertise, advertisement or advertising means any and all means of conveying to the public notice of a sale or notice of an intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by circular, by pamphlet, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement, by radio program, by recordings or by any and all other means, including oral, written or printed. 
    Resident merchant means a merchant who has maintained an established place of retail business within the city for the sale at retail of goods similar to those to be sold at the sale described in this section, for a continuous period of one year or more directly preceding the opening date of the sale. 
    Transient merchant means any merchant doing or contemplating doing business in the city, who is not a resident merchant. 
(Code 2017, § 16-181) 
Sec. 13-98. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any applicant for a license, or any licensee who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this division, or who shall make a false statement in any application for a license, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-9, and any license issued shall be revoked. 
(Code 2017, § 16-182) 
Sec. 13-99. - Exemptions from division. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs, bailiffs or marshals. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auctions. 
(4)  Executors, guardians, assignees or insolvent debtors, bankrupts or other persons required by law to sell the property. 
(Code 2017, § 16-183) 
Sec. 13-100. - Authority of council. 
    The council is hereby authorized and empowered to supervise or regulate closing-out sales, to issue appropriate licenses therefor upon the proper application for a license, and to provide for the investigation of applications therefor and for the issuance of licenses thereon by the necessary officer. 
(Code 2017, § 16-184) 
Sec. 13-101. - License required. 
    No person shall publish or conduct any closing-out sale without first obtaining a license therefor, and the license remaining in effect and unrevoked. 
(Code 2017, § 16-185) 
Sec. 13-102. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application for a license shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form to be approved by the council, and shall be verified by the applicant. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the place where the closing-out sale is to be held. 
(2)  The nature of the occupancy of the premises, whether by ownership, lease or sublease. 
(3)  The effective date of the termination of the occupancy. 
(4)  The means to be employed in publishing the sale. 
(5)  The proposed language to be used in the advertisements to indicate the nature of the sale. 
(6)  A statement of the intention of the applicant for the license in holding the sale. 
(7)  A statement as to in what manner the descriptive name for the sale is, in fact, descriptive of the sale. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not any merchandise of any kind, quantity or description has been purchased by or delivered to the applicant for the purpose of being included in the sale. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant agrees not to purchase or accept delivery of any merchandise, goods or wares of any kind, nature or description to be sold at the sale after the date of the application. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application and payment of the fee prescribed by this division, the council shall cause the application to be examined and investigated. 
(Code 2017, § 16-186) 
Sec. 13-103. - Bond. 
    Before a license shall be issued by the council, the applicant for the license shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00 signed by the applicant, and also signed by a surety company duly authorized to transact business in the state, which bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance of the provisions of this division, and also conditioned to reimburse and indemnify any purchaser at the closing-out sale held by the applicant for any loss incurred or damage sustained by the purchaser by reason of misrepresentation or fraud in the sale of any such goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 2017, § 16-187) 
Sec. 13-104. - Issuance of license. 
    If, upon investigation, the facts as represented by the application for the license are found to conform to the representations on the application, the reason given for the sale is satisfactory, there appears to have been no stockpiling of merchandise for sale, there has been no fraud or deception in the application, and the advertisements proposed to be used truly represent the facts and are not fraudulent or misleading to the public, the council may issue a license permitting the publication and conduct of the sale. 
(Code 2017, § 16-188) 
Sec. 13-105. - Expiration of license; renewal license. 
(a)  Expiration of license; conditions for renewal. A license shall be valid for a period not exceeding 60 days, except that, upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock on hand at the time of the original application has not been disposed of, upon proper application, the council shall cause the application to be examined and investigated, and if it is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in the renewal application the council may issue a renewal license for one or more consecutive periods of 30 days' duration upon payment of the renewal fees therefor. 
(b)  Application for renewal license. Any licensee who desires a renewal license pursuant to this division shall make application for the renewal license in writing to the clerk on a form to be approved by the council, which shall be verified by the licensee. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the place where the closing-out sale is to be held. 
(2)  The nature of the occupancy of the premises, whether by ownership, lease or sublease. 
(3)  The effective date of termination of the occupancy. 
(4)  The means to be employed in publishing the sale. 
(5)  The proposed language to be used in the advertisements to indicate the nature of the sale. 
(6)  A statement of the intention of the applicant in holding the sale. 
(7)  A statement as to in what manner the descriptive name is, in fact, descriptive of such sale. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not any merchandise of any kind, quantity or description has been purchased by or delivered to the applicant for the purpose of being included in the sale. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant agrees not to purchase or accept delivery of any merchandise, goods or wares of any kind, nature or description to be sold at the sale after the date of the application. 
(10)  The approximate proportion of the original inventory on hand at the time of commencing the sale that still remains on hand and unsold. 
(Code 2017, § 16-189) 
Sec. 13-106. - Waiting period for new license after termination of sale. 
    Upon the termination of the closing-out sale, no license shall be issued to the license applicant for the period of one year from the closing-out sale. 
(Code 2017, § 16-190) 
Sec. 13-107. - License fee. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for an original license, the applicant therefor shall pay the fees therefor as established by city council resolution from time to time. 
(b)  If any application or renewal application is disapproved, one-half of the license fee paid shall be retained by the city as and for the cost of investigating the statements made in the application or renewal application. 
(c)  The license fee for each 30-day renewal period shall be one-half of the fee for an original license. 
(d)  All inventory figures set out in a fee schedule shall be computed at the applicant's cost price. 
(Code 2017, § 16-191) 
Sec. 13-108. - Revocation of license. 
    If at any time during a closing-out sale the council shall determine that any statements in the application for the license were untrue, or that any of the provisions of this division have been or are being violated by the licensee, the council may immediately revoke the license, and it shall thenceforth be unlawful for the licensee to continue the sale until a new license is issued in accordance with the terms of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 16-192) 
Sec. 13-109. - Display of license; inspection of merchandise and records; wording of advertisements. 
    Upon commencement of a closing-out sale, the license shall be permanently displayed near the entrance to the premises. A duplicate original of the application for the license and the stock list pursuant to which a license was issued shall at all times be available to the council or to the inspector, and the licensee shall permit the inspector to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with the stock list at any and all times during the period of the sale. All advertisements or advertising, and the language contained herein, shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which the license was issued, and the wording of the advertisement shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the application. The advertising shall contain a statement in these words: "Sale held pursuant to License No. _____ of the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa, granted the _____ day of _____/_____/_____, 19 ___," and in such blank spaces shall be indicated the license number and the requisite dates. Books and records of the sale shall be kept by the licensee and shall at all times be available to the inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 16-193) 
Sec. 13-110. - Fraudulent or misleading advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise or cause to be advertised goods, wares or merchandise for a closing-out sale which do not conform to the representations of the advertisement. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to publish or cause to be published advertising falsely representing the reason for a closing-out sale. 
(Code 2017, § 16-194) 
Sec. 13-111. - Increasing inventory. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee publishing or conducting a closing-out sale to purchase or add to the stock of goods offered for sale any goods during the closing-out sale or during the effective period of the license, or to sell any goods at the closing-out sale except those on hand at the time of application for the license. 
(Code 2017, § 16-195) 
Secs. 13-112-13-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 13-136. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to alarm systems and alarm users as defined in this division. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm agent means a person designated in writing to the police of the city by an alarm user to respond to an alarm call at the alarm user's protected premises when the alarm user is out of the city or otherwise unable to respond to an alarm call. 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device such as a solid state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall include automatic holdup alarm system, burglar alarm system, holdup alarm system, local alarm system and manual holdup alarm system. The term "alarm system" shall not include proprietary alarm system, an alarm system on a motor vehicle (unless connected to an alarm system on or at a protected premises), or a system which monitors temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a protected premises. 
    Alarm user means any person in control of premises, as owner or lessee, on which premises an alarm system is located or maintained within the city. 
    Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of an attacker or robber. 
    Burglar alarm system means an alarm system which is designed to detect and signal the presence, entry or attempted entry of an intruder into a protected premises. 
    City means the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal necessitating a response by a police officer where an emergency situation does not exist. A false alarm does not include an alarm signal resulting from a power interruption caused by severe weather conditions in the city. 
    Holdup alarm system means an alarm system designed to signal a robbery or attempted robbery at a protected premise. 
    Local alarm system means an alarm system which, when activated, generates either an audible sound or a visual signal, or both, on the protected premises designed to be seen or heard by persons outside the protected premises. 
    Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the person attacked or by another observer. 
    Proprietary alarm system means a system that is designed to sound and/or record an alarm signal only at a control center located within the protected premises. 
    Police means a police officer or officers of the city. 
    Police chief means the chief of police of the city or his designee. 
    Protected premises means that part of a building to which protection is afforded by an alarm system. 
(Code 2017, § 16-236; Ord. No. 2463, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Sec. 13-137. - False alarms; fees for false alarms. 
(a)  An alarm user shall be charged a fee for each false alarm as provided in this section, in such amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Each alarm user shall be allowed five false alarms without being charged a false alarm fee during each calendar year. All false alarms after the first five false alarms in each calendar year shall be subject to a false alarm fee as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If an alarm user, or his designated alarm agent, fails, for whatever reason, to respond to the protected premises as a result of an alarm call within 30 minutes of the time the police have responded to the alarm and have arrived at the location of the protected premises, that alarm call shall be considered a false alarm, and a false alarm fee shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  If an alarm user fails to pay any false alarm fee within 30 days of the date of invoice for such fee from the city, the alarm user shall incur a finance charge of 11/2 percent per month for each month or part of a month from the date of the original invoice until the fee and all finance charges are paid in full. 
(Code 2017, § 16-237; Ord. No. 2463, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Sec. 13-138. - Disconnection of alarm system and/or termination of police response to alarm. 
(a)  If an alarm user fails to pay any false alarm fee together with any finance charges thereon within 30 days of the date of invoice from the city, the police chief may issue notice of intention to disconnect the alarm user's alarm system from its connection to the police department of the city, and/or notice of intention to refuse to authorize the police of the city to respond to an alarm call at the alarm user's protected premises. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied on for disconnecting the system and/or refusing to authorize the police to respond to alarm calls at the alarm user's protected premises, and shall advise the alarm user of his right to request a hearing, and the time limitation and procedure to request such a hearing. Notice shall be given either by personal service on the alarm user or by depositing said notice in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the alarm user at the address where the protected premises are located, or at the alarm user's last known address if different from the address of the protected premises. 
(b)  An alarm user shall have 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice to request a hearing before the police chief. Such request must be in writing and must be postmarked or delivered to the chief of police at the city hall of the city within said 20-day period. If the alarm user submits a timely written request for hearing, then notice of the date, time and place of hearing before the police chief shall be sent by the police chief to the alarm user at least ten days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall be given in the same manner as the notice under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  At the hearing, the alarm user shall be given an opportunity to present whatever information and evidence the alarm user desires to submit in support of the request. The police chief shall allow information and documentation to be submitted by the police in support of the notice given under subsection (a) of this section. The police chief shall issue a written decision either authorizing disconnection of the alarm user's alarm system and/or authorizing the police to refuse to respond to an alarm call at the alarm user's protected premises, or denying such authorization. A copy of the decision shall be sent to the alarm user in the same manner as the notice under subsection (a) of this section. The decision shall advise the alarm user of the right to appeal the decision to the city council, and of the time limitation and procedure for the appeal. 
(d)  If the alarm user has submitted a timely request for hearing under this section, the chief of police shall not disconnect the alarm user's alarm system from its connection or refuse to authorize the police to respond to an alarm call at the alarm user's protected premises under a final decision is made by the chief of police on the request. 
(Code 2017, § 16-238; Ord. No. 2463, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Sec. 13-139. - Appeals. 
(a)  Right of appeal. An alarm user aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Notice of appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk of the city within 15 days after service of the decision of the chief of police. The notice of appeal shall briefly state the basis for such appeal. 
(b)  Appeal procedure. 
(1)  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. The city council shall set the matter for hearing at least 14 days but not more than 28 days in the future. The city clerk shall give the appealing party written notice of the time and place of the hearing by ordinary mail in the same manner as provided for in section 13-138(a). 
(2)  At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal from the decision of the chief of police, the city council shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the determination by the chief of police should not be upheld. The burden of proof shall be on the appealing party to show that the action taken by the chief of police is arbitrary, capricious, or in excess of his authority. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(c)  If an alarm user has filed a timely appeal of the decision of the chief of police, the chief of police shall not disconnect the alarm user's alarm system from its connection or refuse to authorize the police to respond to an alarm call at the alarm user's protected premises until a final decision is made on the appeal. 
(Code 2017, § 16-239; Ord. No. 2463, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Sec. 13-140. - Reconnection of alarm system. 
    Any alarm user, whose alarm system has been disconnected from the police department and/or with respect to whom the police have issued a refusal to respond to alarm calls, may apply for a new connection at the same or a different protected premise. The chief of police shall not be required to allow a new connection from the alarm user unless all false alarm fees and finance charges have been paid in full, and unless the police chief, in his sole and absolute discretion, is satisfied that the alarm user shall meet the obligations imposed upon the alarm user by the provisions of this division, and provided that sufficient space is available at the police department or dispatch center for the connection. 
(Code 2017, § 16-240; Ord. No. 2463, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Secs. 13-141-13-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS FOR BUSINESSES 

Sec. 13-164. - Purpose. 
    This division is enacted to reduce the potential for situations where employees of certain businesses or persons utilizing the services of certain businesses are exposed to potential death and/or injuries because of actions of people with criminal intent. 
(Code 2017, § 16-260; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 13-165. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means an establishment for retail sale of petroleum products and other supplies for motor vehicles, as well as for the retail sale of a variety of other items typically sold in grocery stores, or an establishment that provides lodging for paying guests or any other establishment that normally has only one clerk or employee on duty or financial institution's automated teller machine or similar device which dispenses currency to a patron, and said establishment routinely remains open for business for some or all of the hours between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 2017, § 16-261; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 13-166. - Surveillance camera required. 
    Any business as defined herein shall be equipped with a functioning surveillance camera between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or that portion of those hours the business is open, each day (night) that the business is open. The surveillance camera shall be positioned so as to record on film or videotape the image of all persons entering the business and/or all persons approaching within five feet of the cash register. All proposed installations and positioning of a surveillance camera shall be submitted in advance to the city police division for determination and approval that the same meets the requirements set out in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 16-262; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 13-167. - Exemptions. 
    Any business may apply to the chief of police for exemption from the provisions of this division if that business has undertaken alternate security measures which are substantially equal to or more effective in preventing criminal activity and assisting in the apprehension of the perpetrator and for protecting employees. The chief of police shall provide written standards which the chief of police, or designee, will consider in determining alternate security measures. If the chief of police or designee approves such alternate security measures submitted by the business, then the business is not required to comply with the provisions of this division for as long as the approval of the chief or designee is effective. If the application for exemption is denied by the chief of police or designee, the business may then appeal to the administration committee of the city council for further review of the application for exemption and the decision by the administration committee for the city council shall be final, except, to such extent as the same may be changed by judicial review. 
(Code 2017, § 16-263; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 13-168. - Right of inspections. 
    Cameras shall be maintained in proper working order and positioned correctly at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police or designee. 
(Code 2017, § 16-264; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 13-169. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision, section or paragraph of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. That each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2017, § 16-266; Ord. No. 2040, § 1, 12-13-1993) 
Chapter 14 - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as will permit the vehicle to be conveyed or used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways, and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons, but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in the state. This definition shall include modular homes. 
    Mobile home accessory building or structure means any awning, cabana, ramada, storage structure, carport, fence, windbreak or porch established for the use of the occupant of the mobile home upon a mobile home space. 
    Mobile home park means any site, lot, field or tract of land under one ownership, upon which two or more occupied mobile homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park. The term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own labor or students. 
    Mobile home space means a designated portion of a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory buildings or structures for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a grouping of mobile homes on not less than 20 acres of contiguous area, where each mobile home unit rests on a lot of separate ownership. The lots shall have been properly subdivided in accordance with chapter 20. 
    Travel trailer means a towed recreational vehicle up to 35 feet in length and a maximum of eight feet wide. 
(Code 2017, § 17-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 17-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Compliance with chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any premises owned or occupied by him to be used in violation of the terms of this chapter. A violation of this chapter by the occupant of a mobile home shall raise the presumption that such violation was consented to by the person owning or occupying the premises. 
(Code 2017, § 17-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Parking of mobile homes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home: 
(1)  On any street or other public place within the corporate limits of the city for a period of time in excess of two hours, and then only between the hours of sunrise and sunset, with the direction of the police operations division. 
(2)  For more than 48 hours on the premises of one occupied dwelling or business building, or more than 24 hours on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling or business building, except in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 2017, § 17-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Occupation of mobile home outside of park or subdivision. 
    A mobile home may be parked and occupied outside a mobile home park or subdivision only in the following instances: 
(1)  If the mobile home is used in conjunction with a construction project and not for living purposes. 
(2)  If the mobile home is used in the rendition of a public service. 
(3)  If the mobile home is used by public authorities in emergencies. 
(4)  If the mobile home is used as on-lot temporary housing for an owner and family while the owner's substantially damaged residence is being reconstructed for occupancy. The occupancy must have prior approval by the city council and shall be subject to the following considerations: 
a.  All property owners in the subdivision wherein the owner's lot is located shall consent, by signed petition, to the temporary housing. 
b.  All property owners not within the subdivision, but within 330 feet of the proposed on-lot utilization, shall consent, by signed petition, to the temporary housing. 
c.  Location of the mobile home for the temporary occupancy shall be satisfactory to the city council. 
d.  Satisfactory provisions shall be made for removal of the mobile home within two weeks of issuance of the occupancy approval for the reconstructed dwelling. In no case shall the mobile home remain in excess of one year. 
e.  Provision of all public utility services such as water, sewer and electric service shall be to the satisfaction of the city council. 
(5)  If the mobile home is provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to be used as on-lot temporary housing for an owner and family whose residence has been substantially damaged due to a natural disaster that has been the subject of a Presidential Declaration. 
a.  The occupancy must have prior approval by the city staff of the department of community development and shall be subject to the following considerations: 
1.  The on-lot temporary location of the mobile home is necessary because the owner's residence is being reconstructed for occupancy. A building permit for the reconstruction of the owner's primary residence must be obtained within 30 days of the placement of the mobile home on the private lot. 
2.  All owners of abutting properties to the proposed on-lot utilization shall be given prior written notice. The written notice shall be sent by regular mail and certified mail to the property owner's last known address with no written objections received by the department of community development within ten days from the date of mailing. If written objections by abutting property owners are received by the department of community development within ten days of the date of mailing, the matter of the on-lot temporary location of the mobile home shall be considered by the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. If the applicant for the on-lot temporary location of the mobile home obtains written consent from all abutting property owners, city staff may grant the occupancy before the ten-day waiting period expires. 
3.  Location and proper elevation of the mobile home for the temporary occupancy shall be satisfactory to the department of community development. Owner shall provide a site plan and an elevation survey, if necessary, to city staff. 
4.  Provision of all public utility services such as water, sewer and electric service shall be to the satisfaction of the department of community development. 
5.  A signed contract between the owner and the city shall be executed prior to occupancy, which shall include satisfactory provisions for the removal of the mobile home at the owner's expense within two weeks of issuance of the occupancy approval for the reconstructed dwelling. In no case shall the mobile home remain on the private lot in excess of 18 months. 
b.  The provisions of subsection (5)a.1 of this section may be waived if there is substantial proof, satisfactory to the city council, that there are no other available sites for the mobile home to be located in any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In the event there is a request pursuant to this subsection, the matter shall be considered by the city council at its next regularly scheduled city council meeting subsequent to the expiration of ten days from the date of mailing of notice to all abutting property owners. 
(Code 2017, § 17-5; Ord. No. 2663, § 1, 8-18-2008) 
Sec. 14-6. - Nonconforming mobile homes. 
(a)  Generally. Mobile homes in existence at the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 1666, and which are not located in a mobile home park or subdivision complying with this chapter, are hereby declared to be nonconforming uses, and such mobile homes shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered when located outside a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. Any mobile home in existence at the adoption of Ordinance No. 1666 which was not an authorized nonconforming use under previous ordinances regulating mobile homes shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming use pursuant to this chapter or amendments thereto. If such mobile home is damaged to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement value, or the mobile home is removed from its present location, it shall not thereafter be restored or placed in other than a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. If the nonconforming use of a mobile home is discontinued for a period of one year, the mobile home must thereafter comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit required; contents of application. All mobile homes declared by this section to be a nonconforming use must apply for and obtain a permit as a nonconforming use from the city clerk. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street and number of the premises whereon the mobile home is located. 
(2)  The owner of the premises, if other than the occupant of the mobile home. 
(3)  A site plan showing the proposed location of the mobile home on the lot. 
(4)  A statement of the nature and location of sanitary facilities used by the mobile home occupants. 
(5)  A statement that all wastewater from the mobile home is emptied into a proper sanitary sewer connected fixture. 
(6)  A statement that all garbage shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(7)  If rented, a certificate of occupancy from the minimum housing code inspector. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. If the application required in subsection (b) of this section contains the necessary true information, a permit shall be issued as a nonconforming use permit at no charge. 
(Code 2017, § 17-7) 
Sec. 14-7. - Minimum number of spaces in park or subdivision. 
    No mobile home park or subdivision, nor any initial stage thereof, shall contain less than 30 mobile home spaces. 
(Code 2017, § 17-8) 
Sec. 14-8. - Recreation areas in parks and subdivisions. 
    Not less than eight percent of the gross area of every mobile home park or subdivision shall be developed as recreation areas easily accessible to all park residents. Recreation areas may include, but are not limited to, such facilities as recreation buildings, adult recreation areas, child play areas and swimming pools. 
(Code 2017, § 17-9) 
Sec. 14-9. - Drainage of parks and subdivisions. 
    Each mobile home park or subdivision shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure drainage free from stagnant pools of water. No sidewalks shall be used as drainageways. Drainage plans including retention areas shall be provided in accordance with city policy and the city engineer's specifications. 
(Code 2017, § 17-10) 
Sec. 14-10. - Off-street parking for parks and subdivisions. 
    Each mobile home park and subdivision shall provide two off-street parking spaces per mobile home space or mobile home lot. Each mobile home space or lot shall have two permanent concrete or asphalt surfaced off-street automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of 180 square feet per parking space. The mobile home space or lot off-street parking requirement may be included within the square foot requirements of the space or lot. 
(Code 2017, § 17-11) 
Sec. 14-11. - Screening in parks and subdivisions. 
    Fences, walls and plantings shall be required in mobile home parks and subdivisions to the extent needed to provide for adequate privacy and screening of objectionable views such as laundry drying yards, garbage and trash collection stations, nonresidential uses, playgrounds and rear yards of adjacent properties. 
(Code 2017, § 17-12) 
Sec. 14-12. - Site maintenance for parks and subdivisions. 
    A covenant shall run with the land, in favor of the city and all persons having a possessory interest in any portion of a mobile home park or subdivision, that the owners of the park or subdivision or their successors in interest will maintain all private facilities such as interior streets, parking areas, sidewalks, sewers and other utility services and plantings in compliance with city ordinances and the final development plan as approved by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 17-13) 
Sec. 14-13. - Accessory buildings or structures. 
    All additions to mobile homes, accessory buildings, structures, awnings, cabanas, carports, basements and garages are subject to the building, electrical, plumbing, fire and zoning codes of the city. Inspection shall be required, permits obtained and associated permit fees paid in conformance with these or other applicable codes prior to occupancy by any person. 
(Code 2017, § 17-17) 
Sec. 14-14. - Conversion of mobile home; use for home occupation; certificate of occupancy required for rental. 
    No mobile home shall be converted, regardless of the lot area, nor shall any mobile home be utilized for a home occupation unless it meets the requirements for a home occupation as defined by the zoning chapter. If rented, the mobile home shall have a certificate of occupancy from the minimum housing code inspector. 
(Code 2017, § 17-18) 
Secs. 14-15-14-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 14-32. - Development procedures. 
(a)  Submission of preliminary plan. The owner of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than 20 acres wishing to develop a mobile home park shall submit to the city planning and zoning commission six copies of a preliminary plan of the proposed development, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in such amount as established by the council from time to time. The preliminary plan shall show, in schematic form, the generally proposed location of all of the following: 
(1)  Mobile home spaces or lots. 
(2)  Site topographic features. 
(3)  Buildings, other than garages and other buildings accessory to particular mobile home spaces, and their proposed height, use and exterior design. 
(4)  Access drives. 
(5)  Public streets abutting or within the proposed development. 
(6)  Proposed private streets within the development. 
(7)  Proposed location of public or private utility services, lines or structures, including sewers, streets, sidewalks, fuel tanks and electrical, gas and water lines. 
(8)  Public or private recreation areas. 
(9)  Required peripheral yards. 
(10)  Private off-street parking facilities. 
(11)  Landscaping and planting areas. 
(12)  Walls and fences. 
(13)  Storage areas. 
(14)  Development stages and timing of each. 
(15)  Floodway and floodplain areas as shown by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(16)  Storm protection shelters for occupants of the park. 
(b)  Approval of preliminary plan. Following the requirements for amendment to the zoning chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the comprehensive plan and with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscaping architecture. The commission may approve the plan as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan as the commission deems necessary, to the end that it preserves the intent and purpose of this article to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(c)  Submission of final plan. If the city council approves the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit six copies of a final development plan indicating not less than one stage of the proposed development, showing specifically and in detail the location of all items required on the preliminary schematic plan, and in addition: 
(1)  The location of all public streets, subdivisions and landowners within 300 feet of the contiguous holdings of the owner. 
(2)  The location and dimensions of the property's exterior boundaries, proposed mobile home spaces or lots, streets, drives and easements therein. 
(3)  The location of existing property lines, easements, buildings, tree masses, soil types and other physical features which may affect the final development. 
(4)  The location and width of proposed and existing streets, highways, roads and pedestrian ways. 
(5)  The location of public and private parks and open spaces. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers of proposed and existing lots and mobile home spaces. 
(7)  North arrow, scale, date, and the subdivision's or park's name, address and legal description. 
(8)  The location of solid waste receptacles, sidewalks, lighting facilities, common buildings, service buildings and storm shelters. 
(9)  Landscaping plan. 
(10)  The location of utility easements, lines and hydrants. 
(11)  Street names and address or lot numbers. 
(12)  The location of floodway and floodplain areas. 
(13)  Locations for mail pickup and delivery services. 
(d)  Required engineering data. The applicant shall also submit complete engineering data covering cross sections, profiles and proposed grades for the improvements required, all to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(e)  Inspection and certification of improvements. Provision shall be made for inspection and certification of completion of all improvements by a registered engineer in the state, other than a city-employed engineer, prior to occupancy of any lot. 
(f)  Approval of final plan. The final development plan shall be reviewed by the commission for compliance with the preliminary plan. After no more than 60 days, the commission shall forward its recommendations to the city council. After final approval by the council, a plan of the district shall be filed with the building official and maintained as a permanent part of the records of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 17-36) 
Sec. 14-33. - State licenses required prior to issuance of occupancy permit. 
    Any owner of any mobile home park shall obtain all required state licenses prior to issuance of an occupancy permit by the city for any lot, space or accessory structure. 
(Code 2017, § 17-37) 
Sec. 14-34. - Identification map; lot numbers. 
(a)  A logical and systematic method shall be used in preparing an identification map of all mobile home spaces, streets and service buildings located in a mobile home park. This map shall meet the requirements of the fire operations division and be filed as a permanent part of its records. 
(b)  Lot numbers a minimum of three inches in height shall be placed on a post a minimum of four feet in height, the posts being located in a systematic manner consistently on each space throughout the mobile home park. 
(Code 2017, § 17-38) 
Sec. 14-35. - Utilities. 
    Each mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be provided with utility connections for water, sanitary sewer and electricity. The construction of all utilities, including telephone, street lighting and television wires and cables, shall be in compliance with applicable ordinances, and utilities shall be installed entirely underground by the developer thereof in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications of the public utility or agency providing such service. 
(Code 2017, § 17-39) 
Sec. 14-36. - Lighting. 
    Walkways and roadways in a mobile home park shall be properly maintained and shall be lighted at night to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of 0.4 footcandle in all walkway and roadway areas. 
(Code 2017, § 17-40) 
Sec. 14-37. - Streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Each mobile home site in a mobile home park shall have direct access to a street which is constructed in accordance with city specifications for residential streets and which has a minimum width of not less than 22 feet. On collector streets within the park or where on-street parking is extensively utilized, wider streets may be required. These streets shall be maintained in good condition as provided for by section 14-12. 
(b)  Common sidewalks shall be provided along all entrance streets and in areas of high pedestrian traffic such as in the vicinity of the community buildings and recreation facilities. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and constructed in accordance with city specifications, including specifications for handicapped ramps. 
(c)  Individual walks shall be provided to connect all mobile home sites to common sidewalks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces connected to a paved street. Such individual walks shall be at least two feet wide and constructed of asphalt or Portland cement concrete pavement. 
(Code 2017, § 17-41) 
Sec. 14-38. - Distance between structures; patios. 
    Mobile homes in a mobile home park shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between any mobile home and another mobile home or any principal building within the mobile home park. Accessory structures attached to mobile homes shall be considered an integral part of the mobile home in determining clearance requirements. In addition, each mobile home space shall be provided with a paved patio of at least 80 square feet. Accessory buildings may not be closer than five feet to a lot line or eight feet to a mobile home unit or other principal structure. 
(Code 2017, § 17-42) 
Sec. 14-39. - Lot area. 
    Each mobile home lot area in a mobile home park shall not be less than 3,500 square feet. 
(Code 2017, § 17-43) 
Sec. 14-40. - Lot setbacks. 
    Individual lots in a mobile home park shall provide a minimum of a 20-foot front yard, ten-foot rear yard and five-foot side yards. 
(Code 2017, § 17-44) 
Sec. 14-41. - Lot width and depth. 
    Individual lots in a mobile home park shall not be less than 90 feet deep or 35 feet wide. 
(Code 2017, § 17-45) 
Sec. 14-42. - Accessory buildings and service connections to comply with applicable codes. 
    The accessory buildings and service connections of all mobile home units in a mobile home park shall be provided in accordance with applicable building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, housing, fire and gas codes. Permits and associated fees shall be required for all construction, additions, modifications and demolition, where applicable by such codes or other codes. 
(Code 2017, § 17-46) 
Sec. 14-43. - Occupancy by travel trailers. 
    No place, site, lot or space shall be established or maintained for the occupancy of a travel trailer in a mobile home park, except that a mobile home park or a portion of a mobile home park may be designated an approved area for travel trailers by the city in the approval process set out in this article. No travel trailer shall occupy a mobile home space for 30 days or more without meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 17-47) 
Secs. 14-44-14-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 14-75. - Development procedures. 
(a)  Submission of preliminary plan. The owner of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than 20 acres wishing to develop a mobile home subdivision shall submit to the city planning and zoning commission six copies of a preliminary plan of the proposed development, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in such amount as established by the council from time to time. The preliminary plan shall show, in schematic form, the generally proposed location of all of the following: 
(1)  Mobile home lots. 
(2)  Site topographic features. 
(3)  Buildings, other than garages and other buildings accessory to particular mobile home spaces, and their proposed height, use and exterior design. 
(4)  Access drives. 
(5)  Public streets abutting and within the proposed development. 
(6)  Proposed location of public utility services, lines or structures, including sewers, streets, sidewalks and electrical, gas and water lines. 
(7)  Public or private recreation areas. 
(8)  Required peripheral yards. 
(9)  Private off-street parking facilities. 
(10)  Landscaping and planting areas. 
(11)  Walls and fences. 
(12)  Storage areas. 
(13)  Development stages and timing of each. 
(14)  Floodway and floodplain areas as shown by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(15)  Storm protection shelters for occupants of the subdivision. 
(b)  Approval of preliminary plan. Following the requirements for amendment to the zoning chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the comprehensive plan, and with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. The commission may approve the plan as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan as the commission deems necessary to the end that it preserves the intent and purpose of this article to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(c)  Submission of final plan or detailed site plan. If the city council approves the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit six copies of a final development plan or detailed site plan, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in such amount as established by the city council from time to time. The final development plan or detailed site plan shall indicate not less than one stage of the proposed development, showing specifically and in detail the location of all items required on the preliminary schematic plan and, in addition: 
(1)  The location of all public streets, subdivisions and landowners within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  The location and dimensions of the property's exterior boundaries, proposed mobile home spaces or lots, streets, drives and easements therein. 
(3)  The location of existing property lines, streets, easements, buildings, tree masses, soil types and other physical features which may affect the final development. 
(4)  The location and width of proposed and existing streets, highways, roads, and pedestrian ways. 
(5)  The location of public and private parks and open spaces and their improvements. 
(6)  Street names and numbers of proposed and existing lots. 
(7)  North arrow, scale, date, and the subdivision's or park's name, address and legal description. 
(8)  The location of solid waste receptacles, sidewalks, lighting facilities, common buildings, service buildings and storm shelters. 
(9)  Landscaping plan. 
(10)  The location of utility easements, lines and hydrants. 
(11)  The location of floodway and floodplain areas. 
(d)  Submission of homeowner's agreement. The applicant shall also submit a draft homeowner's agreement, including a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of incorporation and bylaws for the homeowner's association controlling all common areas if such means exist in the proposed site plan. The agreement shall be prepared in accordance with the Horizontal Property Act of the state. 
(e)  Review by planning and zoning commission. The final development or detailed site plan and homeowner's agreement plan shall be reviewed by the commission for compliance with the preliminary plan. After no more than 60 days the commission shall forward its recommendations to the city council. After final approval by the council, a plan of the district shall be filed with the building official and maintained as a permanent part of the records of the city. 
(f)  Approval of final plan and other documents. Upon approval of the detailed site plan, or in conjunction with the plan, the developer shall submit a preliminary plat, final plat and final draft of the homeowner's agreement, prepared and filed in accordance with chapter 18, for planning and zoning commission and city council review and approval. All city policies with regard to public improvements and their construction standards and design shall apply to all public improvements in the plat. The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve the plats, owner's dedication and homeowner's agreements as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the materials as the planning and zoning commission and city council deem necessary, to the end that it preserves the intent and purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. The preliminary and final plats shall be exempt from the processing fees required by chapter 18 if fees have previously been paid for preliminary plan and final development or detailed site plan approval. 
(g)  Installation of improvements. Before the final plat of the subdivided area shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements required in the detailed site plan and preliminary plan in accordance with the construction plans approved by the city engineer. If the improvements have not been constructed, inspected and certified complete by the city engineer, then the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the city to ensure completion of the improvement within a specific time. The performance of such contract shall be secured by the filing of a bond or cash, to be approved by the council. The bond or cash shall not be less than the appropriate cost of the improvements as estimated by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 17-66) 
Sec. 14-76. - Identification map. 
    A logical and systematic method shall be used in preparing an identification map of all mobile home lots, streets and service buildings located in a mobile home subdivision. This map shall meet the requirements of the fire operations division and be filed as a permanent part of its records. 
(Code 2017, § 17-67) 
Sec. 14-77. - Utilities. 
    Each mobile home lot in a mobile home subdivision shall be provided with utility connections for natural or LP gas, public water, public sanitary sewer and electricity. The construction of all utilities, including telephone, street lighting and television wires and cables, shall be in compliance with applicable ordinances, and utilities shall be installed entirely underground by the developer thereof in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications of the public utility or agency providing such service. 
(Code 2017, § 17-68) 
Sec. 14-78. - Lighting. 
    Private walkways and roadways in a mobile home subdivision shall be properly maintained and shall be lighted at night to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of 0.4 footcandle in all walkway and roadway areas. Public streets and sidewalks shall be lighted in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications of the city and public utilities. 
(Code 2017, § 17-69) 
Sec. 14-79. - Streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Each mobile home lot in a mobile home subdivision shall have direct access to a public street which is constructed in accordance with city specifications for residential streets. 
(b)  Public sidewalks shall be provided along all streets. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and constructed in accordance with city specifications, including specifications for handicapped ramps. 
(c)  All driveways and curb openings shall be constructed in accordance with the city engineer's specifications and in accordance with chapter 19. 
(Code 2017, § 17-70) 
Sec. 14-80. - Distance between structures. 
    Mobile homes in a mobile home subdivision shall be so located on each lot that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between any mobile home and another mobile home or any principal building within the mobile home park. Accessory structures attached to mobile homes shall be considered an integral part of the mobile home in determining clearance requirements. Accessory buildings may not be closer than five feet to a lot line or eight feet to a mobile home unit or other principal structure. 
(Code 2017, § 17-71) 
Sec. 14-81. - Lot area. 
    Each mobile home lot area in a mobile home subdivision shall not be less than 5,000 square feet. 
(Code 2017, § 17-72) 
Sec. 14-82. - Lot setbacks. 
    Individual lots in a mobile home subdivision shall provide a minimum of a 20-foot front yard, a ten-foot rear yard and side yards equal to ten percent of the lot width, with no side yard less than five feet on any one side. Corner lots shall provide front yard setbacks on both street sides. 
(Code 2017, § 17-73) 
Sec. 14-83. - Lot width and depth. 
    Individual lots in a mobile home subdivision shall not be less than 90 feet deep or 50 feet wide at the building line. Each lot shall have at least 40 feet of street frontage. 
(Code 2017, § 17-74) 
Sec. 14-84. - Service connections. 
    All lot services in a mobile home subdivision shall be provided in accordance with applicable building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, housing, fire and gas codes. 
(Code 2017, § 17-75) 
Sec. 14-85. - Occupancy by travel trailers. 
    No place, site, lot or space shall be established or maintained for the occupancy of a travel trailer in a mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 2017, § 17-76) 
Chapter 15 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Public nuisances prohibited; authority to abate. 
    The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is unlawful and is prohibited. The mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to abate nuisances either by issuance of a municipal infraction punishable as provided in section 1-9(c)(10), or by administrative abatement procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 18-1; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 15-2. - Nuisance defined; certain acts, conditions declared as nuisances. 
    Whatever is injurious to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by the public or community shall be deemed a nuisance. Nuisances shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The erecting, continuing or using of any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public. 
(2)  The causing, permitting or allowing of any refuse, solid waste, garbage, noxious substances, hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials to be collected or to remain in any place. The term "noxious substances" includes, but is not limited to, substances, solid or fluid, which are offensive, detrimental to health, hurtful or dangerous, including any dead animal or portion thereof, together with human or animal excrement. 
(3)  The causing, preventing or allowing any refuse, solid waste, garbage, noxious substances or hazardous wastes, junk, salvage material or other offensive substances to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public square, lot, whether vacant or occupied, or upon any pond or pool of water. 
(4)  The obstructing or impeding, without legal authority, of the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water. 
(5)  Creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to exist any stagnant water standing on any property, including any container or material kept in such a condition that water can accumulate and stagnate therein. 
(6)  The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure of the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the river, stream or pond from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others. 
(7)  Creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to exist any ditch, drain or watercourse which is now or hereafter may be constructed so as to prevent or unduly interfere with the surface and overflow water drainage from adjacent lands, or any stormwater detention basin not properly maintained, as determined by the city engineer. 
(8)  Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as septic tanks, cesspools and drain fields, which have failed or do not function properly, or which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors; or septic tanks, cisterns and cesspools which are abandoned or no longer in use, unless properly emptied and filled with clean fill; or any cesspool or septic tank which does not comply with the county department of health regulations. 
(9)  The obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings, structures, signs or otherwise, of the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds. 
(10)  Any gathering of persons or vehicles upon a public street or sidewalk or any use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk which obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other lawful use of streets or sidewalks, except as permitted by permit or ordinance. 
(11)  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness, gambling houses, or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Iowa Code § 204.101(6), in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others. 
(12)  Unoccupied buildings or unoccupied portions of buildings which are unsecured or abandoned. 
(13)  Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. 
(14)  Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees and all other cotton-bearing poplar trees. 
(15)  The depositing or storing of inflammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles, within the fire limits of the city, unless it is in a building of fireproof construction. 
(16)  The depositing or allowing the depositing of any mud, dirt, gravel or other debris on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property. 
(17)  The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash in the city. The city may provide the necessary rules for inspection, regulation and control. 
(18)  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other vegetation, including dead bushes, and dead woody plants, or other overgrown or unkempt bushes or other growth, in the city so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard. 
(19)  Creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to exist conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin; or allowing to exist infestations of vermin, such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats, starlings, pigeons, wasps, cockroaches or flies. 
(20)  Trees infected with infectious disease as identified by the city arborist or operations and maintenance division manager; or any dead, diseased or damaged trees or plant materials which may harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees or plant materials, or any healthy tree in such a state of deterioration that any part of such tree is likely to fall and damage property or cause injury to persons. The stump of any tree that is removed must be cut flush with ground level, unless the stump is made into a decorative, tasteful yard element. 
(21)  Creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to exist any noxious weeds described as a nuisance in section 17-246. 
(22)  The following items stored in outdoor areas or in partially enclosed sheds, lean-tos or other structures not totally enclosed by structural walls, roof and properly functioning doors: building materials not part of an active building project authorized by a current city building permit, abandoned, inoperable vehicles or junk vehicles (as defined in section 15-33), non-registered or unlicensed vehicles, auto parts, miscellaneous steel, plastic, rubber or metal parts or junk, tires, packing boxes, wooden pallets, tree limbs, brush piles, discarded lumber, not including neatly stacked and cut fire wood, broken or unused furniture and appliances, any upholstered or finished furniture intended for indoor usage such as couches, beds, mattresses, desks, chairs, shelving or wooden tables, other broken or unused household furnishings or equipment including carpeting, appliances and other typical household items intended for indoor usage, plastic tarps, trash bags containing leaves, debris, garbage or other items, trash and garbage not properly contained within a trash disposal container or any other discarded or miscellaneous item or items not normally required in the day to day use of the exterior area of the property, when stored continuously in excess of 48 hours on any portion of any property outside of a totally enclosed structure located on the property. 
(23)  Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children in the form of abandoned vehicles, abandoned or broken equipment, including abandoned refrigerators, hazardous pools, ponds, excavations, materials, including building material, debris, or neglected machinery. 
(24)  Real property maintained in such condition as it becomes so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes substantial depreciation of the property values of the surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to properties and improvements. 
(25)  Any violation of the provisions requiring removal of accumulations of ice and snow set forth in chapter 19. 
(26)  Any wall, fence or hedge in such condition as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to cause depreciation in the value of any adjacent or nearby property. 
(27)  Any discarded or unused material on real property that is not consistent with the condition and visual appearance of surrounding adjacent real properties. Types of unacceptable materials include those items enumerated in subsection (13) of this section and also include dirt and gravel piles, rock piles, incomplete landscaping projects, eroded soil areas, pits, holes and excavations. 
(28)  The causing of the accumulation of building debris and/or construction materials, tools, equipment or machinery on any property within the city limits of the city after the expiration of a building permit as outlined in chapter 7, the occasioning of which becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public. 
(29)  Creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to exist for a continuous period of more than 30 days, any manmade excavation, hole, or other depression in the ground in or on any lot or parcel of land in the city of a depth of more than three feet below the surrounding grade, other than as part of the active construction of a building or other structure on the lot which will ultimately close in and completely cover such excavation, hole or depression. Upon a finding by the court that the owner of the lot or parcel of land has violated the provisions of this subsection, the lot owner shall be required to fill in any such excavation, hole or depression and grade the same to a topographic elevation equal to or level with the surrounding adjacent grade, and seed the site with grass or similar vegetative ground cover, and take reasonable measures to ensure the proper germination of the planted vegetation. 
(30)  On properties being used by an allowable commercial use, any items stored on the property that are not normally utilized in the daily operation of the commercial use must be stored in structures totally enclosed by structural walls, roof and properly functioning doors. 
(31)  All structures, both commercial and residential, including detached accessory structures, on any commercial, residential, agricultural or industrial property shall be free from significant structural defects. The term "free from significant structural defect" means: 
a.  The roof and roofing material are of such a nature and condition that they do not permit water, snow or ice to penetrate into the structure. Roofing materials shall be in good condition and made up of consistent materials and consistent coloration throughout the roof area. 
b.  Drainage gutters and downspouts are securely attached to the structure and in proper functioning order. 
c.  All exterior trim and exterior exposed surfaces, including siding materials, must be sound, in good condition and securely attached to the structure. 
d.  Exterior walls must be free of holes and made of a consistent material, such that patches or repairs consisting of dissimilar materials or colors compared to the prevailing surface material of the exterior walls are not present. 
e.  The foundation of the structure is sound, capable of supporting the structure and not deteriorated to the point that failure is judged to be inevitable, but not necessarily imminent. The foundation shall be plumb and free from cracks, breaks and holes so as to prevent the entry of animals. 
f.  Windows and doors, including outer screen or storm windows and doors, must be intact, containing no holes, squarely hung with properly operating latches or locks so as to be securely closed, and where the windows have intact glass or normal window material that allows the entry of light with no holes in said window surface areas. 
g.  All points of egress/ingress into and out of the structure must be of a secure and safe design and made of standard building materials and must also provide clear and easy access via properly installed steps, porches, entryway landings and hand rails that are intact, with no protruding or loose boards or surface materials causing a hazard, and which provide ready access to all points of entry to the structure. 
h.  Exterior wall surfaces are properly painted and/or maintained with appropriate exterior wall materials, including wood, vinyl, steel or metal siding materials, stucco or exterior insulation finish system (EIFS) materials, brick or similar masonry materials, that are in all cases intact, not in a condition of deterioration, are of uniform coloration and are not patched with dissimilar materials. Plastic wrap material shall not be considered to be an acceptable siding material. No flaking or chipped paint or outer loose material dominates or detracts from the exterior appearance of the structure. 
i.  All fencing, including gates, shall be maintained in good condition, free from damage, breaks, holes or missing structural members. All fencing shall be of consistent materials and coloration. 
j.  Detached accessory structures, including garages and storage sheds, must conform to the standards outlined above. In addition, all doors and windows must be of functional design and materials and in proper working order. No plastic wrap material or tarps shall be used to substitute for doorways or windows. 
k.  All exterior wires which are hanging or unsecured on the exterior of the structure must be fastened to the structure in order to avoid life safety issues. 
l.  Reconstruction and repair: Materials and practices used in the reconstruction/repair of any building structure, whether of roofing materials, siding materials, foundation, walls, windows, doorways, entryways or detached accessory structures shall be of standard quality and appearance, consistent with currently applicable International Building Code requirements and consistent with the appearance and character of the structure under repair and consistent with other properties in the immediate vicinity of the premises. 
m.  Vacant structures: All vacant structures shall comply with the above-cited maintenance provisions with the exception that windows and doors may be secured with boards or other materials intended to provide security and protection to the structure. All vandalized portions of the structure must be promptly repaired including repainting of areas that are defaced with paint or graffiti. 
(32)  All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism which is visible to the public view. 
(33)  Any hazardous thing or condition on property which may contribute to injury of any person present on the property, including, but not limited to, open holes, open foundations, open wells, or dangerous trees or limbs. 
(34)  Any thing or condition on property creating a fire hazard, as determined by the fire chief, or in violation of chapter 9. 
(35)  Any thing or condition on property creating an imminent threat to human health or in violation of any health or sanitation law. 
(36)  Building construction sites maintained in violation of chapter 7, buildings. 
(37)  Any violation of the noise ordinance set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(38)  Any violation of junk vehicles set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(39)  Any area located outside of any building or structure on private property, whose sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking lots, parking spaces or similar areas are not kept in a proper state of repair, or are not maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(40)  Any vegetation that creates mold, blocks private sidewalks, entrances, doors or windows, or which creates other obnoxious or unsafe situations. 
(41)  Any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer which, although operable, contains stored gasoline or other fuel, paper, cardboard, wood or other combustible materials, garbage, refuse, solid waste, debris, or the like. 
(42)  Residing in, or living in, or using for night-time living accommodation purposes, such as sleeping activities, making preparation to sleep overnight, including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping, a tent, camper, motor home, travel trailer, camper, recreational vehicle, or any other vehicle, on any private property in the city for a period of more than 30 days, except as otherwise expressly provided for in section 26-176(c)(13) or 26-177(e)(17). 
(Code 2017, § 18-2; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 2882, §§ 1-4, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2942, § 1, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 15-3. - Additional conditions subject to chapter. 
    The requirement of the removal, correction or abatement of nuisances enumerated in this chapter shall not be confined to the things known to the common law or specially declared by law as nuisances, but shall also extend to anything constituting a nuisance in fact, including as well anything designated in this Code and judicially declared as dangerous, offensive, unhealthy or obstructive. 
(Code 2017, § 18-3; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 15-4. - Responsibility for abatement; abatement defined. 
(a)  The owner, agent, lessee, occupant or other person in charge of any building or premises where any of the things forbidden by this chapter exist, or whence any of such things have originated, or any person responsible for the existence, origin or continuance of any of such things, shall correct, remove or abate such thing without delay. 
(b)  Abatement may include, but not be limited to, repair, removal, cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, draining, securing, repairing a building or structure, boarding unoccupied buildings, barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures, and demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings. 
(Code 2017, § 18-4; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 15-5. - Abatement by city after notice; procedure; payment of costs. 
(a)  In case of the failure of any person to correct, remove or abate a nuisance on written notice issued by the mayor or the mayor's designee, served in the manner of an original notice, or by certified mail to the last known address of the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or other person in charge of the building or premises where the nuisance exists, and designating the time allowed for such removal, correction or abatement, the time thus allowed depending on the urgency of the case, then and at once upon such failure the mayor or the mayor's designee shall cause the nuisance to be summarily removed, corrected or abated, and the mayor or the mayor's designee, chief of police and such other officers as may be directed by the city council or mayor or the mayor's designee therefor shall have the power at all times during the daytime to enter into and upon the premises and make thorough examination thereof for the purpose of ascertaining its sanitary conditions or the existence of nuisances therein, and to do whatever may be necessary to remove, correct or abate such nuisances. 
(b)  Whenever the owner, occupant or agent of any premises upon which any nuisance is found is unknown or cannot be found, then the nuisance may be abated without notice. 
(c)  Emergency abatement procedure. When the mayor or the mayor's designee determines that a nuisance exists on a property and constitutes an imminent and compelling danger to health, safety, or welfare of persons or property, the mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to abate or have abated the nuisance without prior notice and opportunity of hearing. The cost of any such emergency abatement procedure may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property taxes as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. However, prior to such assessment, the city shall first provide the property owner or other responsible person an opportunity to appear and be heard as provided in section 15-6. 
(d)  Whenever any nuisance is found on any premises and is abated under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, the city officers shall report to the council a detailed statement of the costs thereof, which shall be paid in the first instance by the city, together with a description of the premises in or upon which the nuisance was found and the name of the owner or occupant of such premises, if known. The city shall either institute an action in the name of the city against the owner, tenant or other occupant of the premises for the recovery of the expenses incurred in abating such nuisance, or, if the city council so directs, the expense of abatement shall be assessed upon the premises chargeable therewith and become a lien thereon, or the city may both institute such an action and assess a lien against the property. The city clerk shall thereupon certify for taxation purposes and for purposes of the establishment of a property lien to the county treasurer all such abatement costs, together with an administrative expense of $5.00, to be collected in the same manner as a property tax. 
(e)  Costs of abatement. Abatement costs shall include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of removing or eliminating the nuisance, the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and testing, the costs of notification, filing costs and other related administrative costs and any other costs or expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 2017, § 18-5; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 15-6. - Abatement hearing; appeal. 
    Any person ordered to abate a nuisance as provided in section 15-5 may have a hearing before the administration committee of the city council, or such other person or committee as the administration committee may designate, as to whether a nuisance exists, and what steps must be taken to abate the nuisance. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk on or before the date stated in the notice of abatement issued by the city, or it shall be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and that it must be abated as ordered. Within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the administration committee or its designee shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists, and shall notify the city and the appealing party of its decision by ordinary mail. If the administration committee or its designee finds that a nuisance exists, it shall include in the notification and order what steps must be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which such steps must be taken. 
(Code 2017, § 18-6; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 15-7. - Resisting, obstructing or interfering with city officer. 
    Any person who resists, obstructs, or otherwise interferes with any city officer who has been designated by the mayor or the mayor's designee to enter upon and inspect any premises, or to correct or abate any nuisance on such premises, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 18-7; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Secs. 15-8-15-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INOPERABLE VEHICLES 

Sec. 15-33. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared that the parking, dismantling, or storage of inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts upon public or private property within the corporate limits of the city is a threat to the public health, welfare and safety and constitutes a nuisance. 
(Code 2017, § 18-36; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-34. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Cedar Falls. 
    Dismantle means to take apart; disassemble; tear down. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any vehicle that has any one of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Any vehicle that does not display current state registration. 
(2)  Any vehicle with a broken, or missing windshield, missing window, headlight, or any other missing glass. 
(3)  Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, roof, steering wheel, trunk lid, muffler or tailpipe. 
(4)  Any vehicle that is the habitat of rats, mice, snakes or any other vermin or insects. 
(5)  Any vehicle that lacks an engine, one or more wheels, or other parts that render the vehicle inoperable, such as a truck without an engine or a trailer missing a wheel. 
(6)  Any vehicle that does not have all tires inflated. 
(7)  Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse gears. 
(8)  Any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer which contains stored gasoline or other fuel, paper, cardboard, wood or other combustible materials, garbage, refuse, solid waste, debris, or the like. 
    Parking means the placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle part for any period of time not exceeding 48 hours. 
    Permit means to allow or fail to prevent. 
    Person means any firm, person, partnership or corporation. 
    Storage means the placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle part for any consecutive period of time exceeding 48 hours. 
    Vehicle means any implement of conveyance designed or used for the transportation of people or materials on land, water, or air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, boats, airplanes, helicopters, tractors, trailers, campers, motor homes, wagons, etc. 
    Vehicle part means an individual component or subassembly of a vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 18-37; Ord. No. 2882, § 5, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 15-35. - Violation declared. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, dismantle, or store any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part or to permit the parking, dismantling, or storage of any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part other than as herein provided by section 15-43. 
(Code 2017, § 18-38; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-36. - Owner of motor vehicle or vehicle parts prima facie responsible. 
(a)  The owner of any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part is prima facie responsible for the parking, dismantling, or storing of such vehicle or vehicle part upon public or private property in violation of this article. Any owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the city upon which one or more inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts are found is prima facie responsible for permitting such parking, dismantling, or storage of any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part upon such property in violation of this article. No person shall be charged with more than one violation of this article for any one vehicle. The owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner of real estate upon which such inoperable vehicle or vehicle part are found may both be charged. 
(b)  Each day the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the city is found in violation of this article and permits the violation to continue after the notice period provided in section 15-38 shall be a new violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 18-39; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-37. - Notice. 
(a)  Upon discovery of any inoperable motor vehicle or vehicle part stored upon private property within the corporate limits of this city, any police officer, or other city officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may notify in writing the owner of said motor vehicle or vehicle part, and the owner of the property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored that: 
(1)  The motor vehicle or vehicle part constitutes a violation under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing same in accordance with the terms of section 15-38. 
(3)  Failure to remove or repair same shall be sufficient cause for removal and disposal by the city and assessment of costs. 
(b)  In the alternative, the city may cause to be issued to the owner of the vehicle or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property on which the vehicle or vehicle part is found, a citation for a municipal infraction setting forth the violation of this article and seeking an order of removal on conviction. 
(c)  The notice provided by this section relates only to the abatement of a violation of this article and is not an element of a violation, provided, however, that a second and/or any subsequent citation shall not be issued until after the notice provided herein. 
(Code 2017, § 18-40; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-38. - Duty of owner to remove or repair. 
    The owner of the inoperable vehicle or vehicle part which violates the provisions of this article, or the owner of the property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored, shall within ten days after service of a written notice from any police officer, or other city officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, remove or repair same. 
(Code 2017, § 18-41; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-39. - Abatement. 
    If the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part or the owner of the property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored, shall fail to remove or repair same in accordance with the requirements of section 15-38, any police officer, or other city officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may abate such violation by causing same to be towed to a place of safekeeping and the cost of the towing and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property upon which it was parked, dismantled, or stored. 
(Code 2017, § 18-42; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-40. - Auction sale. 
    Inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts impounded by the city may be sold at auction as provided in Iowa Code § 321.89 for motor vehicles otherwise impounded. All revenues derived from the sale of inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts, however, shall accrue to the city. 
(Code 2017, § 18-43; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-41. - Interpretation. 
    Where any other ordinance of the city is more stringent or more restrictive than the requirements set forth herein, or any ordinance of the city affords any other remedy, nothing herein shall be construed to waive or limit the use of and/or compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance. 
(Code 2017, § 18-44; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-42. - Violation. 
    A violation of any of the provisions of this article may be charged as a municipal infraction or a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 18-45; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 15-43. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts parked, stored, or dismantled: 
(1)  Within a garage or other fully enclosed building. 
(2)  Within a fully enclosed vehicle. 
(3)  On the premises of a business operating in a properly zoned area, when necessary to the operation of said business, as authorized under the zoning chapter of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 18-46; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-12-2012) 
Secs. 15-44-15-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 15-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted sound level means the total sound level of all sound as measured with a sound level meter using the A weighting network. The unit of measurement is the decibel on the A weighting network, which is abbreviated db(A). 
    Animal or fowl means any living creature, domestic or wild, retained by and associated with a dwelling or other premises as a pet or beast of labor, or for other purposes which serve the wishes of the owner thereof. 
    Bel means a unit of measure of sound level which is the logarithmic ratio of the power of the sound to be measured to the power of a reference standard. The power is proportional to the square of the sound pressure. The reference pressure is the internationally agreed reference level of 0.0002 microbars. The base of the logarithm is 10. Use of the bel is restricted to sound levels of quantities proportional to power. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
    Cycle means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity that occur during a period. 
    Decibel means one-tenth of a bel and is determined as follows: db = 10 log 10 (p x /p o ) 2, where p x is the sound pressure level to be measured and p o is the international reference standard of p o = 0.0002 microbars. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Frequency of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit of time (hertz) and must be specified. 
    Microbar means a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics, and is equal to one dyne per square centimeter. 
    Motor vehicle means any passenger vehicle, motorcycle, motor-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, truck, truck trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by motorized power, or any powered motor vehicle. 
    Noise means unwanted sound, undesired sound or sound without value. Noise consists of any sound, independent of loudness that may produce physiological or psychological damage or interference with the social ends of an individual or group, such ends to include all of man's activities, including communication, work, rest, recreation and sleep. 
    Noise rating number means the db(A) scale reading as applicable to specific sound sources. 
    Period of a periodic quantity is the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself. 
    Periodic quantity means an oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time. 
    Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this article, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five decibels for center frequencies of 500 hertz and above and by eight decibels for center frequencies between 160 and 400 hertz and by 15 decibels for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 hertz. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks, for the measurement of noise and sound levels in a specified manner. 
    Sound-producing device means a mechanical or electronic device, the primary purpose of which is the creation of sound or amplification of sound to higher levels, including, without limitation, a public address system, music amplifier, horn, siren, whistle or explosive. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Zoning district means the zoning districts as established by chapter 26. 
(Code 2017, § 18-66) 
Sec. 15-76. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 18-67) 
Sec. 15-77. - Violations declared nuisance. 
    Each violation of this article shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as such. 
(Code 2017, § 18-68) 
Sec. 15-78. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  Emergency operations. Emergency short-term operations which are necessary to protect the health and welfare of the citizens, such as emergency utility and street repair, fallen tree removal or emergency fuel oil delivery, shall be exempt from the criteria set forth in section 15-85(a), provided that reasonable steps shall be taken by those in charge of such operations to minimize noise emanating from the operations. 
(b)  Noise required for public safety. The provisions of section 15-85(a) shall not apply to any noise required specifically by law for the protection or safety of people or property. 
(c)  Lawn mowers, garden tools, etc. Powered equipment such as lawn mowers, small lawn and garden tools, riding tractors and snow removal equipment which is necessary for maintenance, and which equipment, when new, would not comply with the standards set forth in this article, shall be exempted from the provisions of section 15-85(a). No person shall operate such equipment, with the exception of snow removal equipment, during the hours of 9:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m., inclusive. 
(d)  Residential air conditioners. Noise emitted by residential air conditioners shall be judged by the criteria set forth in section 15-88. 
(e)  Aircraft operations. Aircraft operations which are controlled specifically by federal law and enforcement shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Disturbing the peace. Noise created by human behavior and generally considered to be disturbing the peace shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Bells, chimes and similar devices. Bells, chimes and similar devices which signal the time of day and operate during the daytime hours for a duration of no longer than five minutes in any given one-hour period shall be exempt from the noise limitations of section 15-85(a). 
(Code 2017, § 18-69) 
Sec. 15-79. - Applicability of other laws. 
    This article shall not be deemed to supersede or repeal other existing ordinances or laws which are designed to control public nuisances or disturbances such as noise. 
(Code 2017, § 18-70) 
Sec. 15-80. - Enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police or designee to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 18-71; Ord. No. 2943, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 15-81. - Variance permits. 
(a)  Permitted activities; issuance. Variance permits may be issued by the chief of police to exceed the noise standards set forth in this article as follows: 
(1)  Temporary variance permits. 
a.  A temporary variance permit may be issued upon request provided that the work producing such noise is necessary to promote the public health or welfare and that reasonable steps are taken to keep such noise at the lowest possible practical level. 
b.  A temporary variance permit may be issued for special events such as circuses, 4th of July celebrations and similar community events which are limited in duration and are generally acceptable to people of the community, provided that precautions are taken to maintain the noises produced at the lowest practical level. 
c.  Applications for temporary variance permits must be made in writing to the chief of police and shall contain all the following pertinent information: 
1.  The dates requested; 
2.  The time and place of operation; 
3.  The equipment and operation involved; 
4.  The necessity for such permit; 
5.  The steps to be taken to minimize noise; and 
6.  The name of the responsible person who will be present at the operation site while the noise is produced. 
(2)  Variance permits for existing businesses. 
a.  It is recognized that it is not technically or economically feasible for certain business operations and equipment to comply with the standards set forth in this article as of January 13, 1975. The chief of police shall therefore issue a variance permit for business operations and equipment in existence on such date which produce excessive noise if it is found that it is not technically or economically feasible to alter such operation to reduce noise to within the prescribed standards set forth in this article. Applications for such variances must be made to the chief of police by an affected party in a letter setting forth the reasons that such variance should be granted. The chief of police, after review of all circumstances and the degree of nuisance, shall reply in writing, giving the variance, denying the variance or setting forth conditions or limitations under which the variance will be granted. Variance permits granted under this subsection shall be valid for a period of one year from the date granted, and may be renewed for a like period of time upon application and review. 
b.  If the chief of police issues an order citing a violation of this article on a business operation and equipment in existence on January 13, 1975, and the party cited applies for a variance within ten days of such citation, then all penalties provided shall be tolled from the date the application is filed until a final order or decision has been issued on the merits of the application. 
(3)  Exemption. A variance permit shall not be required for school, university or community events, such as athletic contests and music concerts, which are performed on a regular basis and are generally acceptable to the people of the city; provided that precautions are taken to maintain the noise produced at the lowest practical level. This provision does not apply to rock music concerts. 
(b)  Revocation. Any variance permit granted under the terms of this section may be revoked prior to the expiration of the permit if it is determined by the chief of police that the permit holder is violating any of the provisions of the variance permit or is exceeding any variances granted in the permit. 
(c)  Appeal of denial. Any person who has been denied a variance permit by the chief of police may appeal the decision of the chief of police directly to the city council within ten days of the denial of the permit. The appeal should be in writing and directed to the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 18-72) 
Sec. 15-82. - Permit to use sound-producing device. 
    Any person who desires to use a sound-producing device which would create a noise level higher than that permitted by this article must first apply for a permit from the city council. The city council may issue such a permit if it is satisfied that the use for which the permit is desired will not endanger the health, safety and comfort of the general public of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 18-73) 
Sec. 15-83. - General noises prohibited. 
(a)  Standards for determination of violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, make, continue or cause any excessive or unusually loud noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people within the limits of the city. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation exists shall include the following: 
(1)  The sound pressure level of the noise. 
(2)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or manmade. 
(3)  The sound pressure level of the background noise. 
(4)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(5)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(6)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs. 
(7)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(b)  Specific acts or conditions prohibited. Each of the following acts, among others, is hereby declared to be in violation of this article and is prohibited. The following enumerated acts shall not be construed as limiting or precluding enforcement of any other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Unnecessary sounding of horns or signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger or alerting signal, and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Loud operation of radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be placed, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of reasonable people. 
(3)  Use of loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for producing or reproducing of sound which is broadcast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any structure or event. 
(4)  Keeping noisy animals and fowl. The keeping, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person, of any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound or cry, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensibilities. 
(5)  Operation of defective or improperly loaded vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(6)  Excessive noise in loading or unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(7)  Creation of noise near schools, courts, churches or hospitals. The creation of loud and excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the school, institution, church or court is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital. 
(8)  Use of drums or other instruments to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, sale or event. This subsection shall not apply to a drum used in an authorized parade in the city. 
(9)  Construction or repair of buildings, structures and streets during certain hours. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure or street other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the director of community development or the director of public works or their authorized agent, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the director of community development or the director of public works or their authorized agent should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways, within the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any interested party, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. This subsection will not apply to the performance of necessary emergency work. 
(10)  Operation of pile drivers, hammers, etc., during certain hours. Except as provided in subsection (b)(9) of this section, the operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or other construction equipment. Such equipment shall at all times be equipped with an effective muffling device. 
(11)  Repairing vehicle during certain hours. The repair or rebuilding of any motor vehicle within any residential area of the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(12)  Discharge of unmuffled exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, or discharge of air or other gases, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(13)  Unlawful use of buildings. No person owning or in possession of or in control of any building or premises shall use the building or premises, permit the use of the building or premises or rent the building or premises to be used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall by the noise generated therefrom exceed the noise limitations provided in section 15-85. 
(14)  Unnecessary use of engine brakes. The use of a Jacob brake or any other engine brake within the city limits, except as required for safety purposes. 
(15)  Use of stationary machinery producing excessive noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any immobile machinery, equipment, pump, fan or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at any portion of the property line of any property to exceed the maximum noise levels in the use zones described in section 15-85(a), provided that this subsection shall not apply to temporarily placed equipment, which shall be subject to the levels outlined in section 15-81. 
(Code 2017, § 18-74; Ord. No. 2941, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 15-84. - Group noise. 
    When a group of persons act together to create noise, each individual shall be deemed responsible as though solely the principal person producing the resultant noise. 
(Code 2017, § 18-75) 
Sec. 15-85. - Noise limitations by use district. 
(a)  Noise limitations at the lot line of any premises located in the various use districts are as follows: 
Noise Limit 
(db(A)) Any residence district 55 Any commercial district 60 Light industrial 65 Heavy industrial or unclassified 65  
(b)  Pure tone and impulsive noises are factors in determination of noise. Five db(A) shall be subtracted from the limits set out in subsection (a) of this section if the subject noise consists primarily of a pure tone or if it is impulsive in character. 
(Code 2017, § 18-76) 
Sec. 15-86. - Method of measuring noise. 
(a)  Equipment. Noise measurements shall be made with a sound level meter, type 1 or type 2, manufactured according to the specifications of the American National Standards Institute, USA Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters (S1.4-1971), and Preferred Center Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements (S1.6-1960), or any subsequent nationally adopted standard superseding such standards. 
(b)  Location and interpretation of measurements. Noise measurements shall be made at the nearest lot line of premises from which a noise complaint is received, and shall be made at a height of at least three feet above the ground and at least three feet away from walls, barriers, obstructions or sound-reflective surfaces. Where the nature of the noise permits, the slow response setting shall be used to obtain the noise level on the sound level meter. 
(Code 2017, § 18-77) 
Sec. 15-87. - Vibrations. 
    Any vibration that can be felt beyond the property line in any zoning district, whether manufacturing, business, commercial or residential, is in violation of this article, and no instrument is needed to make a determination of the vibration. 
(Code 2017, § 18-78) 
Sec. 15-88. - Noise emitted by residential air conditioners. 
(a)  Noise limits. No person shall install, operate or use any residential air conditioner or combination of residential air conditioners which creates a noise level at the lot line of any dwelling unit located on any adjacent premises in excess of the noise limitations listed in section 15-85. 
(b)  Measurement. Upon receiving a complaint, the chief of police shall conduct a noise survey through use of a sound level meter as provided in section 15-86. The sound pressure level shall be measured at the lot line of the premises with the sound level measuring microphone placed at such point at or near the lot line in the most reasonable proximity to the noise source. Results of this survey shall be compared to the maximum permissible levels as set forth in section 15-85(a). If the levels found in the survey exceed the level of the db(A) rating, the noise shall be deemed as excessive and in violation of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 18-79) 
Sec. 15-89. - Noise from motor vehicles. 
(a)  Noise limits. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a combination of motor vehicles at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle, based on the following distances from the centerline of travel on a street or highway or from a location at rest under test procedures established in this section: 
Vehicle Class Distance from Centerline Speed Limit Noise Limit 
(db(A)) Any motor vehicle licensed for ten tons or more and any combination of vehicles towed by such vehicle Not less than 48 feet and not more than 58 feet 35 mph or less 88 Any motor vehicle licensed for ten tons or more and any combination of vehicles towed by such vehicle Not less than 48 feet and not more than 58 feet Over 35 mph 92 Any motor vehicle, including passenger cars, motorcycles and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such vehicles Not less than 30 feet All speeds 80  
(b)  Measurement. Sound level measurement for the noise levels set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighted scale in accordance with those standards promulgated by the Society of Automotive Engineers of the American National Standards Institute. 
(c)  Right to additional test. Where a motor vehicle is deemed to be in violation of this section, the owner thereof may transport it to a central testing location, the location to be determined by the chief of police, where such vehicle may be tested under normal operating conditions for further evaluation. If the vehicle is reevaluated and found not to be in violation of the decibel standards as outlined, no further proceedings shall be instituted, and any citation issued shall be dismissed. 
(Code 2017, § 18-80) 
Sec. 15-90. - Sale or rental of equipment not in compliance with noise standards. 
    No person shall sell, offer, distribute, lease or rent any new or used vehicle, device or equipment intended for use within the limits of the city which does not comply with the provisions of this article, or with rules and regulations adopted by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this article, or with any federal or state standards which apply to such equipment and are intended to reduce or minimize the noise emission from such equipment. 
(Code 2017, § 18-81) 
Sec. 15-91. - Compliance with article in city operations. 
(a)  Compliance by contractors and subcontractors. It is the policy of the city to comply with the noise emission standards, as set forth in this article, in its own operations and the operations of its contractors and subcontractors, and city contractors and subcontractors shall be notified of and required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  City purchases. It is the policy of the city to purchase only equipment which complies with the standards established for the equipment by this article. 
(Code 2017, § 18-82) 
Sec. 15-92. - Issuance of building and occupancy permits for uses potentially creating excessive noise. 
    The procedures set forth in the building code of the city shall be followed before any permit is granted for any nonresidential building or structure or a change in occupancy thereof, the ultimate use of which may result in the creation of noises which could be in violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 18-83) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Assault. 
(a)  A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act; 
(2)  Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act; or 
(3)  Intentionally points a firearm toward another, or displays in a threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another: 
a.  Provided that, where the person doing any of the acts enumerated in this subsection and such other person are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity and does not create an unreasonable risk of serious injury or breach of the peace, the act shall not be an assault. 
b.  Provided that, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation, that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds, or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act shall not be an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled. 
(b)  A person who commits an act of assault other than those acts defined in Iowa Code § 708.2(1)-(5), commits a simple misdemeanor, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 19-1; Ord. No. 2555, § 1, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-2. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or alarm another person, the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm. 
(2)  Places a simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near a building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by another person. 
(3)  Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without the other person's knowledge or consent. 
(4)  Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the act did not occur. 
(b)  A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate, or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "personal contact" means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. Personal contact does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts. 
(c)  Any act of harassment other than those acts described in of Iowa Code § 708.7(2) and (3), is harassment in the third degree. Harassment in the third degree is a simple misdemeanor. Any person who commits harassment in the third degree shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 19-2; Ord. No. 2555, § 2, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-3. - Obstructing traffic. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and to refuse to clear such public way when ordered by any law enforcement officer. For the purpose of this section, the term "public way" means the entire width between property lines of every way or place, of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open for the use of the public as a matter of right or privilege for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2006, § 6, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 16-4. - Criminal mischief. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of criminal mischief, which consists of any damage, defacing, alteration or destruction of property when done intentionally by one who has no right to so act. 
(b)  Whenever criminal mischief is committed upon more than one item of property at approximately the same location or time period, so that all of these acts of mischief can be attributed to a single scheme, plan or conspiracy, such acts shall be considered as a single act of criminal mischief. 
(c)  Criminal mischief is criminal mischief in the fifth degree if the cost of replacing, repairing or restoring the property so damaged, defaced, altered or destroyed does not exceed $200.00. Criminal mischief in the fifth degree is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-5; Ord. No. 2555, § 4, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-5. - Trespass. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned. 
    Public utility means a public utility as defined in Iowa Code § 476.1 or an electric transmission line as provided in Iowa Code ch. 478. 
    Public utility property means any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased, or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical barrier of any kind. 
    Railway corporation means a corporation, company or person owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this state. 
    Railway property means all tangible and real and personal property owned, leased or operated by a railway corporation with the exception of any administrative building or offices of the railway corporation. 
    Reasonable expectation of privacy means circumstances in which a reasonable person would believe that the person could disrobe or partially disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that the person disrobing or partially disrobe was being viewed, photographed, or filmed when doing so. 
    Trespass. 
(1)  The term "trespass" means one or more of the following acts: 
a.  Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense, to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, or to hunt, fish or trap on or in the property, including the act of taking or attempting to take a deer, other than a farm deer as defined in Iowa Code § 170.1 or preserve whitetail as defined in Iowa Code § 484C.1, which is on or in the property by a person who is outside the property. This subsection does not prohibit the unarmed pursuit of game or furbearing animals by a person who lawfully injured or killed the game or fur-bearing animal which comes to rest on or escapes to the property of another. 
b.  Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property. A person has received notice to abstain from entering or remaining upon or in property within the meaning of this subsection if any of the following is applicable: 
1.  The person has been notified to abstain from entering or remaining upon or in property personally, either orally or in writing, including by a valid court order under Iowa Code ch. 236. 
2.  A printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the property or the forbidden part of the property. 
c.  Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others. 
d.  Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession. 
e.  Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases, or operates the railway property. This subsection does not apply to passage over a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge, trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been notified or requested to abstain from entering on to the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not interfere with the operation of the railroad. 
(2)  The term "trespass" shall not mean either of the following: 
a.  Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as possible and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property. This subsection does not apply to public utility property where the person has been notified and requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from entering. 
b.  Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following persons: 
(1)  Representatives of the state department of transportation, the federal railroad administration, or the national transportation safety board who enter or remain upon or in railway property while engaged in the performance of official duties. 
(2)  Employees of a railway corporation who enter or remain upon or in railway property while acting in the course of employment. 
(3)  Any person who is engaged in the operation of a lawful business on railway station grounds or in the railway depot. 
(4)  Representatives of the state utilities board, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or the Federal Communications Commission who enter or remain upon or in public utility property while engaged in the performance of official duties. 
(5)  Employees of a public utility who enter or remain upon or in public utility property while acting in the course of employment. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly trespasses upon the property of another commits a simple misdemeanor, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 19-6; Ord. No. 2555, § 5, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-6. - False reports to or communications with public safety entities. 
(a)  A person who reports or causes to be reported false information to a fire department, a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is false, or who reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur, commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(b)  A person who telephones an emergency 911 communication center knowing that the person is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or assistance commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(c)  A person who knowingly provides false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the information on a citation commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-7; Ord. No. 2555, § 6, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-7. - Refusing to assist officer. 
    Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. A person who, unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuses or neglects to render assistance when so requested commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-8; Ord. No. 2555, § 7, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-8. - Report of damage to city property. 
    It shall be the duty of the person damaging any boulevard lamppost or fittings, any stop sign or any other property belonging to the city to report the damage within 12 hours thereafter to the police station of the city. Any person failing to make such report shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-9) 
Sec. 16-9. - Unlawful assembly. 
    An unlawful assembly is three or more persons assembled together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense. A person who willingly joins in or remains a part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that it is such, commits a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-10) 
Sec. 16-10. - Failure to disperse. 
    A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. Any person within hearing distance of such command, who refuses to obey, commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-11; Ord. No. 2555, § 8, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-11. - Disorderly conduct-Generally. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. 
(2)  Makes loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof. 
(3)  Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another. 
(4)  Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly. 
(5)  By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of fire, epidemic or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless. 
(6)  Without authority or justification, obstructs any street, sidewalk, highway or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be held to prohibit peaceful picketing, public speaking, the ordinary conduct of a legitimate business or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of law. 
(c)  Any person committing the offense of disorderly conduct shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 19-12) 
Sec. 16-12. - Disorderly conduct-Funeral or memorial service. 
(a)  A person shall not do any of the following within 1,000 feet of the building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial: 
(1)  Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service, or participating in the funeral procession. 
(2)  Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another. 
(3)  Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial. 
(b)  This section applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial. 
(c)  A person who commits a violation of this section commits a simple misdemeanor for a first offense. 
(Code 2017, § 19-12A; Ord. No. 2619, § 1, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 16-13. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  In this section, the term "underage person" means a person under the age of 15 years. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to be in or upon the streets or public places in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. every other night. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  When the underage person is accompanied by his parent or other adult having lawful care and custody of the underage person; 
(2)  When the underage person is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or adult having lawful care and custody of such underage person; 
(3)  When the underage person is attending and going to and returning from a bona fide work-study program, school, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the city, school, or another public body, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the underage person without any unnecessary detour or stop and within one hour of the termination of the activity sponsored by the city, school, other public body or civic organization or similar entity; 
(4)  When the underage person is going to or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in such place during the proscribed period of time without any unnecessary detour or stop and within one hour of the termination of the employment activity; 
(5)  When the underage person is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the underage person is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel (interstate and intrastate travel through the city is excepted in all cases from the curfew); 
(7)  When the underage person is on the sidewalk or right-of-way adjoining the property where the underage person resides, or on the property where he resides. 
(c)  Any underage person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to arrest. Upon such arrest, the underage person shall be taken and delivered to the hands of the parents or guardian or turned over to the proper authorities. 
(Code 2017, § 19-13) 
Sec. 16-14. - Disorderly houses. 
(a)  Defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "disorderly house" shall mean and include any building, house, enclosure or place in or upon which occurs any of the following prohibited activities: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct as defined in sections 16-11(a)(1) through (6); 
(2)  Any noise in violation of the provisions set forth in article III, noise, of chapter 15; 
(3)  The open storage, use or consumption of a controlled substance as defined in Iowa Code ch. 124, under which possession of such substance would be an offense; 
(4)  Gambling in violation of Iowa Code ch. 99B; 
(5)  Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in violation of Iowa Code ch. 123; 
(6)  Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering as defined in Iowa Code ch. 725; 
(7)  Engaging in a massage business without a license or any other illegal acts as specified in Iowa Code ch. 152C. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall keep, maintain, operate, or be concerned in keeping, maintaining or operating within the city any disorderly house; nor shall any person knowingly own or be interested as a proprietor or landlord in any such place. 
(c)  Authority to restore order and disperse; failure to disperse. Upon issuance of a citation for a violation of this section, any peace officer of the city shall have the authority to restore order upon the subject premises, up to and including ordering the dispersal of persons from the subject premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an order shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 19-14; Ord. No. 2006, § 8, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2567, § 1, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 16-15. - Discharge of weapons. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any firearm within the city, except peace officers in the line of duty or peace officers and other authorized persons using a police target range, and no person shall discharge any bow and arrow or similar device within the city; however, the city council may, upon written application, grant annual permits to groups, organizations or individuals approved by the city council allowing the permittees to conduct trapshoots, skeetshoots, archery or rifle ranges or special uses in certain areas designated by the permit and under conditions that will in no way endanger persons or property and under the supervision of the permittee. Persons discharging or shooting firearms or bow and arrows or similar devices in the areas designated in the permit and while under the supervision of a permittee shall not be subject to the terms of this section. The council may revoke the permit granted at any time, at its discretion, where the discharge or shooting of firearms or bow and arrows and similar devices under a permit, in its opinion, constitutes a nuisance or in any way endangers persons or property. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  To the discharge of shotguns using shot no heavier than "T" or bow and arrows with heads designed for hemorrhaging effect (i.e., broadhead arrows) in the course of hunting game on land devoted to agricultural use containing 40 acres or more, with the consent of the owner or tenant in possession and no closer than 600 feet to any building, and under conditions that will in no way endanger persons or property. The chief of police, or his designee may approve hunting on smaller portions of private property and non-agricultural land by written approval. 
(2)  To licensed bow hunters engaged in deer hunting as allowed by the state department of natural resources under its special deer management zone procedures. Such special deer management zones within the city boundaries shall be designated by resolution of the city council. The opportunity to hunt allowed under the special deer management zones procedures shall begin on the second Monday of October of each year, and shall continue to January 10 of the following year. During October, hunting shall be allowed during weekday mornings until 12:00 noon. Unless carried in a case, no bow may be displayed within 600 feet of any residence without the permission of the property owner, or on any city property except as stated above, or within 75 feet of any bike trail, nature trail, or other recreational facility, or within any area posted as a no hunting area. 
(c)  No shotgun slugs shall be discharged within the city limits. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or carry on or about his person or in a vehicle any air rifles, pellet guns or similar devices capable of discharging any leaden or other dangerous missile or substance within the city, except peace officers in the line of duty. However, it shall be lawful to carry one or more unloaded air rifles, pellet guns or similar devices if the unloaded weapon is carried in a gun case or closed container which is too large to be effectively concealed on the person or within the clothing of an individual. 
(e)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to bow fishing for carp, buffalo, quillback, gar, sheepshead, dogfish, and other rough fish so designated from time to time by the natural resource commission of the state department of natural resources. For purposes of this section, the term bow fishing shall mean fishing by means of a bow and arrow, which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Each arrow used in such fishing shall be equipped with an arrow head specifically designed for fishing with a bow and arrow; 
(2)  Each arrow used in such fishing shall be firmly attached to a fishing line not exceeding 40 feet in length which has minimum tensile strength of at least 75 pounds and which shall be firmly attached to the bow; and 
(3)  Such fishing shall in all other respects be carried out in strict compliance with all rules and regulations applicable to fishing as are promulgated from time to time by the state natural resources department. 
(Code 2017, § 19-15; Ord. No. 2766, § 1, 5-29-2012; Ord. No. 2878, § 1, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 16-16. - Throwing missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use a catapult, slingshot or snap gun for the purpose of throwing stones or other missiles, or to throw any missile in a manner calculated or likely to injure, or which has the effect to injure, frighten or annoy any person or animal, or injure property. 
(Code 2017, § 19-16) 
Sec. 16-17. - Distributing dangerous substances. 
    Any person who distributes samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance, commits a simple misdemeanor unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited. 
(Code 2017, § 19-17; Ord. No. 2555, § 9, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-18. - Abandoned or unattended refrigerators. 
    Any person who abandons or otherwise leaves unattended any refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, sealed, or otherwise prevent the escape of children, or any person who allows any such refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person's possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children, commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-18; Ord. No. 2555, § 10, 10-24-2005; Ord. No. 2598, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 16-19. - Jumping from bridges. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from any bridge or any portion of a bridge within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 19-19) 
Sec. 16-20. - Urinating in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally urinate in public in the city. This section does not apply to public restrooms. 
(Code 2017, § 19-20) 
Sec. 16-21. - Prohibiting wading, water skiing or swimming in city-owned lakes and detention basins. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, water ski or swim in city-owned lakes and detention basins including those in Birdsall Park, Washington Park, Big Woods Lake, Prairie Lakes Park and the Delta Drive and Greenhill Road detention basins. The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting wading by persons actively engaged in shore line fishing or sailboat or other vessel passengers who enter the water to upright or repair their vessel and remain within ten feet of that vessel. Swimming shall be allowed in designated swimming areas as approved by the city council. This section shall not apply in emergencies. 
(Code 2017, § 19-21; Ord. No. 2097, § 1, 4-24-1995) 
Sec. 16-22. - Interference with official acts. 
(a)  A person commits interference with official acts when the person knowingly resists or obstructs anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Iowa Code ch. 147A, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Iowa Code § 602.1303(4), in the performance of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Iowa Code ch. 147A, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Iowa Code § 602.1303(4), or who knowingly resists or obstructs the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. Interference with official acts is a simple misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalties, the punishment imposed for a violation of this subsection shall include assessment of a fine of not less than $250.00. 
(b)  The terms "resist" and "obstruct," as used in this section, do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically. 
(Code 2017, § 19-22; Ord. No. 2683, § 1, 5-26-2009) 
Sec. 16-23. - Harassment of public officers and employees. 
    Any person who willfully prevents or attempts to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer's or employee's duty, which could include intentionally deceiving a police officer or employee in the discharge of his duties, commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-23; Ord. No. 2683, § 1, 5-26-2009) 
Sec. 16-24. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer fireworks means first-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer fireworks as those terms are defined in this subsection. 
    Display fireworks means any explosive composition, or combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. The term "display fireworks" does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) standard 87-1. 
    First-class consumer fireworks means the following consumer fireworks, as described in APA standard 87-1, chapter 3: 
(1)  Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes. 
(2)  Chasers. 
(3)  Helicopter and aerial spinners. 
(4)  Firecrackers. 
(5)  Mine and shell devices. 
(6)  Missile-type rockets. 
(7)  Roman candles. 
(8)  Sky rockets and bottle rockets. 
(9)  Multiple tube devices set forth under this definition that are manufactured in accordance with APA standard 87-1, section 3.5. 
    Novelties means all novelties, enumerated in chapter 3 of the APA standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission. The term "novelties" includes party poppers, snappers, toy smoke devices, snakes and glow worms, and wire sparklers as defined in APA standard 87-1, section 3.2. 
    Second-class consumer fireworks means the following consumer fireworks, as described in APA standard 87-1, chapter 3: 
(1)  Cone fountains. 
(2)  Cylindrical fountains. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers. 
(4)  Ground and handheld sparkling devices, including multiple tube ground and handheld sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance with APA standard 87-1, section 3.5. 
(5)  Ground spinners. 
(6)  Illuminating torches. 
(7)  Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA standard 87-1, section 3.2. 
(8)  Wheels. 
(9)  Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA standard 87-1, section 3.2. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode consumer fireworks within the city limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode display fireworks within the city limits, unless a permit is properly obtained as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks, for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. Nor shall this section apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes. 
(d)  Display fireworks. The council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the use and explosion of display fireworks within the city limits by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals when the use and explosion of such display fireworks will be handled by a competent operator, and proof of liability insurance is shown. (See also section 9-20.) 
(e)  Violation. Violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00. 
(Code 2017, § 19-24; Ord. No. 2555, § 12, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-25. - Exposing persons to X-ray radiation. 
    Any person other than one licensed to practice medicine, osteopathic medicine, chiropractic, or dentistry, or one acting under the direction of a person so licensed, who knowingly exposes any other person to X-ray radiation, commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-25; Ord. No. 2555, § 13, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-26. - Obstruction of emergency communications. 
    An emergency communication is any telephone call or radio transmission to a fire department or police department for aid, or a call or transmission for medical aid or ambulance service, when human life or property is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. A person who fails to relinquish a telephone or telephone line which the person is using when informed that the telephone or line is needed for an emergency call or knowingly and intentionally obstructs or interferes with an emergency call or transmission commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-26; Ord. No. 2555, § 14, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-27. - Falsely claiming emergency. 
    Any person who secures the use of a telephone or telephone line by falsely stating that such telephone or line is needed for an emergency call commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-27; Ord. No. 2555, § 15, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-28. - Disclosure of information concerning use of videotapes; penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, loaning, or otherwise distributing for a fee videotapes or other like items to individuals for personal use shall not disclose any information which would reveal the identity of an individual renting, leasing, borrowing, or otherwise obtaining through the business a videotape or other like item, except to the extent permitted by the individual as evidenced by the individual's written consent or as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In the absence of consent, the information may be released in any of the following situations: 
(1)  To a criminal or juvenile justice agency only pursuant to an investigation of a particular person or organization suspected of committing a known crime. The information shall be released only upon a judicial determination that a rational connection exists between the requested release of information and a legitimate end and that the need for the information is cogent and compelling. 
(2)  To the extent reasonably necessary to collect payment for the rental, lease, or other distribution fee for the materials, if the individual has been given written notice that the payment is due and the individual has failed to pay or arrange for payment within a reasonable time after this notice. 
(3)  If the disclosure is for the exclusive purpose of marketing goods and services directly to the consumer. The person disclosing the information shall inform the customer in writing that the customer may, by written notice, require the person to refrain from disclosing the information pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  A person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-28; Ord. No. 2555, § 16, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-29. - Theft defined. 
    A person commits theft when the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof. 
(2)  Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property of another which the person has in the person's possession or control, whether such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the owner's rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates such property to the person's own use, when the owner of such property is known to the person. 
a.  Failure by a bailee or lessee of personal property to return the property within 72 hours after a time specified in a written agreement of lease or bailment shall be evidence of misappropriation. 
b.  If a time is not specified in the written agreement of lease or bailment for the expiration or termination of the lease or bailment or for the return of the personal property, failure by a lessee or bailee to return the property within five days after proper notice to the lessee or bailee shall be evidence of misappropriation. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "proper notice" means a written notice of the expiration or termination of the lease or bailment agreement sent to the lessee or bailee by certified or restricted certified mail at the address of the lessee or bailee specified in the agreement. The notice shall be considered effective on the date of the mailing of the notice regardless of whether or not the lessee or bailee signs a receipt for the notice. 
(3)  Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession, control, or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of property of another, by deception. Where compensation for goods and services is ordinarily paid immediately upon the obtaining of such goods or the rendering of such services, the refusal to pay or leaving the premises without payment or offer to pay or without having obtained from the owner or operator the right to pay subsequent to leaving the premises gives rise to an inference that the goods or services were obtained by deception. 
(4)  Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been stolen, unless the person's purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or to deliver it to an appropriate public officer. The fact that the person is found in possession of property which has been stolen from two or more persons on separate occasions, or that the person is a dealer or other person familiar with the value of such property and has acquired it for a consideration which is far below its reasonable value, shall be evidence from which the court or jury may infer that the person knew or believed that the property had been stolen. 
(5)  Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party. 
(6)  Makes, utters, draws, delivers, or gives any check, share draft, draft, or written order on any bank, credit union, person, or corporation, and obtains property, the use of property, including rental property, or service in exchange for such instrument, if the person knows that such check, share draft, draft, or written order will not be paid when presented. 
a.  Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because of insufficient funds, and the maker has not paid the holder of the instrument the amount due thereon within ten days of the maker's receipt of notice from the holder that payment has been refused by the drawee, the court or jury may infer from such facts that the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on presentation. Notice of refusal of payment shall be by certified mail, or by personal service in the manner prescribed for serving original notices. 
b.  Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because the maker has no account with the drawee, the court or jury may infer from such fact that the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on presentation. 
(7)  Obtains gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtains cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate readings. 
(8)  Knowingly and without authorization accesses or causes to be accessed a computer, computer system, or computer network, or any part thereof, for the purpose of obtaining computer services, information, or property or knowingly and without authorization and with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of possession, takes, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of a computer, computer system, or computer network or any computer software or computer program, or computer data contained in a computer, computer system, or computer network. 
a.  Obtains the temporary use of video rental property or equipment rental property with the intent to deprive the owner of the use and possession of the video rental property or equipment rental property without the consent of the owner. 
b.  Lawfully obtains the temporary use of video rental property or equipment rental property and fails to return the video rental property or equipment rental property by the agreed time with the intent to deprive the owner of the use and possession of the video rental property or equipment rental property without the consent of the owner. The aggregate value of the video rental property or equipment rental property involved shall be the original retail value of the video rental property or equipment rental property. 
(9)  Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of state law. 
(Code 2017, § 19-29; Ord. No. 2555, § 17, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-30. - Fifth degree theft. 
    The theft of property not exceeding $200.00 in value is theft in the fifth degree. Theft in the fifth degree is a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 19-30; Ord. No. 2555, § 18, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-31. - Value. 
(a)  The value of property is its highest value by any reasonable standard at the time that it is stolen. Reasonable standard includes, but is not limited to, market value within the community, actual value, or replacement value. 
(b)  If money or property is stolen from the same person or location by two or more acts, or from different persons by two or more acts which occur in approximately the same location or time period, or from different locations by two or more acts within a 30-day period, so that the thefts are attributable to a single scheme, plan, or conspiracy, these acts may be considered a single theft and the value may be the total value of all the property stolen. 
(Code 2017, § 19-31; Ord. No. 2555, § 19, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-32. - Claim of right. 
    No person who takes, obtains, disposes of, or otherwise uses or acquires property, is guilty of theft by reason of such act if the person reasonably believes that the person has a right, privilege or license to do so, or if the person does in fact have such right, privilege or license. 
(Code 2017, § 19-32; Ord. No. 2555, § 20, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-33. - Library materials and equipment; unpurchased merchandise; evidence of intention. 
(a)  The fact that a person has concealed library materials or equipment as defined in Iowa Code § 702.22 or unpurchased property of a store or other mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises, is material evidence of intent to deprive the owner, and the finding of library materials or equipment or unpurchased property concealed upon the person or among the belongings of the person, is material evidence of intent to deprive and, if the person conceals or causes to be concealed library materials or equipment or unpurchased property, upon the person or among the belongings of another, the finding of the concealed materials, equipment or property is also material evidence of intent to deprive on the part of the person concealing the library materials, equipment or goods. 
(b)  The fact that a person fails to return library materials for two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the library materials, or fails to return library equipment for one month or more after the date the person agreed to return the library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or equipment. Notices stating the provisions of this section and of Iowa Code § 808.12 with regard to library materials or equipment shall be posted in clear public view in all public libraries, in all libraries of educational, historical or charitable institutions, organizations or societies, in all museums and in all repositories of public records. 
(c)  After the expiration of three days following the due date, the owner of borrowed library equipment may request the assistance of a dispute resolution center, mediation center or appropriate law enforcement agency in recovering the equipment from the borrower. 
(d)  The owner of library equipment may require deposits by borrowers and in the case of late returns the owner may impose graduated penalties of up to 25 percent of the value of the equipment, based upon the lateness of the return. 
(e)  In the case of lost library materials or equipment, arrangements may be made to make a monetary settlement. 
(Code 2017, § 19-33; Ord. No. 2555, § 21, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-34. - Land. 
    The mere trespass on or occupation of land, contrary to the rights of the owner thereof, is not theft. 
(Code 2017, § 19-34; Ord. No. 2555, § 22, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-35. - Video rental property theft; evidence of intention; affirmative defense. 
(a)  The fact that a person obtains possession of video rental property by means of deception, including, but not limited to, furnishing a false name, address, or other identification to the owner, is evidence that possession was obtained with intent to knowingly deprive the owner of the use and possession of the video rental property. 
(b)  The fact that a person, having lawfully obtained possession of video rental property, fails to pay the owner the fair market value of the video rental property or to return or make arrangements acceptable to the owner to return the video rental property to the owner within 48 hours after receipt of written notice and demand from the owner is evidence of an intent to knowingly deprive the owner of the use and possession of the video rental property. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under section 16-29(9)a, if the defendant in possession of video rental property pays the owner the fair market value of the video rental property or returns the property to the owner within 48 hours of arrest, together with any standard overdue charges for the period that the owner was unlawfully deprived of possession, but not to exceed 120 days, and the value of the damage to the property, if any. 
(Code 2017, § 19-35; Ord. No. 2555, § 23, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-36. - Veteran's grave markers. 
    A person commits a simple misdemeanor when the person takes possession or control of a veteran's grave marker which was provided pursuant to Iowa Code § 35B.16, with the intention to deprive the owner of the marker, regardless of the value of the marker. The person shall also be liable for reimbursement in an amount equal to three times the cost of the marker to be paid to the county commission of veteran affairs or other person who furnished the marker. 
(Code 2017, § 19-36; Ord. No. 2555, § 24, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-37. - Theft detection devices; removal prohibited. 
(a)  A person shall not remove or attempt to remove a theft detection device with the intent of committing a theft and without the permission of the merchant who is displaying or selling the goods, wares, or merchandise. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) of this section commits a simple misdemeanor if the value of the goods, wares, or merchandise does not exceed $200.00. 
(Code 2017, § 19-37; Ord. No. 2555, § 25, 10-24-2005) 
Sec. 16-38. - Obstruction of drainageway or watercourse. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to require the owner or lessee of any lot, part of a lot or tract of ground extending into, across or bordering on any hollow or ravine which constitutes a drain for surface water or a watercourse of any kind who shall, by grading or filling such lot, part of a lot or tract of ground, obstruct the ordinary flow of water through such ravine or watercourse to build or construct, to the extent of such lot or filling, such a drain or passageway for water as the council may by resolution designate. 
(b)  In all cases where the owner or lessee of any lot, part of a lot or tract of ground extending into, across or bordering on any hollow or ravine which constitutes a drain for surface water or watercourse of any kind shall, without constructing a suitable drain, fill or grade such lot, part of a lot or tract of ground so as to obstruct the flow of water through such watercourse and cause such water to accumulate on any street, public place or private lot or ground, he shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction, which may be abated by the city, and on conviction thereof he shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-9. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, in case the owner or lessee shall grade or fill any lot, part of a lot or tract of ground extending into, across or bordering on any hollow or ravine so as to obstruct the flow of water, the council shall have power, by resolution, to order such owner or lessee to construct such a drain such as the council shall order, and within the time to be designated by the council. Upon such order being made, it shall be the duty of the operations and maintenance manager to notify such owner or lessee, in writing. If such owner or lessee shall fail or refuse to construct such drain within the time and manner required, the operations and maintenance manager shall proceed at once to build such drain, and report the expense thereof, with all costs arising therefrom, to the council, whereupon the council may, by resolution, levy and assess the sum as a special tax upon the property so drained, after giving the notice and allowing the hearing as provided for the assessment and collection of special assessments. 
(Code 2017, § 13-2) 
Sec. 16-39. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Unless an offense is declared a municipal infraction in this chapter or unless a specific penalty is provided for an offense in this chapter, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a simple misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 19-38; Ord. No. 2541, § 1, 8-8-2005) 
Secs. 16-40-16-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 16-65. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Intoxicating substances means any compound, liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone or any other substance capable of inducing intoxication. 
    Intoxication means a condition of dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior or any distortion or change of the audio, visual or mental processes. 
(Code 2017, § 19-41) 
Sec. 16-66. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 2017, § 19-42) 
Sec. 16-67. - Inhalation or ingestion prohibited. 
    No person shall inhale, breathe, drink or otherwise take into the body any intoxicating substance, nor shall any person be intoxicated. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise takes into the body any intoxicating substance pursuant to the direction of any authorized doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist. 
(Code 2017, § 19-43) 
Sec. 16-68. - Sale, purchase or possession for unlawful purpose. 
    No person shall buy, sell, possess, transfer possession of or receive possession of any glue or cement or other substance containing any intoxicating substance for the purpose of violating this article or aiding another to violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 19-44) 
Sec. 16-69. - Self-service displays of glue or cement containing intoxicating substance. 
    No person selling glue or cement containing any intoxicating substances shall sell such glue or cement from a self-service display. 
(Code 2017, § 19-45) 
Secs. 16-70-16-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 16-97. - Purpose of article. 
    In order to reduce the danger to public health, safety and welfare from the spills of hazardous substances, this article is promulgated to establish responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills within the city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 19-66) 
Sec. 16-98. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cleanup means the removal of the hazardous wastes or substances to a place where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the environment, in accordance with state rules therefor, or the treatment of the material to eliminate the hazardous condition, including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance, without noticeable odor, as far as practicable. 
    Hazardous condition means the same as set forth in Iowa Code § 455B.381(4). 
    Hazardous substance means any substance as defined in Iowa Code § 455B.381(5). 
    Hazardous waste means those wastes which are included in the definition in Iowa Code § 455B.411(3)a. 
    Responsible person means the party, whether the owner, agent, lessor or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance or hazardous wastes being stored, processed or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances, whether on public ways or grounds or on private property, where the spill would cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment. 
    Treatment means a method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of a hazardous waste so as to neutralize it or to render the waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery or amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume. The term "treatment" includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of a hazardous waste to render it nonhazardous. 
(Code 2017, § 19-67) 
Sec. 16-99. - Cleanup of spills required. 
    Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous waste or substance, so that the hazardous substance or waste or a constituent of the hazardous waste or substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as rapidly as feasible, to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the city may, by the mayor or other authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, the notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the city will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person if the deadline is not met. If the bill for those services is not paid within 30 days, the city attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the city to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the council and immediately seek any state or federal funds available for the cleanup. 
(Code 2017, § 19-68) 
Sec. 16-100. - Notification of spills. 
    The first city officer or employee who arrives at the scene of an incident involving hazardous substances, if not a peace officer, shall notify the police operations division, which shall notify the proper state office in the manner established by the state. 
(Code 2017, § 19-69) 
Secs. 16-101-16-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY STATE OF PUBLIC EMERGENCY RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 16-129. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Anyone violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 19-91; Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-130. - Declaration of state of public emergency. 
    Whenever the mayor determines that there has been an act of violence, an act of terrorism, a natural disaster, or resistance to a lawful exercise of public authority, and that, as a result thereof, the mayor has reason to believe that there exists a state of public emergency, clear and present danger of a riot or other general public disorder involving widespread disobedience of the law and substantial injury to persons or property, which state of public emergency, riot or other general public disorder constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace and to the general welfare of the city or any area of it, the mayor may declare a state of public emergency within the city or any of its areas. 
(Code 2017, § 19-92; Ord. No. 2681, § 2, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-131. - Promulgation of restrictions. 
    Whenever the mayor declares that a state of public emergency exists, the mayor may promulgate any, all or part of the temporary restrictions provided for in section 16-132, with such limitations and conditions as the mayor may deem appropriate under the circumstances. In so doing, the mayor shall specify the area of the city affected by each restriction. Any measure the mayor promulgates will take effect only after reasonable notice of its contents has been given. 
(Code 2017, § 19-93; Ord. No. 2681, § 3, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-132. - Authorized restrictions. 
    The mayor is authorized to promulgate any, all or part of the following restrictions pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Alcohol. The immediate closing of all taverns and the cessation of the sale or any other distribution of intoxicating liquor and beer. 
(2)  Weapons. The cessation of public display, possession, sale or any other distribution of firearms and ammunition, in or adjacent to the area affected by the public emergency. 
(3)  Explosives and flammables. The cessation of the sale or any other distribution of explosives and flammables. 
(4)  Curfew. The closing of all or some public parks, public streets, designated areas within the city, or other public places during specified hours. 
(5)  Assembly. The cessation of gatherings by three or more persons in public buildings, streets, parks and other open areas, either public or private. 
(6)  Evacuation order. The requirement that all residents, businesses and all other people be removed from specified areas of the city due to imminent danger. 
(7)  Restricted areas. The requirement that all persons, other than authorized employees and volunteers, be prohibited from being inside the city designated boundary surrounding a flood wall, flood levee or sandbag levee. 
(8)  Other. The cessation of any other activities reasonably believed hazardous to the maintenance of public safety. 
(Code 2017, § 19-94; Ord. No. 2681, § 4, 3-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-133. - Termination of restrictions. 
    Any restriction promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this article will terminate automatically 48 hours after the mayor's declaration of a state of public emergency was issued or upon his issuing a declaration that a state of public emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that any or all of the restrictions promulgated by the mayor may be extended by successive resolutions of the city council for additional periods of time. The period of any one extension shall not exceed five days. 
(Code 2017, § 19-95; Ord. No. 2681, § 4(1), 3-23-2009) 
Secs. 16-134-16-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 16-166. - Prohibited. 
(a)  Defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, or materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination with a controlled substance, except those items used in combination with the lawful use of a controlled substance, to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do any of the following: 
(1)  Manufacture a controlled substance. 
(2)  Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(3)  Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance. 
(4)  Enhance the effect of a controlled substance. 
The term "drug paraphernalia" does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if manufactured, delivered, sold, or possessed for a lawful purpose. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture, deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia. 
(c)  A person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, §§ 19-116-19-119) 
Sec. 16-167. - Advertisement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia as defined in section 16-166. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a crime and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 19-120) 
Chapter 17 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARBORIST AND CEMETERY SECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 17-19-17-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARBORIST SECTION 

Sec. 17-40. - Supervision; appointment of arborist. 
    The arborist section of the public works department, operations and maintenance division, shall be under the control of the arborist, who shall be appointed by the operations and maintenance manager of the public works department, and be directly responsible to the public works and parks supervisor. 
(Code 2017, § 20-91; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-41. - Duties of arborist. 
    The arborist shall have the following duties and responsibilities under the supervision of the public works and parks supervisor: 
(1)  To cause, unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this division to be enforced. 
(2)  To direct, regulate and control the planting, caring for and removing of all trees and shrubs growing in the streets, parks or other public places in the city. 
(3)  To advise the owners and occupants of private property regarding the kind, culture, care and disposal of any tree or shrub within the city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 20-92; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-42. - Acting arborist. 
    In the absence of the arborist, the duties and responsibilities of the arborist enumerated in this division shall be those of a designee appointed by the operations and maintenance division manager. 
(Code 2017, § 20-93; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-43. - Interference with officers. 
    No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the arborist supervisor or any authorized assistant in the execution or enforcement of duties; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any legal or equitable remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-94; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 17-44-17-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CEMETERY SECTION 

Sec. 17-75. - Supervision; appointment of cemetery supervisor. 
    The cemetery section of the department of public works, operations and maintenance division, shall be under the control of the cemetery supervisor, who shall be appointed by the director of public works upon recommendation of the operations and maintenance division manager and be directly responsible to the operations and maintenance division manager. 
(Code 2017, § 20-106; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-76. - Duties of cemetery supervisor. 
    The supervisor of cemeteries shall: 
(1)  See that the rules and regulations concerning all cemeteries owned and operated by the city are enforced. 
(2)  Perform such duties as are required by ordinance and as the council and director of public works shall direct. 
(3)  See that the rules and regulations concerning all cemeteries are at all times strictly complied with and report to the director of public works any infractions of the rules and regulations on the part of an owner or any other person. 
(4)  Keep all lots, streets, paths and grounds in the occupied part of the cemeteries mowed during the entire growing season. 
(5)  Do all proper acts necessary to maintain the grounds set apart for the burial of the dead in a neat, clean and attractive condition at all times. 
(Code 2017, § 20-107; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-77. - Authority of cemetery supervisor to control location of markers and monuments. 
    The supervisor of cemeteries shall control and direct the location of all markers and monuments within municipal cemeteries located in the city, it being the intention of this section not to limit the size of monuments and markers in the cemeteries except by duly adopted resolution of the city council or an ordinance duly adopted by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 20-108; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-78. - Cemeteries renamed. 
    The cemetery formerly known as Old Cemetery is hereby named Greenwood Cemetery and the cemetery formerly known as Twelfth Street Cemetery is hereby named Fairview Cemetery. 
(Code 2017, § 20-109; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-79. - Applicability of cemetery regulations. 
    The provisions of this division and the amendments thereto and all other ordinances of the city relating to Greenwood Cemetery shall, except as otherwise provided, apply to any and all other cemeteries which are owned, operated or controlled by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-110; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-80. - Disposition of monies received by cemetery supervisor. 
    All monies received by the cemetery supervisor under the rules and regulations of this division shall be paid over to the city clerk within 30 days after the receipt thereof. The clerk shall then deposit such monies with the treasurer. 
(Code 2017, § 20-111; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-81. - Burial in cemetery required. 
    The remains of all persons, when such remains are buried in the city, except those that are cremated, shall be buried in either Greenwood Cemetery, Hillside Cemetery, Fairview Cemetery or other cemeteries established in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-112; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-82. - Hours of cemeteries. 
    The cemeteries subject to the regulations of this division shall be open to the public each day from sunrise to sunset, and no person shall enter such cemeteries at any other time without the consent of the cemetery supervisor or public safety services department. 
(Code 2017, § 20-113; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-83. - Operation of perpetual care cemeteries. 
(a)  Trusteeship. Pursuant to Iowa Code § 523I.502, the city hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance of interment spaces in Greenwood Cemetery, Hillside Cemetery, Fairview Cemetery, and any other cemeteries hereafter established by the city. 
(b)  Establishment of trust fund. A perpetual trust is hereby established for Greenwood Cemetery, Hillside Cemetery and Fairview Cemetery in accordance with the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund is created, to be known and designated as the "perpetual care cemetery fund," which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or greater than 20 percent of the gross selling price, or $50.00, whichever is more, for each sale of interment space within each cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of the Iowa Cemetery Act (Iowa Code ch. 523I). The perpetual care cemetery fund shall be maintained separate from all operating funds of the city and the principal of the fund shall not be reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act and applicable administrative regulations. 
(c)  Sale of interment rights. The sale or transfer of interment rights for lots in each cemetery subject to the regulations of this division shall be sold at such price as the council may, from time to time, provide by resolution, subject, however, to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, and shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the perpetual care cemetery fund, and the balance thereof to be placed in the city's general fund. 
(d)  Perpetual care registry. The city shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the perpetual care cemetery fund of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-114; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 8-15-2016) 
Sec. 17-84. - Register of lots and interments; collection of assessments. 
    The city clerk or other officer designated by the council shall keep a register of all permits issued in accordance with this division and of all lots sold and transferred, containing the name of the purchaser and the number of the lot and a proper designation of the lot, and shall enter an assessment against each such lot, as required in this division, and collect the assessment from such owner, giving the owner a notice, by mail, to his last known address, before such assessment becomes delinquent; provided, however, that failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the proposed assessment in any way. 
(Code 2017, § 20-115; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-85. - Interments. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  Application for interments must be made to the cemetery supervisor. 
(2)  Such application must be made in writing, stating the name, age and nativity of the deceased, cause of death, the number of the cemetery lot, the place upon the lot where the grave is to be dug and the size of the coffin case. 
(3)  An application for interment shall in all cases be accompanied by the fee, to be fixed as provided in section 17-83. 
(4)  The cemetery supervisor shall register the application and forward interment information to the city clerk to file and preserve in the city records. 
(b)  Prerequisites to issuance of permit. The city clerk shall issue no permit for interment where the application does not cover a lot or portion of a lot theretofore sold and conveyed, unless the application is accompanied by the amount of the value of the lot, to be fixed as provided in section 17-83. Upon payment of the required sum for the lot, in addition to the fees for interment, the clerk shall issue the permit. 
(c)  Unauthorized interment prohibited. The owner of a cemetery lot shall not permit interments to be made therein for remuneration, and shall not permit interments to be made except as provided in this division. 
(d)  Burial on lot of another. The cemetery supervisor is strictly forbidden to permit the burial of any person on the lot of another, without the express written permit of the owner or his heirs or legal representatives. 
(e)  Vaults. All interments requiring a grave opening over 42 inches in length shall be in a vault consisting of either: 
(1)  Concrete, stone or metal of good quality; or 
(2)  High density molded twin sheeting polyethylene which has been permanently sealed by heat bonding and which has a minimum freestanding load capacity of 5,000 pounds. 
(f)  Digging of graves; duties of cemetery officials. 
(1)  The cemetery supervisor or some person employed in a cemetery by the supervisor or council shall dig, open and close all graves, and shall immediately remove all surplus dirt and other litter from such lot, and shall officiate at all interments and conduct the funeral cortege to and from the place of burial in an orderly manner, provided that no grave shall be dug unless the proper permit therefor has been issued. 
(2)  A suitable canvas shall be supplied the supervisor, who shall spread the canvas over the excavated dirt, screening the grounds from the unsightly appearance of such excavation, and, when requested to do so, he shall line the grave and do such other work in and about the premises as the owner may require, for which he shall make a charge for the actual cost of materials and of the reasonable labor employed in the performance of such work. 
(g)  Permit for transferred lot. No permit shall be granted to dig a grave upon any transferred cemetery lot, except upon application of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 20-116; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2876, § 2, 8-15-2016) 
Sec. 17-86. - Care of cemetery lots. 
(a)  Persons authorized to care for lots. No person, other than the owner or his heirs, or a near relative or intimate friend, working without compensation, shall be permitted to care for any cemetery lot; but all lots for the care of which no provision has been made by a deposit in the permanent care fund shall be properly cared for by the duly authorized cemetery supervisor under the direction of the operations and maintenance division manager. 
(b)  Lots provided for by deposit for permanent care. All cemetery lots, the care of which is provided for by a deposit in the permanent care fund, shall be especially under the charge of the cemetery supervisor, who shall properly seed or sod the lots as often as required, keep them mowed during the entire growing season, cut all grass around any marker or monument, and at all times keep such lots in a clean and attractive condition. 
(c)  Special assessment. A special assessment in accordance with the rates adopted by the council by resolution therefor shall be made against each and every occupied cemetery lot in a cemetery, where no other provision has been made for the care of the lot, payable at the office of the city clerk, without notice, on or before May 1 of each year. Such assessment shall be delinquent on October 1 following, at which date a penalty of 25 percent shall be added. No further burials shall be made on any lot on which an assessment is due until the assessment, with all penalties, has been paid in full. 
(Code 2017, § 20-117; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-87. - Removal of remains from cemeteries. 
    Remains may be removed from cemeteries upon the issuance of a permit therefor by the city clerk, or, in his absence, by the mayor, and the fee required by the council shall be charged therefor as in the case of interments. The application for and the record of such removal shall be made and kept in the same manner as for interments. 
(Code 2017, § 20-118; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-88. - Planting of trees, shrubs, etc., on cemetery lots. 
    No tree, vine, shrub or other living thing shall be planted on any cemetery lot, except under the supervision and with the permission of the cemetery supervisor or the operations and maintenance division manager. If planted without such permission, the tree, vine, shrub or other living thing may be removed by the cemetery supervisor without notice. 
(Code 2017, § 20-119; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-89. - Cutting or removal of trees and shrubs in cemeteries. 
    No person shall cut down or remove any trees and shrubs naturally growing in a cemetery without the consent of the cemetery supervisor or the operations and maintenance division manager. 
(Code 2017, § 20-120; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-90. - Use of vases, urns and soldier's markers on graves. 
    Vases, urns for holding flowers and soldier's markers shall be permitted to decorate a grave site. However, all flowers not in a vase or in an urn for holding flowers or in a soldier's marker shall be removed within three days after Memorial Day each year. No artificial flowers or wire shall be placed directly into the ground at a grave site. No glass bottles or other urns shall be allowed upon a grave site. 
(Code 2017, § 20-121; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-91. - Cemetery markers and monuments-Generally. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this division, the term "monument" shall include any stone, marker or other structure on a cemetery lot extending above the natural surface of the ground. 
(b)  Number of markers on grave. Only one marker shall be allowed to a grave. 
(c)  Placing of monuments. All monuments shall be placed only at the end of the grave that is nearest to an adjoining street or alley located within the cemetery. If the monument is placed near an alley located in the cemetery, it shall face said alley; if placed near the street located in the cemetery, it shall face said street with the front edge of the foundation of the monument coinciding with the lot lines. All monument foundations must have a minimum of a five-inch border. Both sides of a monument may be fully inscribed. 
(d)  Placing of flush markers. All flush markers shall be placed at the end of the grave nearest the adjoining street or alley. If the monument is placed nearest the alley, it shall face the alley; if nearest the street, it shall face the street, with the front edge of the marker coinciding with the lot lines. All flush markers shall be set on a five-inch base of sand and shall be set with the natural slope. No concrete or aggregates other than turf grass will be allowed. 
(e)  Supervision of setting. The setting of all monuments and markers and all concrete and stone construction work on lots in the municipal cemeteries shall be under the supervision of the cemetery supervisor, and at such reasonable time as may be agreed upon by the supervisor and the person doing the work. 
(f)  Erection in specific cemeteries. 
(1)  No monument or marker shall be erected in Sunnydale Addition to Greenwood Cemetery, nor in block A of Oaklawn Addition to Greenwood Cemetery, which exceeds 48 inches in length or is more than 30 inches in height. Such monuments and markers shall be in one piece, without base between foundations and die, with the foundation not extending above the surface of the ground. 
(2)  In Memorial Park Addition to Fairview Cemetery, and in blocks B and C of Oaklawn Addition to Greenwood Cemetery, no monuments shall be erected, and only flush markers shall be permitted. 
(g)  Size and materials of flush markers. Where the use of flush markers is required, only a flush marker measuring 12 inches by 24 inches shall be used for all adult graves, except that a companion marker 12 inches by 36 inches in size may be used to mark two adult graves, and a marker ten inches by 16 inches in size may be used to mark an infant's grave. No other sizes of markers shall be permitted. Either granite, marble or United States standard bronze shall be used, and markers of concrete terrazzo, composition materials, white bronze, sandstone, bedford or other soft stones are specifically prohibited. 
(Code 2017, § 20-122; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-92. - Cemetery markers and monuments-Placing of markers pertaining to cremation burial. 
    No more than three markers pertaining to cremation burial shall be allowed per single grave space, as specified in section 17-91(c) and (d). 
(Code 2017, § 20-123; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-93. - Cemetery markers and monuments-Repair or removal of unsightly markers and monuments. 
(a)  Notice to owner. Should any monument, marker or other adornment in a cemetery become dilapidated, unsightly or objectionable to the council, the city clerk shall notify the owner by mail, if his address is known, to make such repairs as may be required, or remove the monument, marker or other adornment, within 30 days from the date of mailing of such notice. At the expiration of such time, if the notice has not been complied with, it shall be the duty of the cemetery supervisor to cause such repairs to be made, or such objectionable thing to be removed. The supervisor shall report the cost to the clerk, and a special assessment shall be made against such owner, if known, and against such lot, covering the cost of such work, as provided in section 17-86(c). 
(b)  Repair by city at owner's request. At the request of an owner of a cemetery lot, the cemetery supervisor may make needed repairs to any marker or monument and render a bill to the owner for the cost of the repairs. If such bill is not paid within a reasonable time, it shall be assessed to such owner and lot as provided in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 20-124; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-94. - Unlawfully erected monuments, markers or foundations. 
    Any monument, marker or foundation placed or erected in a cemetery contrary to the provisions of the ordinances of the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be abated in accordance with the procedure contained in chapter 15. 
(Code 2017, § 20-125; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-95. - Improvements to cemetery lots. 
    No improvements to cemetery lots subject to the provisions of this division shall be made except under the direction of the supervisor of cemeteries or the division manager, and all persons clearing off lots or making improvements thereon shall remove all refuse matter taken from such lot out of the cemetery grounds. Such removal shall be made at the time of making such improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 20-126; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-96. - Fences on cemetery lots. 
    No person shall erect or permit a fence of any kind to remain about any cemetery lot subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 20-127; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-97. - Coping on cemetery lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any coping around any cemetery lot subject to the provisions of this division. Coping placed prior to March 25, 1927, shall not be repaired and shall, upon order of the cemetery supervisor, be removed when it becomes unsightly or in need of repair. 
(Code 2017, § 20-128; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-98. - Destruction of cemetery property. 
    No person shall willfully and without authority destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any of the gravestones or other structures in a cemetery within the limits of the city, or injure or destroy any fence, railing, tree, shrubbery, flower or lawn in such cemetery, or anything belonging to the city, or use such cemetery for any disrespectful or improper purpose whatever. 
(Code 2017, § 20-129; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-99. - Traffic regulations. 
    No person in a cemetery shall: 
(1)  Operate a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding ten miles per hour. 
(2)  Operate any vehicle on any area except the established cemetery roads or parking areas or such other areas as may be specifically designated by the director of public works or designee. 
(3)  Operate a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or similar equipment, unless operated by an employee or agent of a public or private agency for the purposes of providing emergency services, rescue or maintenance, and as may be specifically designated by the director of public works or designee. 
(4)  Operate a vehicle at night without headlights or other similar lighting equipment. 
(5)  Operate any vehicle in disregard of any traffic sign indicating direction, caution or stopping, or any other sign posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(6)  Park a vehicle in other than established designated parking areas, or as directed by the cemetery supervisor or his designee. 
(7)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked during the hours when the cemetery is closed. 
(8)  Park a vehicle, or use a cemetery, for the purpose of repair or washing or maintenance of a vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 20-129A; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-100. - Removal of refuse and litter from cemetery lots. 
    No refuse or litter shall be left on any cemetery lot subject to the provisions of this division, or placed on the lot of another, or in the streets, nor shall any decayed flowers, shells, toys or any other unsightly thing be left on any lot for a period longer than three days; otherwise it shall be the duty of the cemetery supervisor to remove such unsightly thing without notice. 
(Code 2017, § 20-130; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-101. - Raising surface of cemetery lot. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to raise the surface of any cemetery lot subject to the provisions of this division above the abutting street or walk, or to mound up any grave above the surface of such lot more than three inches. All lots shall be kept to a smooth and level grade. 
(Code 2017, § 20-131; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-102. - Aboveground private mausoleums and crypts. 
    Aboveground private mausoleums and aboveground private crypts are hereby prohibited in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-132; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 17-103-17-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ART AND CULTURE CENTER AND BOARD 

Sec. 17-133. - Art and culture center established. 
    There is hereby established a municipal art and culture center, to be known as the James and Meryl Hearst Art and Culture Center. 
(Code 2017, § 20-156; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-134. - Board created. 
    There is hereby established in the city an art and culture board. 
(Code 2017, § 20-157; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-135. - Membership of board; appointment of members. 
(a)  The city art and culture board shall be composed of seven members, who shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  The members shall be qualified by general knowledge or experience in matters related to art purchases, art evaluation and provision of cultural programs. 
(c)  Members shall not hold any elective position in the city. 
(d)  The members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 20-158; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-136. - Term of office of board members. 
    The term of office of the members of the city art and culture board shall be four years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of any board member. 
(Code 2017, § 20-159; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-137. - Compensation of members of board. 
    All members of the art and culture board shall serve without compensation, except for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 20-160; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-138. - Absence of members from board meetings. 
    Members of the art and culture board leaving their residence in the city or absent from three consecutive meetings on the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city, without due explanation of absence, shall surrender their office. The mayor shall then fill the vacant position, with city council approval. 
(Code 2017, § 20-161; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-139. - Director of municipal operations and programs to serve as ex-officio member of board. 
    The director of municipal operations and programs shall serve as an ex-officio member of the art and culture board, without voting privileges. 
(Code 2017, § 20-162; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-140. - Powers and duties of board. 
    The city art and culture board shall have and possess the following powers and duties and such other powers as may be incidental thereto as necessary, and such other powers as may be expressly conferred upon it by law: 
(1)  To adopt rules and regulations governing the board's organization and procedure as may be deemed necessary. All bylaws, rules or regulations shall be consistent with state, federal and local statutes. 
(2)  To develop and provide an art and culture program for the citizens of the city based on the level of financial support provided by the city council and other entities. 
(3)  To determine the operations and programming policy for the city art and culture center, which will be administered by the department of community development through the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager. 
(4)  To participate, if requested by the director of community development, in the selection process of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager. 
(5)  Jointly with the director of municipal operations and programs, to evaluate the performance of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager on a yearly basis. 
(6)  To make recommendations to the city council regarding the disposition of all gifts, allocations, devices and bequests that may be made in the city for the purpose of establishing, increasing or improving the city art and culture program or the development of the art and culture center. However, when any such gift, donation, devise or bequest is conditioned on any act of the city, the city council must first determine whether such condition can be met. 
(7)  To serve as the city's review agency and coordinator of all outside agency and special group requests for city financial support related to the provision of art, theater, music or other cultural services. 
(8)  On behalf of the city, to accept gifts or works of art and select or make purchases of pictures, portraits, statuary and relics, and other objects of art, in the original and in replicas or copies, books, periodicals, papers and journals on the subject of art, and furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for such art. 
(9)  To recommend to the city council expenditures by the community development department on behalf of the city and board in conformance with the board's program policies. 
(Code 2017, § 20-163; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-141. - Appropriation of funds for art and culture programs. 
    The city council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the general fund for the payment of a portion of the expense of operating the art and culture center and the city's art and culture programs. 
(Code 2017, § 20-164; Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 17-142-17-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 17-166. - Created. 
    A parks and recreation commission for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 20-186) 
Sec. 17-167. - Membership; compensation of members; term of office. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be qualified electors of the city, and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. The members shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  The term of office for each member of the commission shall be three years. 
(c)  Commissioners shall hold their office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 2017, § 20-187) 
Sec. 17-168. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring in the parks and recreation commission shall be filled as provided in section 17-167, and such appointment shall be valid for the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 2017, § 20-188) 
Sec. 17-169. - General duties. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall recommend and review policies, rules, regulations, ordinances and budgets relating to parks, playgrounds, recreational centers, golf courses, cemeteries and cultural functions and activities of the city, and make such reports to the city council as the commission deems in the public interest. The commission shall annually transmit to the city council a report of its activities and recommendations for the development and operation of parks, recreation centers, cemeteries, golf courses, playgrounds and cultural facilities and programs. 
(b)  Special attention shall be given to the development of long range planning and programming. The commission is authorized to create and appoint advisory groups to make studies and to disseminate information on all of its activities. All commissioners and advisory groups shall serve without compensation. The commission shall plan for the promotion of the general beauty of the city and its approaches. 
(Code 2017, § 20-189) 
Sec. 17-170. - Cooperation with school board and civic groups. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall cooperate with the school board and civic groups to enlarge the program at a minimum cost to all citizens. 
(Code 2017, § 20-190) 
Sec. 17-171. - Record of proceedings; rules of procedure. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and adopt rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as may be deemed necessary. All adopted bylaws, rules or regulations shall be consistent with state, federal and local statutes. 
(Code 2017, § 20-191) 
Secs. 17-172-17-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 17-196. - Public facilities established; management. 
(a)  Free public playgrounds, parks and recreation and arts centers are hereby established in the city for the use of its inhabitants, under the proper rules and regulations for the government and management thereof. 
(b)  Such playgrounds and parks shall be managed by the department of public works and such recreation and arts centers shall be managed by the department of community development. 
(Code 2017, § 20-211; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-197. - Permits. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  Any person seeking the issuance of a permit required by this article shall file an application with the director of public works. 
(2)  The application shall state: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any. 
c.  The day and hour for which the permit is desired. 
d.  The park, or portion thereof, for which the permit is desired. 
e.  An estimate of the anticipated attendance. 
f.  Any other information which the director of public works shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued under this section. 
(b)  Standards for issuance. The director of public works shall issue a permit required by this article when the director finds: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park. 
(2)  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to the city. 
(5)  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(c)  Revocation. The director of public works or designee shall have authority to revoke a permit required by this article upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(d)  Compliance with applicable regulations. A holder of a permit required by this article shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the rules, regulations and ordinances were inserted in such permit. 
(e)  Liability of permit holder. The holder of a permit required by this article shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person or the city arising out of or resulting from the negligence of the permit holder, his employees, servants or agents, or other persons entitled to the use of the park by the holder. The holder, by acceptance of a permit, assumes full responsibility for and agrees to indemnify the city against and save it harmless from any liability arising out of or arising from the negligence of the holder, his employees, servants or agents, or other persons entitled to the use of the park by the holder. 
(Code 2017, § 20-212; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-198. - Park hours. 
(a)  The parks in the city shall be open from 5:00 a.m. until 10:30 p.m. daily. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to be in a park during the hours of 10:30 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
(Code 2017, § 20-213) 
Sec. 17-199. - Miscellaneous prohibited acts. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Ride or lead a horse, except on designated bridal paths or established roads. 
(2)  Permit or allow a horse to graze or go unattended, or tie a horse to any rock, tree, shrub or fixed object. 
(3)  Swim, except in a specifically authorized area. 
(4)  Use any firearms. 
(5)  Picnic in unauthorized posted areas. 
(6)  Start or maintain a fire in other than a park stove, fireplace, charcoal grill or other designated area. 
(7)  Dump any type of refuse on park property, except in the designated receptacles provided for such use. 
(8)  Cut, pick or remove in any manner whatsoever any plant or plant material unless such removal is authorized by the director of public works or designee. 
(9)  Interfere with anyone using a park in a lawful manner. 
(10)  Land in or take off from a park with an ultralight aircraft, whether or not motorized, or any similar device. This subsection does not prevent emergency landings. 
(Code 2017, § 20-214; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-200. - Traffic regulations. 
    No person in a park, golf course or other public lands shall: 
(1)  Operate a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, or as posted for all other roadways. 
(2)  Operate any vehicle on any area except the established roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may be specifically designated by the director of public works or designee. 
(3)  Operate a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle or similar equipment, unless operated by an employee or agent of a public or private agency for the purposes of providing emergency services, rescue or maintenance, and as may be specifically designated by the director of public works or designee. 
(4)  Operate a vehicle at night without headlights or other similar lighting equipment. 
(5)  Operate any vehicle in disregard of any traffic sign indicating direction, caution or stopping, or any other sign posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(6)  Park a vehicle in other than established designated parking areas. 
(7)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked during the hours when the park, golf course, or public facility is closed. 
(8)  Park a vehicle, or use the public area, for the purpose of repair or washing or maintenance of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 1, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-201. - Camping. 
(a)  No person shall set up tents, shacks or other temporary shelters in the parks for the purpose of overnight camping. 
(b)  No person shall leave in any park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or which could be used, for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, unless such person first obtains a permit from the director of public works or designee. 
(Code 2017, § 20-216; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-202. - Hunting, trapping and fishing. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Hunt or trap unless a special permit has been obtained from the director of public works, or unless the area is within a special deer management zone as described in section 16-15(b)(2). 
(2)  Fish in posted waters. 
(Code 2017, § 20-217; Ord. No. 2878, § 2, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-203. - Advertising. 
    No advertising of any kind shall be permitted in a park, except that necessary for the operation of a concession or advertising sponsored by governmental organizations as a service to the public. All advertising must be authorized by the director of public works or designee prior to the erection or placement of such advertising in a park. 
(Code 2017, § 20-218; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-204. - Concessions. 
(a)  Temporary concessions. Temporary concessions, meaning concessions for any period less than the normal seasonal concessions, are permitted in a park only if a permit for the concession has been obtained from the director of public works. In obtaining a permit, the permit holder must conform to all rules and regulations that the city council may require. 
(b)  Commercial enterprises. Commercial enterprises are permitted in a park only if a permit for the enterprise has first been obtained from the city council. A permit for a commercial enterprise in the park shall be awarded to the bidders who submit to the city council the most acceptable bid. The permit holder shall be awarded a lease for a term approved by the city council. Upon the expiration of the lease, a new bid must be submitted in order to obtain a permit. The permit holder must conform to all rules and regulations that the city council may require. 
(Code 2017, § 20-219; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-205. - Use of public address systems and amplifying devices. 
    No person in a park shall use a public address system or any other method of amplifying sound unless a permit for such use has been granted by the director of public works or designee. 
(Code 2017, § 20-220; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-206. - Dissemination of materials or information to public. 
    No person shall use a park as a place of public assembly for the dissemination of information or material to the public without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works or designee. 
(Code 2017, § 20-221; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-207. - Reservation of park areas and facilities. 
    No person may be granted an exclusive use of park areas or facilities unless a permit for such exclusive use is first obtained from the director of public works or designee and unless specifically authorized by the city council. Only the following park areas and facilities may be so reserved: 
(1)  A golf course. 
(2)  A clubhouse. 
(3)  A specific picnic shelter. 
(4)  Special game facilities. 
(Code 2017, § 20-222; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-208. - Possession of beer or other intoxicating liquor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in or use or have in their possession a keg or similar container for the purpose of dispensing beer or any other intoxicating liquor not otherwise prohibited by Iowa Code § 123.46, within any park, including any access area or wildlife habitat area under the jurisdiction of the city parks and recreation commission, unless either: 
(1)  Such use or possession is authorized by a liquor control license or beer permit approved by the city council, and issued by the state alcoholic beverages division under Iowa Code ch. 123, and such use is confined to a shelter or other place within a park which constitutes a "licensed premises" within the meaning of state law and which is designated for group use; or 
(2)  Such use is arranged in advance with the director of public works and such use is confined to the Island Park Beach House located in Island Park in the city, or to the Celebration Shelter located in Gateway Park in the city. 
(b)  Any person desiring to use a shelter or building, where beer or an intoxicating liquor is to be dispensed from a keg or similar container as authorized in this section must make a prior shelter or building reservation, have a designated agent for contact responsibility, make advance payment of a reservation fee and submit a $100.00 minimum damage deposit. The parks and recreation commission has the right to retain any or all of the required deposit to cover damage to city park property. The holder of a shelter or building reservation shall be bound by and be responsible for enforcing all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances regarding the use of a keg, or similar container, or other rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 20-223; Ord. No. 2301, § 1, 5-22-2000; Ord. No. 2422, § 1, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-209. - Authorized off-leash dog exercise facility. 
(a)  Establishment of facility. The director of public works or designee is hereby authorized to establish one or more authorized off-leash dog exercise facilities within the city which meet the requirements of this section. Each authorized off-leash dog exercise facility shall be hereinafter referred to as a "facility" or as an "authorized facility." 
(b)  Characteristics of authorized facility. Each authorized facility established under this section shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The facility shall be located within a public park in the city; 
(2)  The facility shall be appropriately and securely fenced and equipped with at least one self-closing gate; and 
(3)  The rules and regulations for the use of the facility shall be posted on a sign at each entrance to the facility. 
(c)  Rules governing use of authorized facility. The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of each authorized facility established under this section: 
(1)  The facility shall be for the use of dogs only, and no other types of animals or pets shall be allowed to use the facility. 
(2)  The owner or other competent responsible person shall at all times accompany each dog inside the fenced area of the facility, and shall be responsible for the supervision of such dog at all times while it is in the facility. 
(3)  The facility shall be open for use during regular city public park hours as provided in section 17-198(a). 
(4)  No person shall be authorized to use the facility unless the person has obtained a permit purchased from the city clerk of the city, for the use of the authorized facility or authorized facilities, at a fee to be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. A tag evidencing the issuance of such permit shall be furnished by the city clerk, and shall be affixed to the collar of the dog at all times while the dog is in such facility. 
(5)  No person shall be authorized to bring any dog into such facility unless the owner has a valid, current city license and rabies vaccination for the dog, and then only if the license and rabies tags are attached to and kept on a substantial collar on the dog at all times, all as required by chapter 6. 
(6)  All other provisions of this Code shall apply to the use of each such authorized facility and to the presence and conduct of dogs in each such facility, including, but not limited to, the provisions of chapter 6, such as cleanup of animal droppings, and prohibiting a dog from attacking persons or animals. 
(7)  No dog which is a dangerous animal as defined in section 6-131 shall be allowed to use any such authorized facility at any time. 
(8)  No person shall bring more than two dogs into an authorized facility at any one time. 
(9)  A person using the authorized facility shall at all times carry a leash for each dog which is under his supervision. 
(10)  The following are prohibited in any authorized facility established under this section: 
a.  Dogs in heat. 
b.  Dogs under four months of age. 
c.  Food, bones or rawhide. 
d.  Prong or spike dog collars. 
(11)  No children under six years of age are allowed in any authorized facility. Children from six years of age to 16 years of age must be under the supervision of a competent responsible person at all times while in an authorized facility. 
(d)  Provision for other rules and regulations. The director of public works or designee is hereby authorized to adopt and enforce, from time to time, such other rules and regulations governing the use of each authorized facility as he deems appropriate, provided that such rules and regulations shall first be approved by the city council, and posted on a clearly visible sign at each entrance to each such authorized facility. 
(e)  Dog at-large. A person who brings a dog into an authorized facility and complies in all respects with the provisions of this section, including any rules and regulations established as provided in subsection (d) of this section, shall not be deemed to have permitted or allowed the dog to be at-large within the city, within the meaning of chapter 6. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. Any violation of any of the provisions of this section, including any rules or regulations established under subsection (d) of this section and posted as required herein, shall constitute a municipal infraction, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 20-224; Ord. No. 2337, § 2, 6-11-2001; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-210. - Special events in Gateway Park green space. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of public works or designee. 
    City council means the city council of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    Property means the approximately 3.8 acres of green space to the east of Gateway Park, legally described as: 
GRAMS PLAT LOT 5 ALL LOT 18 EXC BEG AT SE COR LOT 18 TH N ALONG E LINE LOT 18 DIST 231.43 FT TH SWLY 302.89 FT TO PT ON W LINE LOT 18 WHICH IS 215.42 FT N OF SW COR THEREOF TH S ALONG W LINE LOT 18 215.42 FT TO SW COR TH E 303.14 FT ALONG S LOT LINE TO PT OF BEG; and 
GRAMS PLAT ALL LOT 19 EXC BEG AT SE COR LOT 19 TH NLY ALONG E LOT LINE DIST 215.42 FT TH NWLY 152.04 FT TO PT ON W LINE LOT 19 WHICH IS 222.63 FT NLY OF SW COR THEREOF TH SLY ALONG W LOT LINE 222.63 FT TO SW COR LOT 19 TH ELY ALONG S LOT LINE DIST OF 151.78 FT TO PT OF BEG. 
(b)  The director may adopt and enforce rules and regulations to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents. The director may post signs on the property setting forth rules and regulations and directional signs. 
(c)  The director, upon receiving a completed application, shall provide a copy of the application to the fire chief and the police chief. The director shall issue a recommendation on the permit application, with written comments from the police operations and fire operations divisions, and evaluate the following: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all of the requirements of this Code and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder; 
(2)  The proposed event will not substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic in the area; 
(3)  The proposed event will not substantially or unnecessarily interfere with any publicly managed infrastructure project; 
(4)  The concentration of persons or things at the event will not prevent proper fire and police protection or ambulance service; 
(5)  That the proposed event or use of the property will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the property; 
(6)  That the proposed event and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(7)  That the property has not been reserved for other use at the time requested in the application; 
(8)  That the proposed event will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to the city; 
(9)  The applicant and group have complied with any required permits or licenses required for the activity on the property. 
(d)  The application for an overnight permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the group/organization requesting the permit; 
(2)  Name and address of the contact person for the group; 
(3)  Approximate number of people attending the event; 
(4)  Description of the event; 
(5)  Name of any vendors that may be on the property; 
(6)  Any requests for additional services such as garbage receptacles; 
(7)  Number of nights for the event, up to a maximum of 14 days. 
(e)  The director shall provide a written recommendation to the city council within seven days. 
(f)  The city council shall consider the application request at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting, with the application being acted upon no later than 21 days from the receipt of the application by the director. The city council may approve the application as requested, may approve the application with conditions or changes, or deny the application. The city council may approve a maximum of 14 for the event, and upon request by the applicant, the city council may approve an additional 14-day extension for the event. 
(g)  Revocation of permit. The permit to use the property may be revoked without notice if the director, the chief of police, or fire chief have cause to believe anyone using the property has violated any local, state or federal laws, rules or regulations on the property. 
(h)  The group/organization and all individual participants shall be required to have been approved for any local, state or federal licenses or permits that are required for the activities intended to be conducted on the property. 
(i)  In addition to any other appropriate department, the department of public works is authorized to inspect the special event and may issue citations for any violation of this Code or any regulations pertaining to the operation of the special event. 
(j)  The director, after consultation with other appropriate departments, shall have the authority to promulgate such rules and regulations that he determines are necessary or desirable for the implementation of this section. The rules and regulations shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(k)  Liability of permit holder. The holder of a permit required by this article shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person or the city arising out of or resulting from the negligence of the permit holder, his employees, servants or agents, or other persons entitled to the use of the property by the holder. The holder, by acceptance of a permit, assumes full responsibility for and agrees to indemnify the city against and save it harmless from any liability arising out of or arising from the negligence of the holder, his employees, servants or agents, or other persons entitled to the use of the property by the holder. 
(Code 2017, § 20-225; Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 4-23-2012; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 17-211-17-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 17-229. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means all public parks having individual names. 
    Public place means all of the grounds owned by the city. 
    Tree damage means any damage to trees such as bruising, scarring, tearing or breaking of stems and branches. 
    Trees and shrubs means all woody vegetation. 
(Code 2017, § 20-246) 
Sec. 17-230. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating or failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision or requirements of any section or subsection of this article, in addition to any other remedy, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 20-247) 
Sec. 17-231. - Permit for planting, trimming or other work. 
(a)  Required. No person shall plant, move, spray, fertilize, brace, trim, cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub in any street, park or other public place in the city, or cause such action to be done by others, without first obtaining a written permit from the operations and maintenance division manager, who shall issue the permit if, in the judgment of the division manager, the desired work is necessary and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of satisfactory nature; provided that a permit will not be required for the trimming or maintaining of shrubbery growing on any street, park or other public place if such shrubbery does not constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  Bond. The operations and maintenance manager or arborist supervisor may demand the posting of bond or insurance before the permit is granted. Such bond or insurance shall be of sufficient amount to reasonably cover any damages that may occur to life or property while the provisions of the permit are being carried out. 
(c)  Contents. Every permit granted in accordance with this section by the operations and maintenance manager shall describe the work to be done and the estimated cost, define the species, sizes and locations of all trees and shrubs concerned, and contain a definite date of expiration. 
(d)  Violation of terms. Any permit may be declared void if the terms are violated. 
(Code 2017, § 20-248; Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-232. - Tree trimmer's license. 
(a)  Required; issuance. No person shall engage in the business of removing, cutting or trimming of trees or shrubbery in the city without first being granted a license as a tree trimmer. Such license shall allow the removing, cutting and trimming of shade trees over 30 feet in height standing in any street or other public or private place in the city, upon payment of an annual license fee of such amount as is established by resolution of the city council from time to time, which shall become due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(b)  Bond. Any person, before engaging in the business or occupation of removing, cutting or trimming trees in the city, shall deposit with the city clerk a good and sufficient bond or evidence of insurance of such amount as is established by the city council from time to time, conditioned that such person will faithfully comply with the provisions of this article, and further conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless the city and its officers from any and all claims, damages and losses and actions by reason of any acts or things done under or by authority or permission granted in this section. 
(c)  Proof of workers' compensation. Any person, before engaging in the business or occupation of removing, cutting or trimming trees in the city, shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the arborist or operations and maintenance manager that the workers employed by him are covered by a suitable workers' compensation policy according to the laws of the state. 
(d)  Certificate of general liability insurance. Any person, before engaging in the business or occupation of removing, cutting or trimming trees in the city, shall file with the city clerk a certificate of general liability insurance written by a company authorized to transact business in the state, in limits for property damage and for a combined single limit for any person, in amounts established by the city council from time to time, said certificate to be written on a standard form and carrying an endorsement naming the city and its employees as additional insureds as its interest may appear and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required of such contractor by any ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. It shall be a further condition of said certificate of insurance that the obligator will hold the city harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetency on the part of such contractor, his agents or employees in the performance of the work done under a license or permit issued upon the filing of said certificate. Said certificate of insurance shall be issued on or before engaging in the business or occupation described above and shall be refiled annually and kept in continuous full force and effect. That it is the intent and purpose of said certificate of insurance to also bind the individual, company, firm, association or partnership, whether it be trade name, corporation, or other business association or arrangement with which the principal is associated. 
(Code 2017, § 20-249; Ord. No. 2181, §§ 1, 2, 3-24-1997; Ord. No. 2421, § 1, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 2443, § 1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-233. - Exemptions from license and permit requirements. 
    Sections 17-231 and 17-232 concerning permits and licenses shall not apply to: 
(1)  The United States of America, the state or any county, municipality or political subdivision of the state, or any department, bureau or agency thereof or any official representative thereof, in pursuit of official duties. 
(2)  Any person with reference to trees on his own premises. 
(3)  Any individual performing labor or services on or in connection with trees at the direction and under the personal supervision of a licensed tree trimmer while in the performance of such functions. 
(4)  Any public utility engaged in tree trimming or tree removal for the purpose of line clearance, in order to ensure the continuity of utility service to the public. 
(Code 2017, § 20-250) 
Sec. 17-234. - Temporary cutoff of electricity for purpose of pruning or removal. 
    Whenever the arborist supervisor determines that it is necessary, in order to prune or remove any tree or shrub in any street, park or other public place in the city, or for any other reason, to temporarily cut off the electricity from any service wire, he shall serve written notice on the owner of such wire to protect such wire, and the owner shall comply with such order within 24 hours after the service of such notice. 
(Code 2017, § 20-251) 
Sec. 17-235. - Planting of certain trees prohibited. 
    The following trees are declared unsuitable for planting and shall not be permitted to be planted in any street, park or other public place in the city: 
(1)  Black locust. 
(2)  Box elder. 
(3)  Catalpa. 
(4)  Chinese elm. 
(5)  Cottonwood. 
(6)  Fruit trees of all types (except ornamentals). 
(7)  Poplar. 
(8)  Soft maple. 
(9)  Tree of heaven. 
(10)  Russian olive. 
(11)  Willow. 
(12)  Mulberry. 
(13)  Nut bearing trees of all types, except oaks and Ohio buckeye. 
(14)  Ash. 
(Code 2017, § 20-252; Ord. No. 2181, § 3, 3-24-1997; Ord. No. 2628, § 1, 5-29-2007) 
Sec. 17-236. Fastening - signs, wires, etc. 
    No person shall fasten any sign, box, wire, rope or other material to, around or through any tree or shrub in any street, park or other public place in the city, except by permission of the arborist or operations and maintenance manager, or when such materials are designed to preserve such tree or shrub and have been placed under a permit granted by the arborist. 
(Code 2017, § 20-253; Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-237. - Deposit or storage of materials impeding passage of water and air to roots. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any street, park or other public place in the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein, except by the permission of the arborist or operations and maintenance division manager, or when such materials are designed for the construction of sidewalks, paving, gutters or other public improvements and have been placed under a permit granted by the city or some department thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 20-254; Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-238. - Other injurious acts. 
    No person shall set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree or shrub in any street, park or other public place in the city. No person shall knowingly permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main in the root zone of any such tree or shrub. No person shall knowingly permit any wire designed to carry electric current to come into contact with any such tree or shrub unless protected by approved methods. No person shall permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any public tree or shrub. 
(Code 2017, § 20-255) 
Sec. 17-239. - Protection during building operations. 
(a)  Protective barriers required. During all building and construction operations, a contractor or builder shall erect suitable protective barriers around all trees and shrubs in any street, park or other public place in the city to prevent such trees from being injured. 
(b)  Liability for damages; valuation of damage. All contractors and builders operating in any street, park or other public place shall be liable for damage to publicly owned trees as follows: 
(1)  The damage to public-owned trees shall be determined by reference to the guidelines of the 1992 edition of the Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Shrubs, and Other Plants-A Guide to the Methods and Procedures for Appraising Amenity Plants. Said 1992 edition is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated in this Code as if fully set out in this section. An official copy of said 1992 edition, including a certificate by the city clerk as to its adoption and effective date, is on file in the office of the clerk. Copies of said edition adopted by this section shall be kept available at the office of the city clerk for public inspection and for sale at cost to the public. A copy of said 1992 edition, as adopted, shall be furnished at the municipal library and University of Northern Iowa Library. 
(2)  Trees less than breast height (4.5 feet) will be calipered one foot aboveground. The city reserves the right to use nursery replacement costs as a basis of valuation of trees up to five inches in diameter. 
(3)  The total amount of damages will be deducted from the final payment owing to the contractor or builder. All damaged or destroyed trees will remain the property of the city. 
(c)  Treatment of damaged trees. In addition to the payment for damages required under subsection (b) of this section, all trees which have been damaged shall be repaired by a qualified tree surgeon, to be hired at the expense of the contractor or builder. Repair shall include shaping of wounds, removal of badly damaged limbs and sealing of all wounds and cuts with an approved tree dressing. 
(d)  Other landscape damage. For damage to shrubbery and other vegetation and ground covers, the valuation of damages will be based on the replacement and restoration of costs. 
(e)  Shade tree evaluation formula. The International Shade Tree Conference has established a shade tree evaluation formula which can be used as an additional guide for determining the value of damaged or destroyed trees. 
(Code 2017, § 20-256; Ord. No. 2181, § 4, 3-24-1997) 
Sec. 17-240. - Trees and shrubs overhanging street or sidewalk. 
(a)  Declaration of nuisance. Any tree or shrub or part thereof located on, overhanging or interfering with the use of any street, park or other public place in the city that, in the opinion of the council or the arborist supervisor, endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public, shall be declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  Trees and shrubs at a certain height. Any tree or shrub or part thereof overhanging any sidewalk and closer than ten feet above such sidewalk, whether on public or private property, and any or all trees or shrubs overhanging any street or roadway at a height less than 16 feet over such street or roadway, are hereby declared public nuisances and may be abated as provided in this section. 
(c)  Abatement. The owner shall be given not less than ten days' notice in writing or by publication in a local newspaper of the existence of the nuisance, and shall be given no less than ten days from the date of such notice for its correction or removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allotted, the arborist supervisor shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost shall be assessed as provided by law. However, if such tree is considered a public nuisance and emergency measures must be taken prior to ten days' notice, then in such event personal service of notice upon the owner to immediately correct and remove the nuisance shall be permitted, and, upon failure of the owner to comply forthwith, the arborist supervisor shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost assessed as provided by law. 
(Code 2017, § 20-257) 
Sec. 17-241. - Street tree planting regulations. 
    Trees to be planted in street tree right-of-way must conform to categories A or B and/or C, said categories to be adopted and/or amended by resolution adopted by the city council. Street tree planting regulations are as follows: 
(1)  Trees should be spaced so there will be little or no interference with their full development. The minimum spacing shall be 20 feet for category A; 30 feet for category B; 50 feet for category C measured from center on each street tree. 
(2)  At least nine square feet of ground shall be maintained for each street tree and no impervious material shall be placed nearer than 24 inches to the trunk of the tree. 
(3)  No street tree shall be planted nearer than 21/2 feet to the curb and sidewalk line and centered in parking eight feet and less in width. Plantings in parkings over eight feet in width shall be planted four feet from the edge of the sidewalk. 
(4)  No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet from the radius of curb at intersections or closer than ten feet to the edge of a driveway. 
(5)  The minimum spacing from a light standard or transmission pole shall be ten feet for category A; 20 feet for category B; 30 feet for category C measured from center of street tree to standard or pole. 
(6)  Category A and B trees may be used in category C plantings as can category A be planted in category B. 
(7)  As new tree species are introduced, they will be added to these lists. 
(Code 2017, § 20-257.1; Ord. No. 2181, § 5, 3-24-1997) 
Sec. 17-242. - Diseased or infected trees declared nuisance. 
    Any tree infected with Dutch elm disease or other damaging or infectious and spreading disease is a menace to safety and to the welfare of the residents of the city and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement as such. 
(Code 2017, § 20-258) 
Sec. 17-243. - Maintenance of infected trees prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or other person in control of any lot or tract of land situated within the city to knowingly permit or maintain a tree thereon which is infected with Dutch elm disease or other damaging or infectious disease. 
(Code 2017, § 20-259) 
Sec. 17-244. - Disposal of Elmwood bark. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any Elmwood to remain with the bark not removed and disposed of as directed by the arborist supervisor. 
(Code 2017, § 20-260) 
Sec. 17-245. - Failure to destroy infected trees or wood; destruction by city. 
(a)  Each day a nuisance shall continue, after notice from the operations and maintenance division manager or his designee to abate the nuisance within the period set forth in subsection (b) of this section, shall constitute a separate offense. Such notice shall be given and shall be deemed complete when delivered to such owner, lessee or other person in control of such lot or tract of land, or by sending such notice to the owner, lessee or other person in control of such lot or tract of land, by the United States registered mail, addressed to the owner, lessee or other person in control of such lot or tract of land at his last known address. 
(b)  If an owner, lessee or other person in control of a lot or tract of land upon which a nuisance exists fails to remove or destroy a tree or wood infected with Dutch elm disease or other disease or Elmwood with bark not removed, and the roots thereof, as directed by the operations and maintenance division manager, within ten days after notice from the operations and maintenance division manager to do so, the operations and maintenance division manager, without prejudice to the penalty provided in this article, shall affect removal at the expense of such person. The cost thereof shall be assessed in accordance with Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(b), (3)(h). 
(Code 2017, § 20-261; Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-246. - Noxious weeds prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession or control of any land within the city to maintain, cause or permit a nuisance as defined in this section to exist upon such land. For purposes of this section, the term "nuisance" means noxious weeds, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Those defined in Iowa Code § 317.1A; 
(2)  Grass and weeds exceeding eight inches in height; 
(3)  Volunteer trees, bushes or other vegetation that have not been intentionally planted or which have spread through natural means into unsuitable or unsightly areas, such as in cracks or crevices along building foundations, driveways, retaining walls, sidewalks, or other similar improvements. 
(b)  Plantings in the following areas located on private property are hereby declared not to be a nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Prairie grass areas, wildflower planting areas, natural reserve and preserve areas, urban woodlots, wildlife refuge and conservation areas, wetlands and natural waterways, all as recognized and identified by a governmental agency, provided that setbacks shall be required as described in section 19-48. 
(2)  Land zoned agricultural under the zoning chapter, steep slopes, wooded areas, ravines and lots of the city exceeding three acres in size. 
(3)  Other conservation or natural areas deemed appropriate by the city council after consultation with the director of public works or designee. 
(Code 2017, § 20-262; Ord. No. 2653, § 1, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 2883, § 1, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2910, 9-5-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-247. - Failure to destroy noxious weeds; right to hearing; destruction by city. 
(a)  If the owner or person in the possession or control of any land within the city fails or refuses to cut or otherwise destroy the grass, vines, bushes or weeds declared a nuisance as provided in section 17-246 within seven days after notice in writing has been given to such owner and person in possession or control of land within the city, the owner or the person in possession or control of such land shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and punished accordingly. Such written notice to cut or otherwise destroy the vegetation declared a nuisance in this article shall be sent by ordinary mail to the owner of record and to the person in possession or control of the land in question. Such seven-day period to cut or otherwise destroy shall be deemed to commence on the date of mailing of the written notice. 
(b)  Each owner and each person in possession or control of any land within the city may request a hearing with the department of public works of the city to consider any objections and protests to the proposed cutting or otherwise destroying of the vegetation declared in this article to be a nuisance. The operations and maintenance division manager, acting under the direction of the director of public works, shall have full power and authority to enter upon any land within the city for the purpose of destroying a nuisance. The operations and maintenance division manager shall coordinate the removal of the nuisance with the public works director if necessary. Such entry may be made without the consent of the landowner or person in possession or control of the land. 
(c)  The actual cost and expense of cutting or otherwise destroying the vegetation, together with the cost of serving of notice, the cost of special meetings or proceedings, if any, and the cost of supervision and administration, shall be recovered by an assessment against the tract of land on which the vegetation was growing. 
(Code 2017, § 20-263; Ord. No. 2652, § 1, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 2883, § 2, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2907, 7-10-2017; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 17-248-17-272. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ARTIFICIAL LAKES AND RECREATIONAL TRAILS 

Sec. 17-273. - Prohibited operation on artificial lakes. 
    No person shall, on an artificial lake within the city: 
(1)  Operate a vessel at more than a no-wake speed. 
(2)  Operate a vessel between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., daily. 
(Code 2017, § 20-277; Ord. No. 2060, § 1, 5-26-1994) 
Sec. 17-274. - Fishing regulations. 
    The fishing regulations enforced on artificial lakes in the city shall be those fishing regulations set by the natural resource commission of the state as provided in state law and under the rules of said commission adopted under Iowa Code ch. 17A. No person shall violate said fishing regulations. 
(Code 2017, § 20-278; Ord. No. 2060, § 1, 5-26-1994) 
Sec. 17-275. - Recreational trails. 
    The following rules and regulations apply to all recreational trails within the city: 
(1)  Recreational trails shall be used and classified as trails for: foot traffic, bicycling, cross-country skiing, roller-blading and other special usage authorized by permit from the director of municipal operations and programs or designee. 
(2)  The use of motorized vehicles and snowmobiles is prohibited on recreational trails within the city, except for authorized emergency and maintenance vehicles. 
(3)  No person shall permit or allow a horse under their control to be on any recreational trail within the city. No person shall permit or allow a dog on said recreational trail unless said dog is under the control of said person and is on a leash of six feet or less in length. Said person shall pick up and dispose of any feces from the dog under that person's control. For the purposes of this article, the term "horse" means any equine animal including horses, mules, burros, donkeys, and all lamas or alpaca like animals. The term "dog" means all members of the canine species, male or female, whether altered or not. 
(4)  Special permits may be issued by the director of public works or designee for special events on specific dates utilizing golf carts or similar motorized transportation upon a recreational trail for elderly and/or persons with a disability. 
(Code 2017, § 20-279; Ord. No. 2060, § 1, 5-26-1994; Ord. No. 2941, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 17-276-17-298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VISITORS AND TOURISM BOARD 

Sec. 17-299. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city a city visitors and tourism board. 
(Code 2017, § 20-321; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-300. - Membership of board; appointment of members. 
(a)  The city visitors and tourism board shall be composed of nine members. 
(b)  The members shall be qualified by general knowledge or experience in matters related to visitors and tourism programs. 
(c)  Members shall not hold any elective position in the city. 
(d)  The members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city council. 
(e)  An effort shall be made to appoint members to the board who represent various segments of the hospitality industry, including, festivals, special events, attractions, lodging, dining, the University of Northern Iowa, city businesses, and the community at-large while making a good faith effort to maintain gender equity as required by state law. 
(f)  In so far as reasonably practicable, appointees for membership on the board shall be residents of the city, or, if that is not reasonably practicable, shall have a place of employment in the city. Appointees who are neither residents of the city nor who have a place of employment in the city may be eligible for appointment to the board upon a finding of the unavailability of qualified applicants, as determined by the mayor. Any person who is a member of the board on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived who does not meet the qualifications for membership set forth herein shall continue to be eligible to serve as a member of the board until both the expiration of his current term and the member's nonreappointment by the mayor to an additional term. 
(Code 2017, § 20-322; Ord. No. 2820, § 1, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-301. - Term of office of board members. 
    The term of office of the members of the city visitors and tourism board shall be three years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of any board member. 
(Code 2017, § 20-323; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-302. - Compensation of members of board. 
    All members of the city visitors and tourism board shall serve without compensation, except for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 20-324; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-303. - Absence of members from board meetings. 
    Members of the city visitors and tourism board absent from three consecutive meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city, without due explanation of absence, shall surrender their office. The mayor shall then fill the vacant position, with city council approval. 
(Code 2017, § 20-325; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-304. - Director of community development to serve as ex-officio member of board. 
    The director of community development shall serve as an ex-officio member of the city visitors and tourism board, without voting privileges. 
(Code 2017, § 20-326; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-305. - Powers and duties of board. 
    The city visitors and tourism board shall have and possess the following powers and duties and such other powers as may be incidental thereto as necessary, and such other powers as may be expressly conferred upon it by law: 
(1)  To adopt rules and regulations governing the board's organization and procedure as may be deemed necessary. All bylaws, rules or regulations shall be consistent with state, federal and local statutes and shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(2)  To develop and provide visitors and tourism programs for visitors to the city based on the level of financial support provided by the city council and other entities. 
(3)  To enhance the economic development of the city by promoting the city as a visitors destination and as a viable setting to hold meetings, conventions, special events and community attractions. 
(4)  To determine the operations and programming policy for visitors and tourism events, that will be administered by the department of community development through the manager of visitors and tourism/cultural programs division. 
(5)  To participate, if requested by the director of community development, in the selection process of the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division manager. 
(6)  Jointly with the director of municipal operations and programs, to evaluate the performance of the manager of visitors and tourism/cultural programs division on a yearly basis. The board may recommend to the director that the manager of visitors and tourism/cultural programs division be dismissed for cause, incompetency, inattention to duties or failure to provide satisfactory program leadership, following a vote of two-thirds of the board members and compliance with the city's personnel policy and procedures. 
(7)  To serve as the city's review agency and coordinator of all outside agency and special group requests for city financial support related to the use of hotel/motel tax proceeds to support visitors and tourism services. 
(8)  To recommend to the city council the approval of grants, projects or programs when necessary and timely as a part of the city's annual budget process. 
(9)  To recommend to the city council for its approval guidelines and policies related to grant application processes, procedures and authorizations. 
(10)  To recommend to the city council expenditures by the community development department on behalf of the city and board in conformance with the board's program policies. 
(Code 2017, § 20-327; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-306. - Appropriation of funds for visitors and tourism services and programs. 
    The city council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the city's share of state hotel/motel tax receipts for the payment of a portion of the expense of operating the visitors and tourism/cultural programs division and programs. 
(Code 2017, § 20-328; Ord. No. 2823, § 3, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 17-307-17-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMUNITY CENTER AND SENIOR SERVICES BOARD 

Sec. 17-331. - Created. 
    There is hereby established in the city a city community center and senior services board. 
(Code 2017, § 20-329; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-332. - Membership of board; appointment of members. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, the city community center and senior services board shall be composed of five members, who shall be citizens of the city. 
(b)  The members shall be qualified by general knowledge or experience in matters related to senior activities and community social programs. 
(c)  Members shall not hold any elective position in the city. 
(d)  The members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city council. 
(e)  In order for the board to reduce to five members, members shall not be reappointed as their terms expire, except to achieve gender balance. 
(Code 2017, § 20-330; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-333. - Term of office of board members. 
    The term of office of the members of the city community center and senior services board shall be three years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of any board member. 
(Code 2017, § 20-331; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-334. - Compensation of members of board. 
    All members of the city community center and senior services board shall serve without compensation, except for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 20-332; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-335. - Absence of members from board meetings. 
    Members of the city community center and senior services board leaving their residence in the city, or absent from three consecutive meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city, without due explanation of absence, shall surrender their office. The mayor shall then fill the vacant position, with city council approval. 
(Code 2017, § 20-333; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-336. - Ex officio members of board. 
    The executive director of Community Main Street, Inc., a state nonprofit corporation, the executive director of Northeast Iowa Area Agency on Aging, a state nonprofit corporation, and the director of finance and business operations shall serve as ex-officio members of the city community center and senior services board, without voting privileges. 
(Code 2017, § 20-334; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Sec. 17-337. - Powers and duties of board. 
    The city community center and senior services board shall have and possess the following powers and duties and such other powers as may be incidental thereto as necessary, and such other powers as may be expressly conferred upon it by law: 
(1)  To adopt rules and regulations governing the board's organization and procedure as may be deemed necessary. All bylaws, rules or regulations shall be consistent with state, federal and local statutes and shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(2)  To recommend to the community center/senior services section of the department of finance and business operations community center and senior services programs for senior citizens of the city based on the level of financial support provided by the city council and other entities. 
(3)  Along with the library director, the director of finance and business operations and the city council, determine the operations and programming policy for community center and senior events, which will be administered by the department of finance and business operations through the community center and senior services section. 
(4)  Jointly, if requested by the director of finance and business operations, to evaluate the performance of the community center and senior services section on a yearly basis. 
(5)  To recommend to the city council the approval of grants, projects or programs when necessary and timely as a part of the city's annual budget process for senior services or community center improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 20-335; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2943, § 4, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 17-338. - Appropriation of funds for community center and senior services programs. 
    The city council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the general fund for the payment of a portion of the expense of operating the city's community center and the city's community center/senior services section and programs. 
(Code 2017, § 20-336; Ord. No. 2823, § 4, 6-23-2014) 
Secs. 17-339-17-364. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC NATURAL RESERVE AREAS 

Sec. 17-365. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles. 
    Other transportation device means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon or over the surface of the ground, including, but not limited to, bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller blades, carriages, buggies, cross-country skis, sleds, toboggans, and snow boards. 
    Public natural reserve area means any public ground or city-owned land located within the city which has been designated as a public natural reserve by formal action of the city council, including the publicly owned land locally known as Cedar Ridge Reserve, legally described in city council Resolution No. 7677 adopted July 11, 1988. 
(Code 2017, § 20-351; Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. No. 2359, § 1, 11-26-2001) 
Sec. 17-366. - Prohibited acts. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall use or operate any motor vehicle or use or operate any other transportation device of any kind whatsoever on or in any public natural reserve area within the city, except for city maintenance vehicles authorized by the director of municipal operations and programs or his designee. 
(Code 2017, § 20-352; Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. No. 2359, § 2, 11-26-2001) 
Sec. 17-367. - Other provisions applicable to the areas. 
(a)  The provisions of each of the following sections of this Code are hereby declared applicable to all public natural reserve areas within the city, and are incorporated into this section by this reference: 
(1)  Section 17-199, miscellaneous prohibited acts; 
(2)  Section 17-201, camping; and 
(3)  Section 17-202, hunting, trapping and fishing. 
(b)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of section 17-199, 17-201 or 17-202 within any public natural reserve area in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 20-353; Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 17-368. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, in addition to any other remedy, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 20-354; Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 17-369. - Docks and other structures. 
(a)  No dock or obstruction of any nature shall be placed in the water without first obtaining a permit from the state natural resources commission. 
(b)  Applications for dock permits and buoy permits shall be made on forms provided by the state natural resources commission for that purpose. 
(c)  Every dock or other structure shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements on the permit issued by the state natural resources commission, and shall be removed from the water on or before December 15 of each year. 
(Code 2017, § 9-40) 
Chapter 18 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 18-19. - Created. 
    The city planning and zoning commission is hereby created. 
(Code 2017, § 21-26) 
Sec. 18-20. - Membership; appointment of members. 
(a)  The city planning and zoning commission shall be composed of nine members, who shall be citizens of the city. 
(b)  The members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of city planning and zoning. 
(c)  None of the members shall hold any elective position in the city. 
(d)  The members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 21-27; Ord. No. 2073, § 1, 11-28-1994) 
Sec. 18-21. - Term of office; vacancies. 
(a)  The term of office of the members of the city planning and zoning commission shall be five years, except that the members first named shall hold office for such terms, not exceeding five years, that the terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. 
(b)  Any vacancy occurring on the commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 21-28) 
Sec. 18-22. - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation, except for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 21-29) 
Sec. 18-23. - Powers and duties. 
    The city planning and zoning commission shall have and possess the following powers and duties and such other powers as may be incidental to the successful carrying out of the powers vested in it in this section or such as may be expressly conferred upon it by law: 
(1)  The commission shall make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any portion of the city and of any land outside thereof which, in the opinion of the commission, bears relation to a comprehensive plan, and shall submit such plans to the council with its studies and recommendations, and it may publish the plans. 
(2)  The commission shall prepare a comprehensive plan regarding the height, number of stories and size of buildings and structures, the percentage of ground that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes, and shall prepare preliminary reports and hold public meetings and hearings and submit final reports thereon and recommendations to the council, and shall, further, recommend to the council from time to time, as conditions may require, amendments, supplements, changes or modifications in any comprehensive plan prepared by the commission. 
(3)  All plans, plats or replats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land in the city or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other portions of the subdivision or resubdivision intended to be dedicated to the public in the city, and all proposals for the vacation of a street or partial vacation of a street, alley or public ground, shall first be submitted to the commission, and its recommendations obtained before approval by the city council. 
(4)  No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, trafficway, riverfront or other public improvement affecting the city plan shall be finally approved by the city, or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the commission and the commission shall have had 60 days within which to file its recommendations thereon. 
(5)  For the purpose of making a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive studies of the present conditions and future growth of the city, with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. Before adopting a comprehensive plan or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than ten and not more than 20 days before the hearing. The adopting of the plan or part or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the members of the commission. When such comprehensive plan has been adopted as provided for in this subsection, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without such proposed change being first referred to the commission for its recommendation. If the commission disapproves the proposed change, it may be adopted by the city council by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of all the members of such council. 
(6)  The commission may employ such technical assistance as it deems necessary, subject to budgetary limitations. Such assistance may be in the form of secretarial, consultant or legal service. The commission should, as a matter of policy, invite such assistants, the zoning administrator and the city engineer, or their representatives, to regularly attend meetings of the commission and to offer information or make suggestions regarding items under consideration. 
(7)  The city council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the general funds for the payment of the expense of the commission. The commission shall have full, complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the city all sums of money so appropriated. 
(8)  The commission, each year, shall make a report to the mayor and city council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and disbursements and the progress of its work for the preceding fiscal year. 
(9)  The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as may be deemed necessary. 
(10)  The commission shall have all other powers and duties providing for planning and zoning commissions in Iowa Code ch. 414. 
(Code 2017, § 21-30) 
Chapter 19 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Obedience to persons entrusted with care of streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to disobey or disregard the lawful commands or directions of any person in charge of work or repair or connected with such work or repair on any street with respect to the care of the street, the removal of obstructions and the general convenience of traffic and travel. 
(Code 2017, § 23-1) 
Sec. 19-2. - Street meetings; parades. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold public meetings of any character or description upon any street of the city, or in any public park thereof under the jurisdiction of the city, without a permit being first secured as set forth in this section, or for any person to congregate about or upon any street of the city so as to obstruct the streets of the city, or for any person to parade or march upon the streets of the city without a permit being first secured as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Public meetings may be held on the streets of the city and in public parks, and parades or marches may be held upon the streets of the city by a person first obtaining from the council of the city a written permit, which permit in the case of public meetings shall designate the character of such meeting, the place where such meeting is to be held and the person under whose charge the meeting is to be held. In the case of parades or marches, the permit shall state the time, manner and proposed route of such parade and under whose charge the parade or march is being conducted. No such meetings, parades or marches shall be held in a manner or way calculated to obstruct or interfere with public travel on the streets of the city or with free egress from city fire stations. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section, or who holds, conducts, manages, directs or has charge of a public meeting, parade or march otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the written permit issued as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 23-3) 
Sec. 19-3. - Use of barbed wire on street. 
(a)  The use of barbed wire on any property where such wire abuts any street or on the right-of-way of any street within the corporate limits of the city is hereby prohibited, and it is hereby made the duty of the operations and maintenance manager to remove any barbed wire so used on private property within the corporate limits of the city after first giving the owner or person occupying the premises 24 hours' notice to remove the same; provided, however, that, where such barbed wire is on the right-of-way of any street, the same may be removed by the manager without notice. 
(b)  Any person failing, refusing or neglecting to remove any such barbed wire, when notified to do so by the operations and maintenance manager within 24 hours after such notice, or any person who shall use barbed wire in violation of the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 23-4) 
Sec. 19-4. - Clearing of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner to keep sidewalks abutting the property clear of the natural accumulations of snow or ice. If the owner fails to do so within a reasonable time, the operations and maintenance manager may have the natural accumulations of snow or ice removed without notice to the property owner. The manager shall give the council an itemized and verified statement of the costs and a legal description of the property. The costs shall be assessed against the property as taxes. 
(Code 2017, § 23-5) 
Sec. 19-5. - Depositing gasoline, oil, etc., on paved streets. 
    No person shall allow any gasoline, kerosene or oil of any character to be deposited upon any pavement or to drip from any wagon, tank or vessel upon any pavement within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 23-7) 
Sec. 19-6. - Depositing dirt, ashes or rubbish on paved streets. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any dirt, ashes or rubbish of any kind or character on any paved street within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 23-8) 
Sec. 19-7. - Cleanup of glass and other material on removal of wrecked vehicle from street. 
    Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 23-9) 
Sec. 19-8. - Deposit of injurious material on street. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street in the city any glass, bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal or any other debris. No substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon a street shall be thrown or deposited by any person upon such street. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any destructive or injurious materials and other materials as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed. 
(Code 2017, § 23-10) 
Sec. 19-9. - Sweeping refuse or waste into street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any business house or firm to sweep refuse or waste material of any kind into the street. 
(Code 2017, § 23-11) 
Sec. 19-10. - Animals on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive any animal on the streets of the city, unless properly harnessed and ridden, driven or led so as to be under the full control of the person so riding, driving or leading such animal; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent the transporting of animals in vehicles over the public streets of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave any horses or livestock unattended on the streets of the city. 
(c)  All provisions of chapter 23 shall, when applicable, apply to animals ridden, driven or led on the streets of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 23-12) 
Sec. 19-11. - Depositing snow or ice upon streets, sidewalks or municipal parking lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any accumulations of snow or ice upon the traveled portion of any street or highway, or upon any public sidewalk, or upon any municipally owned or leased parking lot, anywhere within the city. Any person violating this section shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 23-13; Ord. No. 2077, 11-14-1994) 
Sec. 19-12. - Camping on public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Camp or camping means residing in or using city-owned property for night-time living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, making preparations to sleep overnight, including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping; erecting, maintaining or occupying any structure with natural or artificial material, including a building or tent, or living in a parked camper, trailer, motor home, motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, or city-owned property. 
(b)  Unlawful camping. Except as otherwise provided in section 17-201 with respect to city parks, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp on any city-owned property, including public street rights-of-way, public sidewalks, public parks, or any other publicly-owned or maintained area or facilities; and no person shall set up a tent, shack, or any other shelter or structure on, nor park a camper, trailer, motor home, or any other vehicle for the purpose of sleeping or camping on, any city-owned property, including public street rights-of-way, public sidewalks, public parks, or any other publicly-owned or maintained area or facilities. 
(Code 2017, § 23-14; Ord. No. 2522, § 1, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 19-13. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 23-15; Ord. No. 2522, § 2, 6-13-2005) 
Secs. 19-14-19-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKINGS 

Sec. 19-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    The parking means all that area between the curb line and the property line. 
(Code 2017, § 23-36) 
Sec. 19-46. - Rights of city. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be held or construed to prevent or prohibit the city from taking, using or occupying the space upon which street lawns are constructed, or upon which trees, shrubberies, etc., are planted, for any proper purpose which shall in the judgment of the council of the city be deemed necessary or advisable. 
(Code 2017, § 23-37) 
Sec. 19-47. - Plantings by property owners or parties in possession. 
(a)  All owners or parties in possession of lots or parcels of ground in the city are hereby granted the right to construct and maintain lawns or grass plots at the front or sides of their lots or parcels of ground that abut any street in the city in the area between the curb line and the property line, and to ornament said area with shade or ornamental trees, plants and shrubbery, provided said trees, plants and shrubbery do not create a safety hazard or interfere with public utility infrastructure located in said area, are not prohibited by section 17-235, meet all the requirements of sections 17-241 and 17-246, and setbacks are maintained as set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section: 
(b)  For plantings other than trees in the area between the curb line and the property line, the boundary of the planting area shall be a minimum of 18 inches from any adjacent street, curb, public sidewalk, alleyway or other similar throughway; and shall be defined with a turf grass mow strip that will be maintained in accordance with this Code. Such plantings shall not overhang across the public sidewalk or public street or alleyway. 
(c)  Sight areas for plantings, other than trees, in the area between the curb line and the property line are required to be maintained as follows: 
(1)  Street corners or curves. The clear vision of sight area required to be maintained at street corners or curves is that sight area formed by measuring 30 feet in length in perpendicular directions beginning at the intersection of the abutting property owner's lot lines nearest the public right-of-way, or extensions thereof in the case of a curve, with the inside boundary formed by a straight line connecting the end points of the two 30 foot lines, and the outside boundary formed by perpendicular lines extending from the end points of the two 30 foot lines to the nearest curb lines of the adjoining street or streets, with those two lines connected by another line running along the nearest curb line. Plantings in this area shall be no taller than 24 inches from natural grade. Refer to figure 1. 

(2)  Accessways, driveways and alleyways. The clear vision of sight areas required to be maintained at property located at accessways, driveways or alleyways are those sight areas formed on both sides of the accessway, driveway or alleyway, by measuring ten feet in length in perpendicular directions beginning at the intersection of the abutting property owner's lot line nearest the public right-of-way, and the nearest edge of the accessway, driveway or alleyway, with the inside boundary formed by a straight line connecting the end points of the two ten foot lines, and the outside boundary formed by perpendicular lines extending from the end points of the two ten foot lines to the nearest curb line of the adjoining street, with those two lines connected by another line running along the nearest curb line. Plantings in this area shall be no taller than 24 inches from natural grade. Refer to figure 2. 

(d)  Sight areas for plantings, other than trees, on private property are required to be maintained as follows: 
(1)  Street corners or curves. The clear vision of sight area required to be maintained at private property located at a street corner or curve is that sight triangle area formed by measuring 30 feet in length in perpendicular directions beginning at the intersection of the adjoining property owner's lot lines nearest to the public right-of-way, or extensions thereof in the case of a curve, with the inside boundary formed by a straight line connecting the endpoints of the two 30 foot lines. Plantings in this area shall be no taller than 24 inches from natural grade. Refer to figure 3. 

(2)  Accessways, driveways and alleyways. The clear vision of sight area required to be maintained at private property located at accessways, driveways and alleyways is that sight triangle area formed on both sides of the accessway, driveway or alleyway, by measuring ten feet in perpendicular directions beginning at the intersection of the abutting owner's lot line nearest the public right-of-way and the nearest edge of the accessway, driveway or alleyway, with the inside boundary formed by a straight line connecting the end points of the two ten foot lines. Plantings in this area shall be no taller than 24 inches from natural grade. Refer to figure 4. 

(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or party in possession of lots or parcels of ground in the city to fail to keep in good order or to maintain the area between the curb line and the property line abutting their property including keeping said area free of holes, pitfalls, stumps of trees, fences, brick, stone, cement or other monument-type mail boxes, stakes, posts or rods to which a metal, plastic or similar receptacle designed to hold newspapers are affixed, private irrigation or sprinkler systems, retaining walls, landscaping brick, block, stone, timber or other similar material, or any other similar obstructions. In the event plant material described in subsection (a) of this section or any of the obstructions described in this subsection are damaged or destroyed by the city, its employees, agents or contractors, in the course of street maintenance, including snow removal, street sweeping, street cleaning, and other similar work, or any repair, replacement, construction or reconstruction of city streets, subdrains, storm sewer pipes, conduits or other similar structures, or other city work within the public right-of-way, including the area between the curb line and the abutting private property line, the city, its employees, agents and contractors shall have no liability to the private property owner or party in possession of the property adjacent to which such obstructions or plant material are located, for any damage to or destruction of such obstructions or plant material. The owner or party in possession of the land referred to above shall comply with the city ordinances pertaining to the trimming of trees, and other ordinances affecting the maintenance of said area of ground lying between the curb line and the property line abutting their property. 
(f)  No private property owner, or party in possession of such property, or any other person or entity whatsoever, shall engage in any excavation within the city right-of-way adjacent to such private property, without first having provided notice of the planned excavation to the statewide notification center established in Iowa Code § 480.3, in accordance with the requirements of Iowa Code ch. 480, to initiate determination of the location of underground facilities that may be located within the public right-of-way. Any private property owner, or party in possession of such property, or any other person or entity whatsoever, or an agent or contractor of such owner or party in possession, that engages in any excavation within the public right-of-way in the city without complying with the notification provisions of Iowa Code ch. 480, shall be liable to the owner of the underground facilities located in the public right-of-way for any damages caused to such facilities by any such excavation. For purposes of this section, the term "excavation," shall include any stake, post or rod that is driven into the ground to any depth within the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Plantings on private property, other than trees and shrubs, shall not overhang onto neighboring properties and shall not overhang across the public sidewalk or public street or alleyway. 
(h)  The term "curb line," for the purpose of this section, means either the actual cement curb or edge of the traveled portion of a street. 
(Code 2017, § 23-38; Ord. No. 2654, § 1, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 2658, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2911, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 19-48. - Injuring parkings, ornamentations or fixtures. 
    No person shall willfully deface, trample down, tear up, take away or in any way injure any parkings in the city, whether the parkings are in the street or along the sides thereof, or the grass, shrubs, trees, bushes or other ornamentations or fixtures thereon, either by injuring, defacing or interfering with the parkings, trees, etc., or by throwing or depositing upon the parkings any rubbish, dirt or other material whatsoever. 
(Code 2017, § 23-39) 
Secs. 19-49-19-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-70. - Unlawful placement upon streets and sidewalks; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed over, into or upon any of the public streets and sidewalks of the city any obstruction whatsoever, including any building, fence, structure, projection, lumber, timber, brick, stone or other material, coal, wood, goods, wares or merchandise, rubbish, manure, refuse, produce or other commodities, except for the purpose of immediate transfer, or for immediate construction or lawful repair of such street or sidewalk, or except as may be excepted in this article or in other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 23-61) 
Sec. 19-71. - Lights and barriers. 
    Any person who places any obstruction in any public street in the city, whether by placing building material, leaving vehicles loaded or unloaded, or leaving anything which amounts to an obstruction or any object dangerous to public travel shall properly guard the obstruction by placing a suitable barrier around the obstruction, and, in every case, at night, or between sunset and sunrise, shall place at each end and at the outer limits of each obstruction a blinking amber light. Such light shall be displayed between the hours of sunset and sunrise of every day in which such obstruction remains in any such street, and all building permits shall require such lighting. 
(Code 2017, § 23-62) 
Sec. 19-72. - Obstruction by animal or vehicle. 
(a)  Any person who shall drive, ride or place any horse or other animal or drive, place or ride any automobile or other vehicle on any sidewalk, or tether any animal on the streets, parkings or public grounds of the city or on vacant lots, except with the consent of the owner or agent thereof, or leave any automobile or other vehicle standing on or across any street in the city so as unreasonably to obstruct the street, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to prevent any person from leading, driving or riding any animal or vehicle, as the case may be, across any sidewalk leading to or from any lot owned by him or his employer, provided he does so in a careful manner. This section shall not be construed to prevent the loading or unloading of goods, merchandise or other things, provided that the walk is not obstructed for an unreasonable length of time, and that the loading or unloading is done in accordance with the ordinances of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prevent farmers and others from hitching animals temporarily to posts set for that purpose. 
(Code 2017, § 23-63) 
Sec. 19-73. - Storage of building materials. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for persons constructing buildings or making improvements permitted by the city ordinances to use a reasonable portion of the street or sidewalk adjacent to such building or improvement for a reasonable length of time, for depositing building materials, subject to the provisions in this Code governing such deposit and use. Such use shall be confined to one-third of the width of any street between the curbs thereof, and shall not continue longer than shall be necessary with reasonable diligence to supply the requirements of such construction and improvement. 
(b)  As a condition precedent therefor, a written permit shall be procured from the director of public works, which permit may provide for the erection and maintenance of a temporary sidewalk by the applicant for the permit as deemed necessary by the director of public works. A suitable roof or covering for the sidewalk shall be provided whenever deemed necessary by the director of public works. The person using such street must keep the gutters therein clear of all obstructions, and must maintain such street and surroundings free from anything dangerous or inconvenient for travel and traffic on account of such construction or improvement. 
(Code 2017, § 23-64; Ord. No. 2941, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 19-74. - Certain commercial use of public sidewalks. 
(a)  Any person may use a maximum of three feet in width of the sidewalk next to and in front of his building in the city for the purpose of displaying samples of goods kept by him for sale, provided that the sidewalk is not less than 12 feet in width, and that nothing is used or set out on the sidewalk for such purposes which might endanger or injure the person or the dress of anyone who might pass on the sidewalk. Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting the storing of goods on sidewalks. 
(b)  Temporary stands may be permitted to be erected on the streets of the city for the sale of goods or merchandise, such permits to be issued by the director of public works in his or her discretion, specifying the location thereof. Such permits shall be subject to revocation at any time, whereupon such stand shall be removed at once from the street. 
(c)  No person shall leave upon any sidewalk in front of his place of business any goods, wares or merchandise which may be left there by the person delivering or receiving the goods to or from the owner or occupant of any place of business for a longer period than six hours, nor occupy therefor a space exceeding three feet of the outer edge of the sidewalk. 
(d)  Tables, chairs and/or benches. Any proprietor of an establishment in those areas of the city that are zoned C-3 Commercial District under the zoning chapter, that sells food for consumption on or off the premises of such establishment may use that portion of the public sidewalk that is immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the side property lines, as extended to the curb, of the public sidewalk, for the purpose of providing tables, chairs and/or benches, for the convenience of and use by such proprietor's customers and others, with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Such proprietor and the proprietor's employees shall not at any time serve any food or beverages to customers or others seated at such tables, chairs and/or benches. 
(2)  There must be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk between any such tables, chairs and/or benches and the curb line of the public street, in order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk, provided, however, that the city may, in granting a permit under this subsection, require more than five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the city, such additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the peculiar circumstances involved with the particular permit application, and the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area in question. 
(3)  No such tables, chairs and/or benches shall be attached in any manner to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk. The proprietor shall be responsible for any damage to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk by said tables, chairs and/or benches. 
(4)  By the closing time of such establishment each night, all such tables, chairs and/or benches shall either: 
a.  Be moved inside the building that is adjacent to such establishment, restoring the public sidewalk to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or 
b.  Be moved to a location on the public sidewalk that directly abuts the front of the building in which such establishment is located, stacked neatly, and secured by means of chains and locks or some other secure means approved by the city director of public works, and not attached in any manner to the public sidewalk or to any public benches. If the proprietor selects the alternative set forth in this subsection, the proprietor shall be responsible for insuring that such tables, chairs and/or benches do not cause damage to persons or property during the hours such establishment is closed. 
(5)  Before a proprietor of such an establishment may lawfully place any tables, chairs and/or benches on the public sidewalk in front of such establishment, the proprietor shall file an application for a permit with the city clerk of the city, on a form furnished by the city clerk, and shall pay a non-refundable annual permit fee therefor, in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. The application and an accompanying diagram or site plan shall show: 
a.  The dimensions, including the length and width, of the area of the public sidewalk that is adjacent to said establishment, as described in this subsection; 
b.  The five-foot area of unobstructed public sidewalk adjacent to the curb which is to be reserved for pedestrian use; 
c.  The approximate location where the tables, chairs and/or benches shall be positioned, and the size and number thereof; 
d.  The location where the tables, chairs and/or benches shall be stored during the hours when such establishment is closed, in the event the establishment elects not to move said items inside the establishment each night; 
e.  The means by which such tables, chairs and/or benches shall be secured, as provided in this subsection; 
f.  A physical description of the tables, chairs and/or benches that will be used; 
g.  A minimum of a two-foot clearance between any such tables, chairs and/or benches and each side of any doorway leading from the establishment onto the public sidewalk; 
h.  Proof that the applicant holds a valid license or permit to operate the establishment; 
i.  The written consent to the filing of said application from the owner of the building in which such establishment is located, if the applicant is not the owner of the building; 
j.  Proof of insurance and compliance with the indemnification requirements set forth in subsection (d)(14) of this section; and 
k.  Such other information and documentation as the city may require in order to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
(6)  The city clerk shall forward a copy of the proprietor's application, together with all other information and documentation required in connection with said application, to the city director of public works, and to either Community Main Street, Inc., for tables, chairs and/or benches to be located in the downtown Parkade area of the city, or to College Hill Partnership, for tables, chairs and/or benches to be located in the College Hill area of the city, for review as to compliance with the requirements of this subsection, compliance with the interests of public safety, health or welfare, and compliance with the aesthetics of the area. If the application is approved by both the city director of public works and either Community Main Street, Inc., or College Hill Partnership, as being in compliance with the requirements of this subsection, the city clerk shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. If the application is not approved by both the city director of public works and either Community Main Street, Inc., or College Hill Partnership, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the reason or reasons the application was not approved. The applicant shall be afforded a period of 30 days from the date of the city clerk's notice, within which to revise the application in an effort to comply with the requirements of this subsection and to correct the reasons for denial thereof. If the revised application is approved by both the director of public works and either Community Main Street, Inc., or College Hill Partnership, the city clerk shall issue a permit. If the revised application is not approved by both the city director of public works and either Community Main Street, Inc., or College Hill Partnership, the city clerk shall not issue a permit. In that event, the applicant shall have a period of 30 days from the date of notice of denial to appeal the denial to the administration committee of the city council. The administration committee shall conduct a hearing on the appeal of the denial of the application within 30 days, shall afford the applicant an opportunity to present information in support of the application, and shall issue a decision to either approve the application, which may be conditioned on one or more requirements, or to deny the application. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. 
(7)  Any permit issued under this subsection (d) of this section shall be issued for a period of one year, and may be renewed upon the filing of an application for renewal of the permit before its expiration by the proprietor, and by payment of the required annual fee. The application for renewal shall state whether or not any of the contents of the original application is being revised, failing which the contents of the application for renewal shall be deemed to be the same as contained in the original application. 
(8)  In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall not thereby be transferred, and the new owner shall be required to file a new and separate application for such a permit, as provided in this subsection. 
(9)  The city reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any other valid public purpose. The city reserves the right to either deny an application which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection, or to require the proprietor to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this subsection if, in the reasonable determination of the city, either granting the permit, or granting it without such additional terms and conditions, would not adequately protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the city or of its residents, or would not adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort or convenience of the city's residents. 
(10)  The city director of public works may order the immediate removal of any or all of a permit holder's tables, chairs and/or benches in the event such items are causing a hazard to public safety, health or welfare, are interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians, are unsightly in appearance or unsanitary in condition, are interfering with removal of ice and snow from the public sidewalks, or for any other reason affecting public safety, health or welfare. 
(11)  A permit issued under this subsection shall be revoked if the proprietor holding the permit does any of the following: 
a.  Fails to maintain a valid license or permit covering the establishment adjacent to where the tables, chairs and/or benches are located; 
b.  Fails to either move the tables, chairs and/or benches inside the establishment, or fails to secure them, as required in subsection (d)(4) of this section; 
c.  Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit; 
d.  Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this subsection, of all other city ordinances, and of state law; or 
e.  Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard, health hazard, or public nuisance under state law or city ordinance, in connection with the placement or use of the tables, chairs and/or benches. Upon the occurrence of any of the events described in this subsection (d)(11) of this section, the city clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment notice of revocation of the permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to place tables, chairs and/or benches on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. 
(12)  The permit holder may appeal the revocation of the permit by written notice of appeal mailed or delivered to the city clerk within ten days of the date of notice of revocation. The administration committee of the city council shall conduct a hearing within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The permit holder shall be notified in writing of the time and place of hearing thereon, and shall be afforded an opportunity to present information to the committee, following which the committee shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing, either affirming or reversing the revocation of the permit. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. During the pendency of the appeal, the permit holder shall not be allowed to place the tables, chairs and/or benches on the public sidewalk. 
(13)  The city shall retain the right to terminate any permit granted under this subsection upon seven days' written notice, and may require the removal of all tables, chairs and/or benches from the public sidewalk adjacent to an establishment, if the city council, after due consideration, determines that there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public right-of-way being occupied by such tables, chairs and/or benches, for a valid public purpose. The determination of the city council shall be final, and there shall be no right of appeal from such decision. 
(14)  A permit shall not be issued under this subsection unless the applicant, at the time of filing an application for issuance or renewal of a permit, furnishes proof of insurance and indemnification of the city that meets the following requirements: 
a.  Commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, with the city to be named as an additional insured on the policy, with an endorsement to be issued as part of the insurance policy, evidencing compliance with this requirement; and 
b.  An indemnification agreement on a form furnished by the city clerk, under which the proprietor agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability for damages arising out of the placement of the tables, chairs and/or benches in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Temporary movable signs on certain public sidewalks. Any proprietor of an establishment in those areas of the city that are zoned C-3 Commercial District under the zoning chapter, may use a portion of the public sidewalk that is immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the side property lines, as extended to the curb, of the public sidewalk, for the purpose of displaying one temporary movable sign for such establishment, with the following restrictions: 
(1)  The portion of the public sidewalk that may be used by the proprietor of such establishment for the display of such signs is the area of the public sidewalk that extends from the storefront of the establishment to the adjacent street curb and between the side property lines of the building in which the establishment is located, as such side property lines are extended to the adjacent street curb. 
(2)  There must nevertheless be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk between such storefront and the edge of the sign closest to the storefront, or between the edge of the sign closest to the street and the inside edge of the street curb, in order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk, provided, however, that the city may, in granting a permit under this subsection, require more than five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the city, such additional clearance is necessary in the interest of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the peculiar circumstances involved with the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area in question; and provided, further, that all such temporary signs must in all events maintain at least a two-foot setback from the outside edge of said sign to the inside edge of the street curb. 
(3)  No such temporary movable sign shall be attached in any manner to the public sidewalk, or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk, such as tables, chairs, or other fixtures, or on top of any temporary elevations such as fill material or snowbanks. 
(4)  No such temporary sign shall exceed 2.5 feet in width and five feet in height in outer frame measurements, with such height measured from the natural grade of the sidewalk surface adjacent to such establishment. No more than one such sign may be placed in front of any single store front. All such signs must be well-maintained and kept in good repair. 
(5)  By the closing time of such establishment each day, each such sign shall be moved inside the building adjacent to which the sign is displayed, restoring the public sidewalk to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway. 
(6)  Before the proprietor of any such an establishment may lawfully place any such temporary sign on the public sidewalk in front of such establishment, the proprietor shall file an application for a permit with the city clerk of the city, on a form furnished by the city clerk, and shall pay a nonrefundable annual permit fee therefor, in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. The application and an accompanying diagram or site plan shall show: 
a.  The dimensions, including the length and width, of the public sidewalk that is adjacent to said establishment, as described in this subsection; 
b.  The five-foot area of unobstructed public sidewalk which is to be reserved for pedestrian use, and the two-foot setback from the outside edge of said sign to the inside edge of the street curb; 
c.  The approximate location where the sign shall be positioned, and the size of said sign, including its outer dimensions; 
d.  Proof that the applicant holds a valid license or permit to operate the establishment; 
e.  The written consent to the filing of said application from the owner of the building in which such establishment is located, if the applicant is not the owner of the building; 
f.  Proof of insurance and compliance with the indemnification requirements set forth in subsection (e)(15) of this section; and 
g.  Such other information and documentation as the city may require in order to demonstrate that the proprietor complies with the requirements of this subsection. 
(7)  The city clerk shall forward a copy of the proprietor's application, together with all other information and documentation required in connection with said application, to the city planner for review as to compliance with the requirements of this subsection, and compliance with the interest of public safety, health, or welfare. If the application is approved by the city planner as being in compliance with the requirements of this subsection, the city clerk shall forward the application to the city council. Upon approval by the city council, the city clerk shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. If the application is not approved by the city planner, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the reason or reasons the application was not approved. The applicant shall be afforded a period of 30 days from the date of the city clerk's notice, within which to revise the application in an effort to comply with the requirements of this subsection and to correct the reasons for denial thereof. If the revised application is approved by the city planner, the city clerk shall forward the application to the city council. Upon approval by the city council, the city clerk shall issue a permit. If the revised application is not approved by the city planner, the city clerk shall not issue a permit. In that event, the applicant shall have a period of 30 days from the date of notice of denial to appeal the denial to the administration committee of the city council. The administration committee shall conduct a hearing on the appeal of the denial of the application within 30 days, and shall afford the applicant an opportunity to present information in support of the application, and shall issue a decision to either approve the application, which may be conditioned on one or more requirements, or to deny the application. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. 
(8)  Any permit issued under this subsection shall be issued for a period of one year, and may be renewed upon the filing of an application by the proprietor for renewal of the permit before its expiration, and by payment of the required annual fee. The application for renewal shall state whether or not any of the contents of the original application are being revised, failing which the contents of the application for renewal shall be deemed to be the same as contained in the original application. 
(9)  In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall not thereby be transferred, and the new owner shall be required to file a new and separate application for such a permit, as provided in this subsection. 
(10)  The city reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any other valid public purpose. The city reserves the right to either deny an application which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection, or to require the proprietor to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this subsection if, in the reasonable determination of the city, either granting the permit, or granting it without such additional terms and conditions, would not adequately protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the city or its residents, or would not adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort or convenience of the city's residents. 
(11)  The city planner may order the immediate removal of any such temporary sign in the event such sign is causing a hazard to public safety, health or welfare, is interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians, is unsightly in appearance, is interfering with the removal of ice and snow from the public sidewalks, or for any other reason affecting public safety, health or welfare. 
(12)  A permit issued under this subsection shall be revoked by the city if the proprietor holding the permit does any of the following: 
a.  Fails to maintain a valid license or permit covering the establishment adjacent to which the sign is located; 
b.  Fails to move the sign inside the building by closing time of the establishment as required in this subsection; 
c.  Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit; 
d.  Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this subsection, of all other city ordinances, and of state law; or 
e.  Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard in connection with the placement of the sign. 
Upon occurrence of any of the events described in this subsection, the city clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment seven days' written notice of revocation of the permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to place any such sign on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. 
(13)  The permit holder may appeal the revocation of the permit by written notice of appeal mailed or delivered to the city clerk within ten days of the date of notice of revocation. The administration committee of the city council shall conduct a hearing within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The permit holder shall be notified in writing of the time and place of hearing thereon, and shall be afforded an opportunity to present information to the committee, following which the committee shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing, either affirming or reversing the revocation of the permit. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. During the pendency of the appeal, the permit holder shall not be allowed to place the sign on the public sidewalk. 
(14)  The city shall retain the right to terminate any permit granted under this subsection upon seven days' written notice, and may require the removal of the sign from the public sidewalk adjacent to an establishment, if the city council, after due consideration, determines that there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public right-of-way being occupied by such sign, for a valid public purpose. The determination of the city council shall be final, and there shall be no right of appeal from such decision. 
(15)  A permit for a temporary movable sign shall not be issued under this subsection unless the applicant, at the time of filing an application for issuance or renewal of a permit, furnishes proof of insurance and indemnification of the city that meets the following requirements: 
a.  Commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, with the city to be named as an additional insured on the policy, with an endorsement to be issued as part of the insurance policy, evidencing compliance with this requirement; and 
b.  An indemnification agreement on a form furnished by the city clerk, under which the proprietor agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability for damages arising out of the placement of the temporary movable sign in the public right-of-way. 
(Code 2017, § 23-65; Ord. No. 2141, § 1, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 2578, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2647, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-2008; Ord. No. 2798, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 2941, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 19-75-19-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 19-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words and phrases used in this division are defined by state law, such definitions shall apply to the use of such words and phrases in this division and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that are further defined or are reiterated in this section shall have the meanings set out in this section. 
    Alcoholic beverages means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, walkway, right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian travel that is dedicated to public use and/or publicly owned. 
    Public sidewalk means the improved portion of the public right-of-way lying between the traveled portion of the street and the private property line or building line, which is intended primarily for pedestrian use. 
    Restaurant means a business that serves food to customers and which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service which is open to the public while the kitchen is open; 
(2)  Has a food service menu from which customers may order; 
(3)  Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers; 
(4)  Has a kitchen separate from the bar that contains such food preparation equipment as a stove, exhaust fan, a griddle, a grill or broiler, or a food refrigeration unit with a capacity in excess of 20 cubic feet; 
(5)  Is licensed by the county health department to operate as a restaurant service during at least 60 percent of the hours that the business is open to the public; and 
(6)  Cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop, specialty food shop, lunchroom or tearooms are included. 
    Sidewalk cafe means an outdoor area meeting the requirements of this division that is temporarily situated on a public sidewalk and which is adjacent to and contiguous with any side of a building in which a restaurant is located, and in which area food and beverages are served for consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables within such area. Sidewalk cafes must be situated on the same level as the adjacent sidewalk lying outside the sidewalk cafe. 
    Sidewalk cafe elements means all tables, chairs, fencing, planters and plants, and any other privately owned property comprising the sidewalk cafe, which is approved for use in a sidewalk cafe by this division or in a sidewalk cafe permit. 
    Sidewalk cafe permit means a permit issued by the city for operation of a sidewalk cafe which meets all of the requirements of this division and all other applicable ordinances of the city and all state laws. 
(Code 2017, § 23-66; Ord. No. 2827, § 1, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 19-93. - Use of public sidewalks restricted. 
    The use of the public sidewalks of the city for any commercial or private purpose, including the use thereof for sidewalk cafes, shall be unlawful except as specifically authorized in this division or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 23-67; Ord. No. 2554, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 19-94. - Use of public sidewalks for sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes shall only be permitted in those areas of the city which meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Are within the public right-of-way of the city; 
(2)  Are within those areas of the city that are zoned C-3 Commercial District under the zoning chapter; 
(3)  Are within an area of the public sidewalk where the public right-of-way directly abuts on a private building line; and 
(4)  Meet all of the other requirements of this division. 
(b)  The sidewalk cafe area must be adjacent to and contiguous with one side of the building it serves, and in which a restaurant is located and operating, and may not extend beyond the side property lines of such building as extended to the adjacent street. 
(c)  There must be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk between the boundary of the sidewalk cafe area and the curb line of the public street, free of any lampposts, public benches, planters, trees, tree grates, or other public fixtures located within the public sidewalk, in order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the adjacent public sidewalk; provided, however, that the city may, in granting the sidewalk cafe permit, require more than five feet of unobstructed public sidewalk clearance for any sidewalk cafe if, in the reasonable determination of the city, such additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or welfare, in light of the peculiar circumstances involved with the particular cafe permit application, the configuration of the proposed sidewalk cafe permit, and the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk, parking areas and streets adjacent thereto. 
(d)  The sidewalk cafe area shall maintain a minimum of a two-foot clearance on each side of any doorway leading from the building onto the public sidewalk. 
(e)  Any sidewalk cafe area that serves alcoholic beverages must be situated so that no part of the sidewalk cafe area is less than 300 feet from the boundary of any area of the city that is zoned residential under the zoning chapter. 
(f)  No part of the sidewalk cafe area shall be located within that portion of the public sidewalk lying between the lines formed by the extension of the exterior building lines to the adjacent intersecting streets, or within ten feet of any public alley. 
(g)  The sidewalk cafe area shall be delineated by, and the sidewalk cafe elements divided from, that portion of the adjacent public sidewalk lying outside of the sidewalk cafe area, by a barrier at least three feet in height, consisting of: 
(1)  Fencing or other rigid structure; or 
(2)  Ropes of a design or type approved by the director of public works and the design committee of the respective district. 
(h)  All sidewalk cafe elements must either: 
(1)  Be removed from the public right-of-way within 30 minutes of the closing time of the sidewalk cafe each night, restoring the sidewalk cafe to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or 
(2)  Be orderly secured within 30 minutes after the closing time of the sidewalk cafe each night, by means of chains and locks or some other secure means, in such a way that such cafe elements cannot be used to cause damage to persons or property. If the proprietor attaches any sidewalk cafe elements to approved public property, the proprietor shall be responsible for restoring property to its original condition or condition of suitable agreement with the city, such as seasonal plugs, whenever the elements are removed per subsection (n) of this section. Upon completion of the repairs, the city will inspect for compliance. 
a.  The proprietor may select either of the above alternatives, provided that, if the proprietor selects the alternative set forth in subsection (h)(2) of this section, the proprietor shall be responsible for insuring that such sidewalk cafe elements do not cause damage to persons or property and do not inhibit or obstruct regular sidewalk maintenance including, but not limited to, ordinary repair and snow removal. Except as expressly provided for in subsection (h)(2) of this section, no property shall be stored on the public right-of-way. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (h)(2) of this subsection, if the proprietor elects to close the sidewalk cafe during certain times of the year, as provided for in section 19-96(10), then all sidewalk cafe elements shall be removed. 
(i)  Sidewalk cafe elements may consist of tables, chairs, fencing, planters and plants, and umbrellas and awnings and similar fixtures if approved by the city as part of the sidewalk cafe permit process. 
(j)  A sidewalk cafe may not use or incorporate into the sidewalk cafe area any public fixtures such as benches, seats, planters, trash receptacles, lampposts, or any other publicly owned structures located in any part of the public right-of-way. 
(k)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection (h)(2) of this section, stacking of chairs or tables in the sidewalk cafe area is not permitted at any time. 
(l)  Outdoor heaters are allowed if approved by the city as part of the sidewalk cafe permit process, or subsequently approved by the city in the same manner as the sidewalk cafe permit. 
(m)  No advertising or signage shall be permitted in a sidewalk cafe area except that the name of the establishment may be printed on chairs, tables, umbrellas or other amenities as approved by the city. 
(n)  In the event of any damage to the surface of any part of the public sidewalk lying within or immediately adjacent to the confines or boundaries of the sidewalk cafe area, the proprietor of the sidewalk cafe and the adjacent restaurant shall repair the damage to the specifications of the director of public works of the city. If the proprietor fails or refuses to repair such damage within 30 days after written notice from the city to do so, the director of public works of the city shall cause the work to be done and billed to the proprietor. All costs, including administration and city staff time shall be computed and will be invoiced as part of the project. Any failure of the proprietor to reimburse the city for the cost of such work shall be grounds for termination of the proprietor's sidewalk cafe permit. Any such costs shall be deducted from the proprietor's cash deposit, and the balance may be collected from the proprietor by legal proceedings instituted by the city, including placing a lien on the property. 
(o)  The sidewalk cafe shall be equipped with an inside or outside water source to clean the sidewalk cafe area, as provided in section 19-95(5). 
(p)  No bottles, cans or pitchers shall be used to serve beverages. 
(q)  The city reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued for sidewalk cafes if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any other valid public purpose. 
(Code 2017, § 23-68; Ord. No. 2827, § 2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 2941, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 19-95. - Operation of sidewalk cafes. 
    Operation of sidewalk cafes shall comply with all of the following provisions: 
(1)  If alcoholic beverages are served in the sidewalk cafe area, the proprietor of the sidewalk cafe shall obtain the necessary liquor control license or wine or beer permit from the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division which covers the sidewalk cafe area, and shall otherwise comply with all requirements of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Control Act, Iowa Code ch. 123, and chapter 5, alcoholic and malt beverages. 
(2)  The sidewalk cafe, as a part of a restaurant, must be licensed by the state and/or county health departments and comply with all requirements of laws applicable to establishments that sell food to the public for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  The hours of operation for sidewalk cafes shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 10:30 p.m. daily, and except as otherwise expressly provided under section 19-94(h)(2), the sidewalk cafe area shall be restored to its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway at all other times, including during certain times of the year that the sidewalk cafe is not open for business, as provided in section 19-96(10). 
(4)  Food and beverages, other than alcoholic beverages, must be available for service to and consumption by patrons in a sidewalk cafe during all hours of operation. 
(5)  The proprietor of the sidewalk cafe area and the restaurant with which it is affiliated, or its employees or agents, shall clean the sidewalk cafe area on a daily basis, including cleaning of tables, chairs, trash receptacles, and the surface of the sidewalk within the sidewalk cafe area. All garbage, trash, litter and other debris shall be picked up and collected whenever the trash receptacles appear to be full. All garbage, trash and other debris located on the public sidewalk adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area, and extending for ten feet on any side thereof, shall be the responsibility of the sidewalk cafe proprietor, or its employees or agents, to pick up and dispose of properly, during all hours of operation, and before closing. No trash receptacles or sidewalk cafe elements shall be hosed down in the sidewalk cafe area or in any part of the public sidewalk at any time, and the sidewalk within or adjacent to the sidewalk cafe shall not be hosed down during cold weather, when ice could form thereon. 
(6)  The sidewalk cafe area shall be served by waiters or restaurant staff at all times during all hours of operation. 
(7)  Sidewalk cafes shall not play or allow the playing of music, whether live or recorded, that involves the use of sound amplification equipment, and no speakers, microphones, or other sound amplification equipment shall be used in conjunction with televisions, radios or other audio or video devices in a sidewalk cafe area at any time during the hours of operation. 
(8)  Lighting of the sidewalk cafe area shall not unreasonably reflect onto adjacent properties or cause disturbance to residential quarters located above or adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area. 
(9)  The city may require additional restroom capacity in the restaurant located within the building adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area in order to comply with the requirements of city or state building, fire or other applicable codes. 
(10)  Occupancy limits, including the occupancy load of the sidewalk cafe area, shall comply with all applicable city or state building, fire, or other applicable codes. 
(11)  No entrances or exits to the adjacent building shall be blocked or obstructed by any sidewalk cafe elements or other materials or property. 
(12)  The only entrance into or exit out of a sidewalk cafe area shall be through the adjacent building, unless such entrance or exit is located at and adjacent to the main entrance to the building in which the restaurant is located. 
(13)  A sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee who shall monitor the sidewalk cafe area at all times during the hours alcoholic beverages are served or are available for service. 
(14)  The operation of each sidewalk cafe shall be in entire conformity with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including all applicable fire code requirements. 
(15)  Patrons of the sidewalk cafe shall wear shirts and shoes at all times, or they shall not be admitted to or served in the sidewalk cafe area. 
(16)  The sidewalk cafe and the adjacent restaurant shall be subject to inspection by any city employee or agent of any of the city divisions or departments headed by any of the city officials identified in section 19-97(a), at any time during business hours. 
(Code 2017, § 23-69; Ord. No. 2827, § 3, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 19-96. - Application for sidewalk cafe permit. 
(a)  Before a restaurant may lawfully establish a sidewalk cafe on the public sidewalk adjacent to its building, the proprietor of the restaurant shall file an application with the city clerk for a sidewalk cafe permit on a form furnished by the clerk. The application shall be accompanied by each of the following items: 
(1)  Proof that the applicant holds a valid license or permit to operate a restaurant. 
(2)  Proof of insurance as required in this division. 
(3)  Written consent to the establishment of a sidewalk cafe from the owner of the building in which the restaurant is located, if the applicant is not the owner of the building. 
(4)  Written approval of the design review committee of Community Main Street, Inc., for a sidewalk cafe to be located in the downtown Parkade of the city, or of College Hill Partnership, for a sidewalk cafe to be located in the College Hill area of the city. 
(5)  A significantly detailed, accurate site plan showing the dimensions of the proposed sidewalk cafe area; the position and number of tables, chairs and other sidewalk cafe elements; the type and designs of roping, fencing or other barrier, as approved by Community Main Street or the College Hill Partnership, to divide the area from the adjacent public sidewalk; the distance between the boundaries of the sidewalk cafe area and all adjacent street curbs, buildings, property lines, street intersections, alleys, and fixtures in the public sidewalk; occupancy load of the sidewalk cafe area, and any other items reasonably required by the city clerk or other city staff to ensure that the proposed sidewalk cafe area will comply with all applicable requirements of this division and all other laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to sidewalk cafes, and which shows that the proposed sidewalk cafe shall not unreasonably interfere with: 
a.  Adequate pedestrian flow; 
b.  Access to building entrances; 
c.  Pedestrian and traffic safety; and 
d.  The aesthetic quality of the surrounding area. 
(6)  A nonrefundable permit fee in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(7)  A public right-of-way easement agreement on a form furnished by the city clerk, for the use of the portion of the public right-of-way to be occupied by the sidewalk cafe, as provided in this division, including an indemnification provision as provided in this division. 
(8)  A cash deposit in the sum of $250.00 to cover any damage to the public sidewalk included within the sidewalk cafe area. If the fencing or other items are permanently affixed to public property, the property owner will furnish the city with a cost estimate during the application process that provides a detailed summary of the repairs and costs to repair the items in public property. The cash deposit shall be refunded by the city clerk upon expiration, non-renewal or other termination of the sidewalk cafe permit, if there is no damage to the public sidewalk after removal of the sidewalk cafe elements from the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Proof that the applicant holds a valid liquor control license or wine or beer permit for the restaurant which is adjacent to the proposed sidewalk cafe and proof that the applicant has applied to the state alcoholic beverages division for approval to extend the "premises" covered by such license or permit to include the entire sidewalk cafe area, if the applicant is applying for authority to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe area. No sidewalk cafe permit shall be issued by the city clerk until such liquor control license or wine or beer permit has actually been issued as provided in this subsection. 
(10)  A listing of the effective dates during the calendar year that the proprietor intends to operate the sidewalk cafe. Sidewalk cafes may be installed no earlier than April 1, and all components thereof shall be removed from the public passageway on or before November 15 of each year. 
(b)  The proprietor shall specify the beginning and ending dates during the calendar year that the sidewalk cafe will be open. The proprietor may revise the effective dates of operation by written notice to the city no more often than once during each permit year, and may revise such effective dates at the time the permit is renewed each year. 
(Code 2017, § 23-70; Ord. No. 2827, § 4, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 19-97. - Review of application. 
(a)  The city clerk shall submit a copy of the application and all accompanying documents to the following city staff for review and for either approval or denial: 
(1)  The city building official. 
(2)  The city fire chief. 
(3)  The city police chief. 
(4)  The city planning and community services manager. 
(5)  The city director of public works. 
(b)  Within 15 days after receipt of such documents, each such city official shall forward to the city clerk his approval or denial of the application, and in case of denial, the reason or reasons for denial. The applicant shall be notified of the results of the reviews and shall be afforded a period of 15 days to supplement, correct or modify the application to address the city officials' reasons for denial. 
(c)  If the city officials all approve the application, and the applicant has complied with all other requirements of this division, the city clerk shall issue a sidewalk cafe permit to the applicant, including the requirement for city council approval of a public right-of-way easement agreement. 
(d)  After 30 days from the date of filing of the application, if the applicant has not received all necessary city staff approvals, or if the application has been denied by one or more of such city officials, the application shall be considered denied. The applicant may file a written appeal of the denial to the administration committee of the city council within 45 days of the date of original filing of the application with the city clerk. The administration committee shall schedule a hearing within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date, time and place of hearing. The committee shall afford the applicant the opportunity to present information to the committee in support of the application. Within ten days after such hearing, the administration committee shall issue its decision, which may either affirm or reverse the denial of the application, or affirm the application subject to certain conditions. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. No new application for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be submitted by the same applicant for the same location for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the administration committee denying any application for a sidewalk cafe permit. 
(e)  If the application is granted by the city officials or by the administration committee after appeal, the city clerk shall issue the sidewalk cafe permit for a period of one year, or until the date for renewal of the applicant's liquor control license or wine or beer permit, whichever is less. Thereafter, the permit shall be applied for, and, if approved as provided herein, issued, for successive one-year periods that run concurrent with the applicant's liquor control license or wine or beer permit. If the application does not include a request to serve alcoholic beverages, the initial permit and all renewal permits shall be issued for a one-year period. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to either deny an application for a sidewalk cafe permit which otherwise meets the requirements of this division or to require the proprietor to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this division if, in the reasonable determination of the city, either granting the sidewalk cafe permit, or granting it without such additional terms and conditions, would not adequately protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the city or of its residents, or would not adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of the city's residents. 
(Code 2017, § 23-71; Ord. No. 2827, § 5, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 2941, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 19-98. - Insurance requirements. 
    A sidewalk cafe shall not be established under this division unless the applicant furnishes proof of insurance which meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage with a $2,000,000.00 aggregate. The city shall be named as an additional insured on the policy. An endorsement shall be issued as a part of the insurance policy, evidencing compliance with this requirement. 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance and employer's liability insurance which meets the requirements of state law. 
(3)  Dramshop and liquor liability insurance coverage which meets the requirements of the state code, if the application includes a request to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  The insurance policy or policies shall be issued by an insurance company having authority to do business in the state with a rating of A- under Best's Key Rating Guide. 
(5)  The insurance policy or policies shall contain a provision requiring 30 days advance written notice to the city if the policy is to be cancelled, not renewed, or if any material change in coverage is to be made. 
(6)  Failure to furnish or continue to provide required insurance coverage shall be grounds for revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit. 
(Code 2017, § 23-72; Ord. No. 2554, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 19-99. - Revocation of sidewalk cafe permit. 
(a)  A sidewalk cafe permit issued under this division shall be revoked if the holder of the sidewalk cafe permit does any of the following: 
(1)  Fails to maintain a valid restaurant license covering the building adjacent to the sidewalk cafe. 
(2)  Fails to maintain a liquor control license or wine or beer permit covering either the restaurant adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area, or the sidewalk cafe area itself, if the application for the sidewalk cafe permit includes a request to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Fails to furnish or maintain insurance required by this division. 
(4)  Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the sidewalk cafe permit. 
(5)  Fails to file an application for renewal of the sidewalk cafe permit at least 60 days before the existing permit expires. 
(6)  Fails to operate the sidewalk cafe in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this division, of all other city ordinances, and of state law. 
(7)  The permit holder, or any of its agents or employees, is convicted of a violation of Iowa Code ch. 123, the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, chapter 5, alcoholic and malt beverages, or of any other provision of state law or this Code, or a judgment for a municipal infraction is entered against the permit holder or any of its agents or employees for any such violation of law or ordinance, with respect to the sidewalk cafe area, or with respect to the restaurant located in the building adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area. 
(8)  Fails to comply with the provisions of the sidewalk cafe public right-of-way easement agreement required by section 19-100. 
(9)  Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard, health hazard, or public nuisance under state law or city ordinance, in connection with the sidewalk cafe or its operation. 
(10)  Refuses to allow or resists an inspection of the sidewalk cafe or the adjacent restaurant by any city employee or agent of any of the city divisions or departments headed by any of the city officials identified in section 19-97(a), for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this division, any other city ordinance, any provision of the state law, the public right-of-way easement agreement, or any of the terms or provisions of the owner's sidewalk cafe application or permit. 
(11)  Any other failure of the permit holder or any of its employees or agents to comply with any of the provisions of this division relative to sidewalk cafes. 
(12)  Operates the sidewalk cafe in a manner which, in the reasonable determination of the city, does not adequately protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the city or of its residents, or does not adequately protect and preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of the city's residents. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of any of the events described in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall give the sidewalk cafe permit holder written notice of revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to operate the sidewalk cafe covered by the permit. 
(c)  The permit holder may appeal the revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit by written notice of appeal mailed or delivered to the city clerk within ten days of the date of notice of revocation. During the pendency of the appeal, the permit holder shall not be allowed to operate the sidewalk cafe. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall notify the chair of the administration committee of the city council of the appeal, and a hearing before the administration committee shall be scheduled within 20 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The permit holder shall be notified in writing of the time and place of hearing on the appeal, and shall be afforded an opportunity to present any information to the administration committee. The administration committee shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing, either affirming or reversing the revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit. The decision of the administration committee shall be final. 
(e)  The city shall retain the right to terminate any sidewalk cafe permit at any time upon seven days' written notice, and may require the removal of all sidewalk cafe elements from the public sidewalk, if the city council, after due consideration, determines that there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public right-of-way being occupied by the sidewalk cafe, for a valid public purpose. The determination of the city council shall be final, and there shall be no right of appeal from such decision. 
(Code 2017, § 23-73; Ord. No. 2554, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 19-100. - Sidewalk cafe public right-of-way easement agreement. 
(a)  Before a proprietor may lawfully operate a sidewalk cafe in the city, the proprietor must apply for and obtain from the city a public right-of-way easement agreement as part of the sidewalk cafe permit application, on a form approved by the city clerk, but only after approval by the city council as required by state and local law. 
(b)  The applicant must agree to comply with all state laws and city ordinances governing use of the public sidewalks and other public right-of-way. 
(c)  An annual fee for issuance of the public right-of-way easement agreement shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Each public right-of-way easement agreement shall be for a period of one year, to coincide with the sidewalk cafe permit, except the first easement agreement, which shall be for a partial year, the same as the sidewalk cafe permit. 
(e)  All sidewalk cafe public right-of-way easement agreements shall be issued by the city clerk, but only after the applicant has complied with all other requirements for issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit contained in this division, but only after approval by the city council as required by state and local law. 
(f)  The city shall retain the right to terminate any public right-of-way easement agreement, at any time upon seven days' written notice, and may require the removal of all sidewalk cafe elements from the public sidewalk, if the city council, after due consideration, determines that there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public right-of-way being occupied by the sidewalk cafe, for a valid public purpose. The determination of the city council shall be final, and there shall be no right of appeal from such decision. 
(g)  The use of the public right-of-way by any proprietor of a sidewalk cafe pursuant to an approved public right-of-way easement agreement shall not interfere with the city's or the city utilities' access to public utilities located within the city's public right-of-way. 
(h)  The public right-of-way easement agreement shall contain such provisions as the city may deem appropriate to regulate and control the use of the public right-of-way, and shall include a provision requiring the sidewalk cafe permit holder to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its agents, employees, and insurers, from all claims, demands, and causes of action, together with costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the city arising out of the operation of the permit holder's sidewalk cafe, and to release the city, its agents, employees, and insurers, from any liability to the sidewalk cafe permit holder, its employees, agents, and insurers, arising out of any actions of the city in administering, inspecting, and overseeing (including termination of) the sidewalk cafe permit. 
(Code 2017, § 23-74; Ord. No. 2554, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 19-101. - Violation of division. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and, upon entry of a judgment for such violation against such person, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for a first offense, $500.00 for a second offense, and $1,000.00 for a third or subsequent offense, together with a court order for such other relief as is provided in section 1-9(a)(3). In addition, any such violation by the holder of a sidewalk cafe permit issued under this division, or an employee or agent of such permit holder, shall be grounds for revocation of the sidewalk cafe permit, as provided in section 19-99. 
(Code 2017, § 23-75; Ord. No. 2554, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Secs. 19-102-19-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS/PAVEMENT CUTS 

Sec. 19-131. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to clarify the responsibilities of the city and persons, firms or corporations for the excavation and reconstruction of streets. 
(Code 2017, § 23-86; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer or the officer designated by the city council to perform the duties prescribed for the engineer by this article. 
    Excavations/pavement cuts means any opening in street, sidewalk or right-of-way; usually for the purpose of placing or repairing underground utilities. 
    Person means person, firm or corporation proposing to evacuate. 
(Code 2017, § 23-87; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-133. - Standard excavation specifications. 
    The city engineer shall prepare complete plans and specifications for the excavation and reconstruction of sidewalks or streets, which, upon approval of the city council, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The specifications shall include descriptions and location of barricades and warning lights. All excavations and improvements in public property, whether performed by others or by the city, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the city engineer, and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-88; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-134. - Permits for excavations. 
    No person shall make any excavations unless such person shall obtain a permit from the city engineer. The permit shall state that the person will comply with the ordinances of the city and with the specifications for excavations adopted by the city. The permit also shall state that the work will be done under the direction and approval of the city engineer. All such permits shall be issued upon payment of a charge established annually by resolution by the city council and a copy of the permit with the application, shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city engineer. The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when the work is to be completed. The time of completion for the improvements may be extended by the city engineer. The city engineer may withhold the issuance of any permit for any excavations for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for the proposed improvements or when weather conditions will adversely affect the improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 23-89; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992; Ord. No. 2067, § 23, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 19-135. - Exemption. 
    No permit is required to begin work in cases of emergencies, such as the breakage of water, gas or sewer lines, or electrical cables. However, a permit shall be obtained on the first working day after the emergency excavation/pavement cut has been made. 
(Code 2017, § 23-90; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-136. - Contractor's bond. 
    Any person doing any excavation work within the city must first file a bond with the city clerk, with a copy to the city engineer, in the sum of $5,000.00, or the estimated total cost of the excavation work covered by the permit as determined by the city engineer, whichever is greater, conditioned on: 
(1)  The faithful performance of all duties and regulations required by this article regulating the excavation within the city; 
(2)  The prompt payment to the city of any sums that may become due by reason of this article; and 
(3)  The payment of all fines imposed on said person for violation of this article when said violations occur during the life of the bond. In addition, such person shall provide a certificate of liability insurance to the city clerk with a copy to the city engineer, which policy shall indemnify the city from all liability for damages arising from negligence in doing, protecting or completing the excavation work. Said insurance policy shall have limits in the aggregate of $1,000,000.00 and shall include the city as an additional named insured. Said bond and liability insurance policy shall provide coverage on a calendar year basis. 
(Code 2017, § 23-91; Ord. No. 2758, § 1, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 19-137. - General work standards. 
    All excavation/pavement cuts shall be done in a good, workmanlike manner and in accordance with the applicable city specifications found in the standard specification for municipal improvements for the city. 
(Code 2017, § 23-92; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-138. - Inspection and approval. 
    Upon final completion, the city engineer shall inspect the work. He may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When the work does meet all requirements of this article, the specifications and the permit, the engineer shall indicate this on both copies of the permit. 
(Code 2017, § 23-93; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-139. - Barricades and warning lights. 
    Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed to protect persons from materials, equipment and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of adequate warnings is the responsibility of the constructor. 
(Code 2017, § 23-94; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-140. - Charges for backfilling, restoring surfaces. 
    If a permittee does not perform the repair in accordance with these requirements, the city shall perform the repair and the cost thereof will be billed to the permittee. Cost is determined as follows: The cost of backfilling trenches, including large, irregular and abnormal trenches, and the restoring of pavements, walks and other surfaces shall be made against the individual, firm or corporation who made the excavation and such cost shall be based on two and one-half times the actual cost of labor, materials and the use of equipment. 
(Code 2017, § 23-95; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-141. - Underground facilities; permittee's liability. 
(a)  Before the starting of any excavation, the permit holder shall familiarize himself with underground facilities in the particular area. In general, the sources of this information are as follows: in the office of the city engineer, the municipal utility, the telephone company and the cable television company. 
(b)  The permit holder shall use extra precaution around underground piping and cables so as not to disturb or break them and especially around gas mains and buried electric cables. No work shall be done within ten feet of any utility facility without the presence of a representative of the utility involved. 
(c)  All exposed gas, water, steam or sewer lines, or buried cables or raceways, old or new, must be inspected before the trench is backfilled. 
(d)  The permit holder shall be fully responsible for all damages done by him to any utility facilities. 
(Code 2017, § 23-96; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-142. - Special methods of construction. 
    Methods other than those specified above may be permitted upon special request. The permit holder shall submit specifications for approval by the city engineer prior to granting of an excavation/pavement cut permit. 
(Code 2017, § 23-97; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-143. - Excavation/pavement cuts during winter. 
    No person, firm or corporation or utility shall be granted a permit to excavate or open any street or sidewalk from October 15 of each year to April 1 of the next year unless an emergency or special condition exists and permission is obtained, in writing, from the city. Any person, firm or corporation wishing to obtain an excavation/pavement cut permit between the aforementioned dates shall first explain fully, in writing, the nature of the emergency situation to the city before permission is granted. If a hazardous condition which would endanger life and/or property, exists, excavation work shall not be delayed. However, a written explanation shall be delivered to the city as soon as possible and an excavation/pavement cut permit obtained for the opening made. 
(Code 2017, § 23-98; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-144. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 23-99; Ord. No. 1984, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Secs. 19-145-19-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 19-172. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to clarify the responsibilities of the city and the owners of abutting property for the maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks. 
(Code 2017, § 23-121) 
Sec. 19-173. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer or the officer designated by the city council to perform the duties prescribed for the engineer by this article. 
    Defective sidewalk means any public sidewalk exhibiting deficient characteristics, as defined by the city engineer and approved by the city council. A list of the deficient characteristics shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Owner means the person owning the fee title or the contract purchaser for purposes of notification required under this article. For all other purposes, the term "owner" shall include the lessee, if any. 
    Sidewalk improvements means the reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith. 
(Code 2017, § 23-122) 
Sec. 19-174. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 23-123) 
Sec. 19-175. - Standard specifications; supervision by city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall prepare complete plans and specifications for the construction, reconstruction and repair of sidewalks and driveway crossings in the sidewalk, which, upon approval of the city council, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The specifications shall include descriptions and standards for location of barricades and warning lights. 
(b)  All sidewalk improvements on public property, whether performed by the owner of the abutting property or by the city, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the city engineer, and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-124) 
Sec. 19-176. - Permit required; issuance. 
    No person shall make any sidewalk improvements unless such person shall obtain a permit from the city engineer. The permit shall state that the person will comply with the ordinances of the city and with the specifications for sidewalks adopted by the city. The permit also shall state that the work will be done under the direction and approval of the city engineer. A charge, in such amount as established by the council from time to time, shall be made for all such permits. A copy of the permit, with the application, shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city engineer. The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when the work is to be completed. The time of completion for the sidewalk improvements may be extended by the city engineer. All permits for sidewalk improvements not ordered by resolution of the city council shall be issued in compliance with this article. The city engineer may withhold the issuance of any permit for any sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for the proposed improvements, or when weather conditions will adversely affect the sidewalk improvements. 
(Code 2017, § 23-125) 
Sec. 19-177. - Commencement of work without permit; failure to comply with specifications. 
    Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the provisions of this article and with the city specifications, or when any sidewalk improvements are made without a permit, the city engineer shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor doing the work. If the sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the work to stop until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain a permit immediately and perform any needed corrections within five days from receipt of the permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the engineer shall have the work completed, and the costs shall be assessed to the property owner as provided in section 23-135(c). 
(Code 2017, § 23-126) 
Sec. 19-178. - Bond; insurance. 
(a)  Any person constructing or building sidewalks within the city must first file a bond with the city clerk, with a copy to the city engineer, in the sum of $5,000.00, or the estimated total cost of the construction work covered by the permit as determined by the city engineer, whichever is greater, conditioned on: 
(1)  The faithful performance of all duties and regulations required by this article regulating the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks within the city; 
(2)  The prompt payment to the city of any sums that may become due by reason of this article; and 
(3)  The payment of all fines imposed on said person for violation of this article when such violations occur during the life of the bond. 
(b)  In addition, such person shall provide a certificate of liability insurance to the city clerk with a copy to the city engineer, which policy shall indemnify the city from all liability for damages arising from negligence in doing, protecting or completing the sidewalk work. Said insurance policy shall have limits in the aggregate of $1,000,000.00, and shall include the city as an additional named insured. Said bond and liability insurance policy shall provide coverage on a calendar year basis. Owners doing only their own sidewalk work are not required to furnish a bond or liability insurance policy if the owners execute an agreement with the city to hold the city harmless from any and all claims that may arise out of the sidewalk work. 
(Code 2017, § 23-127; Ord. No. 2758, § 2, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 19-179. - Inspection and approval of work. 
    Upon final completion of sidewalk improvements, the city engineer shall inspect the work. He may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When the work does meet all requirements of this article, the specifications and the permit, the engineer shall indicate this on both copies of the permit. 
(Code 2017, § 23-128) 
Sec. 19-180. - Barricades and warning lights. 
    Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed at sidewalk improvements to protect persons from materials, equipment and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of adequate warnings is the responsibility of the constructor, the owner and the lessee of the property. 
(Code 2017, § 23-129) 
Sec. 19-181. - Interference with sidewalk improvements. 
    No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while it is in the process of being improved, or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice or warning device provided for by this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-130) 
Sec. 19-182. - Authority to order sidewalk improvements. 
    The city engineer may order the reconstruction, repair or replacement of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court. Notice of this order shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. The notice shall include the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the city council within 15 days of receipt of the notice. 
(Code 2017, § 23-131) 
Sec. 19-183. - Duty of abutting property owner to repair defective sidewalk. 
    It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner at any time, or upon receipt of 30 days' notice from the city, to repair, replace or reconstruct all broken or defective sidewalks in the street right-of-way abutting the property owner's property. The abutting property owner shall be liable for damages caused by the failure of the abutting property owner to use reasonable care in the repair, replacement or reconstruction of broken or defective sidewalks abutting the property owner's property. If, after the expiration of the 30 days as provided in the notice, the required work has not been done or is not in the process of completion, the city engineer shall proceed to repair, replace or reconstruct the sidewalk. Upon completion of the work, the city engineer shall prepare and submit to the city council an itemized and verified statement of expenditures for material and labor, and the legal description of the property abutting the sidewalk on which work has been performed. These costs shall be assessed against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The assessment of such costs against the property does not relieve the abutting property owner of liability for damages imposed by this section. The city does not have a duty to repair, replace or reconstruct broken or defective sidewalks. 
(Code 2017, § 23-132; Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 19-184. - Notification of city in case of inability to repair or barricade sidewalk. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or of the contractor or agent of the owner, to notify the city immediately if the owner is unable to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect warnings and barricades as required by this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-133) 
Sec. 19-185. - Removal of snow and ice. 
    The abutting property owner is responsible for the removal of the natural accumulations of snow and ice from the sidewalks abutting the property owner's property within a reasonable amount of time. The abutting property owner shall be liable for damages caused by the failure of the abutting property owner to use reasonable care in the removal of the snow or ice. If the abutting property owner fails to remove the natural accumulations of snow or ice within a reasonable amount of time, the public works department may have the natural accumulations of snow or ice removed without notice to the property owner. Upon completion of the work, the public works director shall prepare and submit to the city council an itemized and verified statement of the costs and a legal description of the property, and the costs shall be assessed against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The assessment of such costs against the property does not relieve the abutting property owner of liability for damages imposed by this section. The city does not have a duty to remove natural accumulations of snow or ice from the sidewalks. 
(Code 2017, § 23-134; Ord. No. 2410, § 2, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2941, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 19-186. - Assessment for repair or clearing cost. 
(a)  Notice. When the city engineer submits a bill for sidewalk improvements or for removal of accumulations as provided in sections 19-177, 19-183 and 19-185, the city clerk shall send a notice of such facts to the owner of the abutting property. The notice may be given either by personal service or by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. The notice shall contain a statement of the work performed, the cost of the work that is being assessed and a description of the property affected, and shall state the fact that the person may pay the amount assessed by a certain date without interest or penalty. The notice also shall indicate that the person may object to such assessment and give the place and time at which the city council will hear such objections. The time set for hearing shall be at least 15 days after the service or mailing of the notice. 
(b)  Hearing. At the time and place designated in the notice, the city council shall consider all objections to the assessment, correct all errors or omissions, and adopt a corrected list as the amounts to be assessed against the property. 
(c)  Billing and certifying to county. Thirty days after the city council's decision, the city clerk shall certify any unpaid amounts to the county auditor. The unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be collected by the county treasurer in the same manner as other taxes. Any assessment that exceeds $500.00 may be paid in installments as set by the city council, not exceeding 15, in the same manner and at the same interest rates as for special assessments under Iowa Code ch. 384, div. IV (Iowa Code § 384.37 et seq.). No interest shall be charged for assessments, or parts thereof, paid within 30 days of the time the city council determines the final amounts. 
(Code 2017, § 23-135) 
Secs. 19-187-19-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS 

Sec. 19-211. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to clarify the responsibilities of the city and owners of abutting property for the construction, reconstruction or repair of driveways. 
(Code 2017, § 23-156; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-212. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer or the officer designated by the city council to perform the duties prescribed for the engineer by this article. 
    Driveway means that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private property that lies between the property line and the roadway of the public street. 
    Owner means the person owning the fee title or the contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, the term "owner" includes the lessee, if any. 
    Paving means any kind of hard surfacing including, but not limited to, Portland cement, concrete, bituminous concrete, brick, stabilized gravel or combinations of such materials, with the necessary base. The term "paving" shall not include surfacing with oil, gravel, oil and gravel, or chloride. 
(Code 2017, § 23-157; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-213. - Consent required before cutting, removing curbs or constructing driveway. 
    No person shall cut or remove a curb or construct a new driveway without first obtaining the consent of the city council or its authorized representative. 
(Code 2017, § 23-158; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-214. - Permit required for construction of driveway entrance; fee. 
(a)  No person shall construct or reconstruct with concrete or asphalt surfacing the driveway entrance lying between the curb and the street line without first obtaining a permit signed by the city engineer. 
(b)  The fee for each permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be in an amount as established annually by resolution by the city council. The city engineer maintains the right to waive the permit fee at the discretion of said engineer. The fee shall be payable in advance to the city clerk. 
(Code 2017, § 23-159; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992; Ord. No. 2067, § 24, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 19-215. - Application for permit to construct driveway entrance; contents. 
    The application for a permit to construct or reconstruct a driveway entrance shall be upon a form furnished by the city and shall contain the name of the owner of the property, a description of the lot, lots or parcels of ground in front of which the driveway entrance is to be built, a statement that the entrance will be constructed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-160; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-216. - Improper construction of driveway entrance to nullify permit. 
    Failure of the property owner to build or have built a driveway entrance in accordance with this article shall nullify the permit and subject the entrance to removal. 
(Code 2017, § 23-161; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-217. - Contractor's bond. 
    Any person constructing or building driveways within the city must first file a bond with the city clerk, with a copy with the city engineer, in the sum of $5,000.00, or the estimated total cost of the construction work covered by the permit as determined by the city engineer, whichever is greater, conditioned on: 
(1)  The faithful performance of all duties and regulations required by this article regulating the construction, reconstruction or repair of driveways within the city; 
(2)  The prompt payment to the city of any sums that may become due by reason of this article; and 
(3)  The payment of all fines imposed on said person for violation of this article when said violations occur during the life of the bond. In addition, such person shall provide a certificate of liability insurance to the city clerk with a copy to the city engineer, which policy shall indemnify the city from all liability for damages arising from negligence in doing, protecting or completing the driveway work. Said insurance policy shall have limits in the aggregate of $1,000,000.00 and shall include the city as an additional named insured. Said bond and liability insurance policy shall provide coverage on a calendar year basis. 
(Code 2017, § 23-162; Ord. No. 2758, § 3, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 19-218. - Standard driveway and curb cut plans and specifications. 
    The city engineer shall prepare complete plans and specifications for the construction, reconstruction, and repair of driveways, curb cuts, which upon approval of the city council, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The specifications shall include requirements for barricades and warning lights. 
(Code 2017, § 23-163; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-219. - Plans, specifications for driveway entrances. 
(a)  All driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the plans prepared by the city engineer. 
(b)  Concrete driveways shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The concrete mix shall be a proportion to develop a minimum ultimate 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch and shall be of air-entrained and shall otherwise meet the requirements of city specifications type C concrete paving. 
(2)  Residential. Entrances shall have a minimum thickness of five inches with a six-inch by six-inch, ten-ten steel mesh reinforcing or a six-inch nonreinforced thickness. 
(3)  Commercial. Entrances shall be constructed with a minimum concrete thickness of six inches. Thickness and reinforcing is to be determined by an analysis of projected traffic axle loads. 
(c)  A one-half-inch asphaltic expansion joint shall be placed on each side of the public sidewalk as shown on the plans. 
(d)  Asphaltic concrete driveways shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The entrance shall be constructed to the requirements of city specification on asphaltic concrete paving. No asphalt driveway work shall be placed after October 15, except with the approval by the city engineer. Asphalt shall not be used for any sidewalk or overlay of any sidewalk. 
(2)  Residential. Minimum of five inches of compacted stone base topped by 11/2 inches of type A asphaltic concrete. 
(3)  Commercial. Minimum of six inches of compacted stone base topped by three inches of type A asphaltic concrete. 
(e)  Driveway culverts shall be installed within rural portions of the city as directed by the city engineer. Minimum size culvert shall be 15 inches in diameter and shall be either corrugated culvert pipe or 2000D concrete culvert pipe conforming to standard specifications for highway and bridge construction, state department of transportation. Actual culvert size will be determined from an upstream analysis of stormwater surface runoff. 
(f)  All driveway improvement in public property, whether performed by the owner of the abutting property or by the city, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the city engineer, and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-164; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-220. - Location of curb openings. 
    Curb openings shall be placed on the center of existing or proposed driveways. No opening, however, shall extend beyond the side lines of the owner's premises. 
(Code 2017, § 23-165) 
Sec. 19-221. - Width and number of curb openings. 
    The curb opening for a single drive shall be not less than 16 feet nor more than 20 feet and the opening for a double drive shall not exceed 24 feet in width. In general, only one opening shall be granted per residence in residential areas. The council may grant additional openings in special cases such as for large corner lots, etc. The width and number of curb openings for business and commercial places shall be determined as to the needs by the council. 
(Code 2017, § 23-166; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-222. - Method of cutting curb. 
    All new and reconstructed curb openings shall be constructed of a minimum two feet curb and gutter section and separate from the driveway. Any cutting which is less than two feet from an existing traverse, joint or 18 inches from an existing longitudinal joint, shall be taken to that joint. All curb cuts shall be neatly sawed to a depth of at least one-half the thickness of the existing street surface with a method approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 23-167; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-223. - Driveway width. 
    The driveway width at the owner's property line shall not be less than ten feet for a single drive and not less than 18 feet for double drives. Where possible, no drive shall be placed nearer than three feet to the side lines of the owner's premises. 
(Code 2017, § 23-168; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-224. - Inspection of driveway entrances. 
    All driveway entrances shall be inspected by the city engineer or his representative for proper grade and subgrade preparations prior to the placing of the concrete or asphalt slabs. The city engineer shall have the right to inspect the finished driveway entrances to determine whether or not the provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 2017, § 23-169; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-225. - Barricades and warning lights. 
    Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed to protect persons from materials, equipment and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of adequate warnings is the responsibility of the constructor, the owner and the lessee of the property. 
(Code 2017, § 23-170; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 19-226. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 23-171; Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 8-24-1992) 
Secs. 19-227-19-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NUMBERING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 19-246. - General plan. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the following plan shall apply for numbering buildings within the city: 
(1)  That portion of the city lying south of the Cedar River shall have the river as the dividing line for Main Street and all streets parallel thereto. Main Street shall be the dividing line for all streets running east and west and transversely thereto. 
(2)  Main Street and all streets parallel thereto, south of the Cedar River, shall be so numbered that all buildings in the first block shall be numbered over 100 and less than 200, and numbers shall rise by 100 for each consecutive block to the south limits of the city. 
(3)  All streets intersecting Main Street shall be termed "West" by their respective names in that portion of the city lying west of Main Street and south of the Cedar River, and in the portion of the city lying east of Main Street and south of the river they shall be termed "East" by their respective names. 
(4)  The buildings on the streets running transversely to Main Street shall be so numbered on either side of Main Street that the buildings within the blocks next to Main Street shall be numbered over 100 and less than 200, and numbers shall rise by 100 for each consecutive block to the east and west limits of the city. 
(5)  That portion of the city lying north of the Cedar River shall be numbered in a manner using the river and Lincoln Street as the dividing lines, and shall be so numbered that the first block on Lincoln Street, and all streets running parallel thereto, shall be numbered over 100 and less than 200, and numbers shall rise by 100 for each block to the city limits. 
(6)  All streets intersecting and running transversely to Lincoln Street shall be termed "North" by their respective names for those portions north of Lincoln Street; those portions of such streets lying south of Lincoln Street shall be termed "South" by their respective names, and shall be numbered in a manner similar to the method of numbering the intersecting streets on the south side of the river. 
(Code 2017, § 23-221) 
Sec. 19-247. - Numbering to commence at dividing lines; use of odd and even numbers. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the numbering of buildings shall commence at the dividing lines established in section 19-246, and be so fixed across the streets from right to left that all odd numbers shall be on the right side and all even numbers on the left side. 
(Code 2017, § 23-222) 
Sec. 19-248. - Numbering on University Avenue. 
    Effective on July 1, 1970, University Avenue, from the east city limits to the west city limits, shall not be termed east or west, and University Avenue shall be numbered commencing at the east city limits with the number 4100 and the street shall be numbered consecutively with odd numbers on the south side of the street and even numbers on the north side of the street, to the west city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 23-223) 
Sec. 19-249. - Effect of lot and building frontage. 
    Each lot having a street frontage of 22 feet shall have a separate number, and buildings having more than a 22-foot frontage shall be numbered by the number to which the lot is entitled upon which the principal entrance to the building is located. 
(Code 2017, § 23-224) 
Sec. 19-250. - Determination of number in case of doubt. 
    In case of doubt as to the proper number for any building or lot subject to the provisions of this article, the city engineer shall, on request, decide on the number. 
(Code 2017, § 23-225) 
Sec. 19-251. - Street number plats. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer to prepare and keep on file in his office a plat showing the streets and the numbers required under this article, and whenever a plat is filed as an addition to the city the engineer shall file a copy of such plat with the city clerk, showing the numbers as required under this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-226) 
Sec. 19-252. - Placement of numbers required. 
    All owners or lessees of buildings on any of the streets of the city are hereby required to number their buildings in strict accordance with the provisions of this article, and shall cause the number to be placed in plain view on their property and so maintained. 
(Code 2017, § 23-227) 
Sec. 19-253. - Standards for numbers. 
    The numbers used to number buildings shall be three inches high and two inches wide, and made of metal or other substantial and durable material. 
(Code 2017, § 23-228) 
Sec. 19-254. - Placement of numbers by city. 
    If an owner or lessee neglects or refuses to number the property owned or occupied by him as required in this article, for a period of ten days after being notified either personally or by public notice published in one issue of some newspaper published in the city, then such numbering shall be done by the city under proper order of the city council, and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the property. 
(Code 2017, § 23-229) 
Secs. 19-255-19-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN 

Sec. 19-272. - Title. 
    The title of this article shall be "A Major Thoroughfare Plan for the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa." 
(Code 2017, § 23-251) 
Sec. 19-273. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum distance between a building and a property line. This minimum distance is established by chapter 26. 
    Collector street means a street whose function is to collect traffic from residential streets and disperse it upon major thoroughfares. 
    Major thoroughfare means a street designed to carry large volumes of traffic to and from the major traffic generators and to facilitate the movement of through traffic. 
    One-way street means a street in which the traffic is permitted to move in one direction only. 
    Restricted or limited access street means a street where access is permitted at only specifically designated points. 
    Right-of-way means that area owned by the city or state or dedicated for public use for street purposes lying between individual property lines. Right-of-way may be abbreviated as R.O.W. 
    Right-of-way, future, means that right-of-way required for the development of streets in the future. 
    Roadway means that portion of the right-of-way developed for the purpose of moving vehicles. 
    Traffic moving lane means that portion of the roadway devoted to the movement of a single line of traffic, varying in width from ten to 12 feet. 
(Code 2017, § 23-252) 
Sec. 19-274. - Interpretation of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall be held as minimum requirements. Where this article imposes a greater restriction than that of other laws, resolutions, restrictions or ordinances, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Code 2017, § 23-253) 
Sec. 19-275. - Amendment of article. 
    The council may, after public notice and public hearing as provided by law, and after recommendation by the city planning and zoning commission, amend, supplement or change the provisions of this article. Such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the council. 
(Code 2017, § 23-254) 
Sec. 19-276. - Official map. 
    The major thoroughfare map, which is integral to and part of this article, is on file in the city clerk's office. References, definitions and regulations in this article are applicable to the map, and all data on the map is applicable to the text of this article, the same as if it were set forth in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 23-255) 
Sec. 19-277. - Measuring of setback lines. 
    Building setback lines, as established in chapter 26, shall be measured from the future right-of-way as established by this article. Where setback requirements have been established along primary, state and federal highways by the state highway commission, the requirements of the state shall apply. 
(Code 2017, § 23-256) 
Sec. 19-278. - Development of thoroughfares. 
(a)  All designated thoroughfares shall be developed in the most expeditious manner, as provided in the capital improvements program. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance prescribing schedules for the development of specific and designated thoroughfares as prescribed in the capital improvements program, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2017, § 23-257) 
Sec. 19-279. - Location of access to major thoroughfares. 
    Access to major thoroughfares, wherever possible, particularly in new areas, shall be confined to street intersections located at not less than one-fourth-mile intervals. 
(Code 2017, § 23-258) 
Sec. 19-280. - Access by other than major thoroughfare required for certain property. 
    Property platted subsequent to June 9, 1958, which abuts a major thoroughfare shall, wherever possible, provide access to and from the property on streets other than the major thoroughfare. This may be done through the use of parallel frontage roads, or by double frontage lots where the lots in question back onto the thoroughfare and have street access in front upon a secondary street. 
(Code 2017, § 23-259) 
Sec. 19-281. - Discharge of water on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the waterspouts, troughs or gutters from any building owned or leased by him to discharge or conduct water upon the surface of any sidewalk in the city, but permission may be given by the council to conduct water over or under any sidewalk under the direction of the operations and maintenance manager. Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 13-3) 
Chapter 20 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "subdivision ordinance" of the city. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design, development, and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions of land, so that existing land uses will be protected, and so that adequate provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so that growth occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the comprehensive plan, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  Application. Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into two or more parts, for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot, or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the city shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record. 
(d)  Subdivided land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire and flood and shall not be subdivided until adequate public utilities, sanitary sewer, streets and similar infrastructure and improvements exist or are satisfactorily provided to the property and to all building sites prior to building construction. Furthermore, all such subdivisions shall, to the extent that is practical, protect and preserve important environmental features of the land, as specified herein, and shall provide effective stormwater runoff controls and soil erosion control features in a manner that minimizes flooding, soil erosion, waterway embankment erosion, and contamination of water resources. 
(e)  Recording of plat. No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat or street dedication within the city shall be filed for record with the county recorder, or recorded by the county recorder, until a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision, or street dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Filing plat. Upon the approval of the final plat by the city council, it shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the county auditor and county recorder, as required by law. 
(g)  Request dely. In those cases where the owner/subdivider requests a delay in referral of a subdivision plat from the planning and zoning commission to the city council, such delay shall be allowed. However, if any plat, whether a preliminary plat, final plat or minor plat is delayed for referral from the planning and zoning commission to the city council for a period longer than one year from the date of review by the commission, said plat shall be resubmitted in the original fashion including payment of platting fees and updated dates on the submitted plat. City staff shall evaluate whether circumstances have changed with respect to details on the plat, with respect to the property being subdivided or with respect to developments on nearby properties that may have an effect on the proposed plat. If city staff feel that no changes are necessary regarding the proposed plat, the matter may be referred directly to the city council with no further review by the planning and zoning commission. 
(h)  Fees established. The city council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution fees for the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be considered filed with the city clerk, unless and until said plat is accompanied by the fee, as established by resolution of the city council from time to time, and as required by this chapter. 
(i)  Lot sales before final plat approval. No owner, subdivider or other person representing or working on behalf of the owner shall dispose of or sell any lot or lots within the area of jurisdiction of this chapter before the final plat thereof has been approved by the city council, and recorded as required by law. Any such lot sale or disposal prior to final plat approval shall result in forfeiture and payment of $300.00 for each lot or part of lot sold or disposed. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the city's right to any other remedies available to the city for the enforcement of this chapter. This provision shall not prevent marketing efforts to advertise or offer for sale such proposed lots subject to final plat approval. 
(j)  Building permit to be denied. No building permit shall be issued for new building construction on any lot, parcel, or tract, where a subdivision is required by this chapter, unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance with this chapter, and until all public infrastructure improvements required by this chapter have been accepted by the city, unless a final plat has been approved in lieu of completion of required public improvements as specified herein. 
(Code 2017, § 24-1; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. An alley is not a street. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land, or the boundary of the subdivision. 
    Building line means a line on a plat between which line and a street, alley, public right-of-way line or private place no building or structure may be erected. Building lines may establish front yard, side yard and rear yard building setbacks. 
    City engineer means the professional engineer registered in the state designated as city engineer by the city council. 
    Comprehensive plan means the general plan for the development of the community, which may be titled master plan, comprehensive plan or some other title, which plan has been adopted by the city council. Such "comprehensive plan" shall include any part of such plan separately adopted, including master street plan, transportation plan or recreation or trails plan or public parks plan and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end connecting to another street, and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn around. 
    Deed transfer means transfers or sales of smaller parcels of land from one property owner to another where said parcel transfer or sale will not result in the creation of a potentially developable parcel by virtue of added lot width, lot depth or lot area. 
    Developable parcel means one or more proposed lots, parcels or land area that have sufficient area, width and depth and are in a location where the potential for future new building construction is likely by virtue of an appropriate zoning classification for the property or likely zoning designation in the future, the presence of street frontage/street access or reasonable expectation of said street or roadway extension and ready, immediate access to all basic municipal utility services. Basic municipal utility services include water, gas, electric, communication and sanitary sewer services. In addition to these considerations, the presence or absence of environmentally sensitive land features may also influence the evaluation of whether the parcel in question is developable. 
    Development or redevelopment means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, new building or construction of other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Easement means an authorization by a property owner for another entity or person to use a designated part of the owner's property for a specified purpose. 
    Environmental report means a graphic and/or written summary of observed physical features on a parcel of land prepared by a person or firm with the background and credentials to perform such assessments and reports with particular attention paid towards natural topographic features such as steep slopes (greater than 18 percent slope), soils, wetlands and related drainage areas of local streams or rivers, floodplain areas, floodways and important plant communities including significant tree stands. The city engineer shall provide a list of pre-approved firms to the subdivider judged to be qualified to prepare the environmental report. The report must contain comments on the general characteristics of the subject property and, where appropriate, identification of important environmentally sensitive features on abutting property if protection measures on the subject property under consideration are necessary to protect the integrity of an important environmental feature on an abutting property. Said report shall recommend whether the site is suitable for development or if special measures need to be taken to protect identified environmentally sensitive land features on the subject property or if measures are necessary to protect such features on abutting properties with recommendations on the means to protect said features. 
    Environmentally sensitive land features means those natural features of land that are characterized by elements such as wetlands as defined herein and adjacent drainage areas important to the natural function of the wetlands, steep slopes (at least 18 percent slope), floodplains and floodways, natural prairie plant areas and significant tree stands, said tree stands consisting of overstory hardwood species trees with a mature height exceeding 30 feet, said species including oak, maple, linden, hickory and evergreen species such as pine, spruce and fir. 
    Environmentally sensitive slopes means naturally occurring slope features prior to development or land alteration with the following characteristics: 
(1)  Steep slope: 18 percent-25 percent, managed development allowed; 
(2)  Critical slope: 25 percent-40 percent, restricted or limited development allowed if engineering designs are deemed acceptable; 
(3)  Protected slopes: 40 percent or more, no development allowed. 
    Final plat means the map or plan of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in this chapter. 
    Flood hazard area and 500-year floodplain mean any area subject to flooding by a two-tenths percent (0.2 percent) probability flood, otherwise referred to as a 500 year flood; as designated by the state department of natural resources or the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the United States Department of Homeland Security. The flood hazard area is made up of two components: the floodway area and the floodway fringe area. 
    Floodplain buildable area means that portion of the lot remaining after the minimum yard area requirements (i.e., setbacks) of the zoning chapter have been met and shall not include that portion of the property within the 500-year floodplain. 
    Floodway , which is part of the flood hazard area or 100-year floodplain, means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands that must be reserved and protected in order to discharge and convey the waters of a 100 year flood event without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation more than one foot. The floodway is that area designated by the official flood boundary and floodway map for the city. 
    Floodway fringe means that portion of the 100-year (one percent flood) and 500-year (0.2 percent flood) floodplain extending beyond the floodway boundary. These boundaries are illustrated on the officially adopted flood boundary and floodway map for the city. 
    Governing body means the city council of the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    Improvements , also meaning required public infrastructure, means changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, turning lanes, roadway medians, curb paving, sidewalks, walk ways, parking lots, recreation trails, bicycle paths, public parks, landscaping, including earthen berms or grass sod, tree plantings, water mains, sewers, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageways, traffic signals, other traffic control devices, public utilities and any other public works, fixtures and appurtenances required by the city. 
    Lot means a tract of land represented and identified by number or letter designation on an official plat. A lot, not an outlot, identified on an official plat, will be presumed to be that portion of the plat that is intended for new building development. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets. 
    Lot, double frontage, means any lot which is not a corner lot which abuts two streets on two sides. 
    Major subdivision means all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of three or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of local government public service or utility facilities, street extension or the creation of any public improvements. 
    Metes and bounds means the method used to describe a tract of land that uses distances and angles, distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the parcel by reference to physical features of the land. 
    Minor subdivision and minor plat means any subdivision of land, which results in the creation of at least one potentially developable parcel as determined by city staff. Said subdivision shall contain no more than three lots including the remaining portion of the original parcel fronting on an existing street, not involving any new public street or road extension or construction and not involving the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvement, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the master plan, official map, zoning chapter, or this chapter. In general, deed transfers of smaller unbuildable parcels of land between property owners will not be considered a minor plat. In certain situations, a reconfiguration of existing lots or property lines on existing lots may not result in creation of any new developable lots. However, said reconfiguration of lot lines may result in the need for added utility easements or possible relocation of certain existing municipal service facilities. In these cases a minor plat will be required in order to establish and record proper utility line locations or utility easements. A minor plat shall also be considered to be a "final plat" for purposes of review, approval and recording of the approved minor plat. 
    Nonresidential subdivision means a subdivision, the intended use of which is other than residential, such as a commercial or industrial use. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
    Official plat means either an auditor's plat or a major or minor subdivision plat that meets the requirements of Iowa Code chs. 354 and 355 and that has been filed for record in the offices of the recorder, auditor and assessor. 
    Outlot means an area of a subdivision plat that is reserved or set aside for some purpose other than new building construction or public street use and is identified on the plat as an outlot or separate tract. 
    Owner means the legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or such representative as is fully and legally empowered to act on the owner's behalf. The owner may also be known as the subdivider. 
    Planning commission means the appointed commission designated by the city council for the purpose of this chapter, and may also be known as the zoning commission, in which case such commission shall be known as the planning and zoning commission. 
    Plat means a map, drawing, or chart on which an owner's or subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented, which the owner or subdivider submits for approval and intends, in final form, to record. 
    Resubdivision means a change in a plat of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or if such a change affects any map or plat legally recorded prior to December 10, 1979. 
    Separate tract or outlot means a parcel of land or a group of contiguous parcels of land under one ownership not intended for building development. All such tracts or outlots illustrated on a subdivision plat must be identified in the deed of dedication or owner's statement submitted with the plat as to their future intended usage, maintenance and ownership. 
    Soils report also geotechnical soils report means a report prepared by a licensed geotechnical engineer or a registered civil engineer experienced in soils engineering. A report that provides an understanding of soil conditions affecting the site. The report evaluates projects where foundations are supported by fill, locations with high groundwater tables, steep slopes or areas within floodplains. When these conditions are present a geotechnical soils report shall be required by the city engineer. 
    Street means public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation. In appropriate contexts, the term "street" may refer to the right-of-way bounded by the property lines of such public property, or may refer to the paving installed within such right-of-way. 
    Street, arterial, major or minor arterial, means a street primarily intended to carry large volumes of traffic from one part of the city to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting property via curb cuts for private driveways. Arterial streets are characterized by relatively few intersections with other streets. Said streets must be established with a dedicated public right-of-way area measuring at least one 100 feet in width. 
    Street, collector, means a street primarily designed to collect traffic from residential streets and to provide a linkage to arterial streets. Collector streets must be established with a dedicated public right-of-way area measuring at least 80 feet in width. Private driveway curb cut access points are to be limited or consolidated upon review and approval by the city engineer. 
    Street, residential sub-collector, means a street primarily designed to provide access to individual building lots with frequent driveway/curb cut access points and frequent intersections with other residential streets, said street providing an access route to nearby collector streets. All such residential streets must be established with a dedicated right-of-way area measuring at least 60 feet in width unless a waiver from this requirement is granted by the city council. 
    Subdivider means the owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person or entity legally empowered to act on the owner's behalf. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into two or more parts, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership and/or building development. The term "subdivision," when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided. The term "subdivision" shall also apply to proposals to establish public roadways or public rights-of-way for dedication to the city. However, the sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots i.e., deed transfers, where such sale or exchange does not create any additional building lots or developable parcels and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than 25 percent of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer, shall not be considered a subdivision. 
    Subdivision agent means any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or owner, in selling, leasing or developing, or offering to sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person consists solely of rendering legal services. 
    Subdivision plat means the graphic representation of the subdivision of land, prepared by a state licensed land surveyor, having a number or letter designation for each lot, tract or outlot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for the county where the land is located. 
    Traffic study or traffic report means a study prepared by a licensed transportation engineer or registered civil engineer experienced in transportation engineering. The study evaluates the existing transportation system serving a particular area and identifies any improvements necessary to maintain or improve the level of service of the transportation system. Typical components of a study include data collection, existing and projected traffic volumes, necessary improvements, impacts upon private properties and structures, alternate alignments, physical constraints and roadway design criteria to be utilized. Traffic studies shall be required when the city engineer determines that known or suspected traffic conflict issues are presented in conjunction with a proposed subdivision plat. 
    Utilities means systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas, electricity, wastewater, sewage, stormwater, telephone, cablevision, internet or other communication or information systems. 
    Watercourse means intermittent and perennial drainageways as indicated by the county soil survey or other official source. 
    Wetlands means that classification of land subject to protection measures as indicated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or this Code. The term shall also mean those lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface and the land is normally or intermittently or seasonally covered in shallow water. Said wetlands must: 
(1)  Have a predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation (i.e., plants that tolerate seasonal or permanent saturated soil conditions) typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
(Code 2017, § 24-2; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2854, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 20-3. - Approval required. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any sale or contract for sale is made for any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure, parking lot or other facility in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider, or the developer, or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 24-3; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-4. - Manner of classification. 
    The department of community development shall determine whether the proposed subdivision is a major or minor subdivision as defined in section 20-2. To aid in this determination, the subdivider or authorized subdivision agent shall submit in writing or otherwise document the principal features of access, relationship to public streets and public utilities, proposed number of lots, and other pertinent data. If the proposed subdivision is determined to be major, the developer shall be required to submit preliminary and final plats in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the proposed subdivision is determined to be a minor subdivision the developer shall be required to submit a minor plat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 24-4; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-5. - Improvements. 
(a)  Required. The owner shall, at the owner's expense, install and construct all improvements required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established for such improvements by the city and Cedar Falls Utilities (CFU) and as shown on the approved preliminary plat. 
(b)  Inspection. All improvements shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider, and shall be the actual cost of the inspection to the city. 
(c)  Minimum improvements. The improvements set forth below for all proposed subdivision plats shall be considered the minimum improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  Streets. 
a.  The owner of land being platted/subdivided shall provide the grading of the entire street right-of-way, alley or public place and provide appropriate paving, including curb and gutter on all streets. All streets or alleys shall be of such width and shall be so constructed as to meet the standards of the city (and be in compliance with state law). If any street is established with boulevards or divided lanes that incorporate natural landscaping, private entry signs or other optional decorative components desired by the subdivider, said street must be established with adequate provision for future maintenance of said landscaped area and other private components by the subdivider or property owners' association within the subdivision plat area unless the city agrees to assume maintenance responsibilities. These provisions relating to boulevard establishment and maintenance must be outlined in the subdivision deed of dedication or statement of restrictions and shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
b.  Under appropriate circumstances the city may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a street having a width greater than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the city street system as it relates to both the area being platted and other areas. In such event, the city shall pay the subdivider the difference in cost of improving the wider street and the street width reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the subdivision taken alone. The streets shall, upon final approval by the city engineer and acceptance by the city, become the property of the city. In order to provide a continuous street system that will serve adjacent properties in the future, all streets shall be constructed to the outer or perimeter boundary of the plat area to allow for the future extension of said street to adjacent properties. An adequate turn-around area at the end of said streets as determined by the city engineer, must be provided and maintained by the subdivider until a connecting street is improved, dedicated and accepted by the city council. A waiver of the requirement of street construction to the outer boundary of the plat area may be granted by the city council in consideration of special circumstances upon the recommendation of the city engineer. In such cases of waiver, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future street extension. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer system. 
a.  The owner of the land being platted shall make adequate provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage from the platted area with due regard being given to present or reasonably foreseeable needs. There shall be constructed, at the subdivider's expense, a sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping stations, pumping equipment, manholes, and all other necessary or desirable appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or parcels of land within the platted area to a connection with the city's sanitary sewer system. The sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications of the city and at the sewer grades as established by the subdivider's engineer and reviewed and approved by city staff. In order to provide for the future extension of sanitary sewer service to adjacent properties, the sanitary sewer system shall be installed and constructed to the outer or perimeter boundaries of the proposed subdivision area. A waiver of the requirement of sanitary sewer construction to the outer boundary of the plat area may be granted by the city council in consideration of special circumstances upon the recommendation of the city engineer. In such cases of waiver, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future sewer extension. The developer shall pay any sanitary sewer tapping fees that may be required by the city. Said tapping fees must be paid at the time of final plat approval by the city council. 
b.  Under appropriate circumstances the city may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the city sanitary sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and other areas. In such event the city shall pay the subdivider the difference in cost of the pipe and installation between the sewer required for the subdivision plat and the larger sewer structure necessary to serve the larger area beyond the boundaries of the plat. The above-mentioned facilities for the collection and disposal of sanitary sewage from the platted area shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the city, become the property of the city and shall be established within the public street right-of-way or within public easements of sufficient width to allow adequate access for future maintenance, repair and reconstruction of said facilities, including excavation. 
(3)  Storm sewer system. The owner of land being platted shall install and construct a storm sewer system adequate to serve the plat area. The storm sewer system shall be extended to the outer or perimeter boundaries of the proposed subdivision plat area for the purpose of future extension to adjacent properties. A waiver of the requirement of storm sewer construction to the outer boundary of the plat area may be granted by the city council in consideration of special circumstances upon the recommendation of the city engineer. In such cases of waiver, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future sewer extension. 
a.  Under appropriate circumstances the city may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, installation of a storm sewer system that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the city storm sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in cost of the pipe and installation between the sewer required for the subdivision plat and the larger sewer structure necessary to serve the larger area beyond the boundaries of the plat. 
b.  The sewers shall, upon inspection, approval, and acceptance by the city, become the property of the city and said sewers shall be established within the public street right-of-way or within public easements of sufficient width to allow adequate access for future maintenance, repair and reconstruction of said facilities, including excavation. In the storm sewer design phase, consideration shall be given to alternatives and principles of stormwater management, such as "conservation design principles" or in conformance with the provisions of a stormwater management plan if such plan has been adopted by the city. 
(4)  Stormwater management. All requirements outlined in this Code relating to stormwater management, illicit discharges and erosion control, or any similar provisions (chapter 24) shall be followed in accordance with city engineering division specifications. 
(5)  Water distribution system. The owner of land being platted shall install and construct a water main distribution system in accordance with the service policy of the municipal water utility of the city to adequately serve all lots or parcels of land within the platted area, with due regard to the present and reasonably foreseeable needs of the entire area including extension of said water distribution system to the outer or perimeter boundaries of the proposed subdivision plat area for the purpose of future extension to adjacent properties, and shall connect the same to the existing municipal water distribution system. Extension of the water main/distribution system to the outer boundary of the subdivision plat may be waived by the city council and Cedar Falls Utilities upon recommendation by the city engineer. In such cases of waiver, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future water line extension. 
a.  The water mains/distribution system and service stubs or service conduits shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the municipal water utility of the city. The subdivider or subdivider's engineer shall apply for a construction permit, submitting reproducible copies of the required state department of natural resources forms and appropriate schedules and water system construction plans for review by the municipal water utility of the city. 
b.  The owner shall construct the water system extension according to requirements of the municipal water utility of the city and provide the required bonds and insurance documents to the city. Upon final approval and acceptance by the municipal water utility of the city the water mains shall become the property of the municipal water utility of the city. Said water system lines and facilities shall be established within public street right-of-way or public easements of sufficient width to allow adequate access for future maintenance, repair and reconstruction of said facilities, including excavation. 
(6)  Electric distribution system. Underground electric facilities shall be installed by the municipal electric utility of the city to all newly platted residential subdivisions in accordance with the electric service policy of the municipal electric utility of the city. 
a.  The owner of the land being platted shall submit a plan of the proposed subdivision to the municipal electric utility of the city. The municipal electric utility shall design and request easements to accommodate electric facilities in the newly platted subdivision. All said public easements shall be established of sufficient width to allow for adequate access for future maintenance, repair and reconstruction of said facilities, including excavation. Said electric facilities shall be extended to the outer perimeter or boundary of the subdivision plat area unless a waiver of said extension is granted by the municipal electric utility of the city and the city. In such cases of waiver of extension, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future electric line extensions. 
b.  Requests for unusual underground electric facilities shall be evaluated on an individual basis. For these unusual cases, an allowance of three years base revenues shall be made by the municipal electric utility to cover installation of electric facilities with the balance of the estimated extension cost to be paid in advance by the owner/subdivider. At the end of the three years the owner/subdivider may request a review of the actual cost of the extension and the actual base revenue for three years. 
(7)  Street lighting. Street lighting for newly platted subdivisions shall normally be designed and installed by the municipal electric utility of the city with the approval of the engineering division of the city. All lighting system costs shall be borne and paid for by the owner. Allowable street lighting fixtures shall be determined by the municipal electric utility. Any unusual request for street lights other than the standard fixture and pole shall be at the customer/developer expense and approved by the municipal electric utility of the city of and the city. 
(8)  Communication systems. The owner of the land being platted shall submit a plan of the proposed subdivision to all authorized communication network providers in the area. These providers include private service providers and the municipal communication utility of the city. All communication facilities established within a subdivision shall utilize a common trench area as designed and constructed by city utilities personnel and the city engineer. Public easements must be established of sufficient width necessary to accommodate the installation and excavation/repair of all communication facilities in the newly platted subdivision. 
(9)  Natural gas distribution system. Natural gas service shall be made available to the land being platted in accordance with the service policy of the municipal gas utility of the city. The subdivider of land being platted shall apply for natural gas service, submitting a plan of the proposed subdivision to the municipal gas utility of the city. The owner and the municipal gas utility of the city shall install a natural gas distribution system in accordance with the service policy of the municipal gas utility of the city. The natural gas distribution system is the property of the municipal gas utility of the city. Said natural gas system lines and facilities shall be established within the public street right-of-way or within public easements of sufficient width to allow adequate access for future maintenance, repair and reconstruction of said facilities, including excavation. Said natural gas lines must be extended to the outer perimeter or boundary of the subdivision plat area unless a waiver of said extension is granted by the municipal gas utility of the city and the city council upon the recommendation of the city engineer. In such cases of waiver, adequate easements must be provided in anticipation of future water line extension. 
(10)  Other improvements. The owner of the land being platted shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within the public right-of-way, grading, seeding or sodding of all lots, the planting of any required trees in the parking areas and the installation of street signs and other public appurtenances such as traffic signals, medians, turn lanes, extension of existing turn lanes, etc., as required by the city engineer. All such improvements shall be constructed under the direction of the appropriate city authority. Public sidewalks shall be installed at the time of new building construction on new or recently platted lots or within five years following final subdivision approval. The required width of the sidewalk shall be determined by the city engineer. Sidewalks must also be installed at the time of new home construction adjacent to abutting streets outside of the subdivision if lots within the subdivision abut the adjacent street right-of-way. After five years following final subdivision approval the owners of any undeveloped lots or properties adjacent to public right-of-way areas where public sidewalks are required, shall install the required sidewalk to city specifications upon notification by the city engineering division. In those cases where a property owner is unable or unwilling to install said required sidewalk the city council may contract the work to be completed and assess the cost for said sidewalk installation to said property owner. Future maintenance of all such sidewalks will be the responsibility of the owner of the private property abutting said public sidewalk in conformance with chapter 19. In appropriate circumstances the city may require the installation of a sidewalk wider than 48 inches. In these cases the city may pay for the "over-size" difference in cost between the typical sidewalk width (i.e., 48 inches width) and the enlarged sidewalk width. 
(11)  Public accessways, walkways or sidewalks. In appropriate circumstances public accessways, walkways or sidewalks shall be required to be installed by the owner across private land for purposes of providing access to nearby subdivisions, schools, recreation trails, parks, open green space areas or other facilities where public access is judged to be necessary. The required width of said walkway or accessway shall be determined by the city engineer. In these cases the subdivider shall be required to provide public access easements of sufficient width to allow installation and maintenance of said pedestrian accessways. The subdivider shall be required to install said pedestrian accessways in conjunction with the installation of other required public infrastructure facilities and improvements in the subdivision in conjunction with final plat approval. The owner or property owners' association within the subdivision shall be responsible for future maintenance of said pedestrian accessways. In cases of doubt regarding responsibility or maintenance, the immediately abutting property owners shall be responsible for maintenance of said walkways, accessways or sidewalks. In appropriate circumstances a delay in pedestrian accessway or sidewalk installation may be appropriate beyond the time needed to construct and install other required public infrastructure and shall be subject to a special agreement between the subdivider and the city with respect to timing of installation of said walkways, access ways or sidewalks. 
(12)  Public recreation trails. In those cases where the city trails plan illustrates the need for the establishment of a public recreation trail that may pass through or upon the proposed subdivision plat, the subdivider shall be required to provide adequate access easements for the establishment of said trail area in conformance with city engineering specifications. The required width of all such trails shall be determined by the city engineer. Recreation trail installation costs shall be shared between the owner and city with an approved agreement upon recommendation by the city engineer. In those cases where a public recreation trail is indicated on the city trails plan in a location where a typical city sidewalk is to be installed (i.e., in the adjacent public right-of-way), the owner shall be responsible for installing the recreation trail in lieu of the typical public sidewalk in that location with the provision that the city shall pay for the difference in the cost of a typical sidewalk section (i.e., 48 inches width) compared to the cost of the trail section. Public recreation trail installation shall normally be completed in conjunction with the installation of other required public infrastructure improvements in conjunction with final plat approval. In appropriate circumstances a delay in trail installation may be appropriate and such delay beyond the time frame for installation of other required public infrastructure shall be subject to a special agreement between the owner and the city. 
(d)  Easements required. Easements shall be established when specified by city officials including city utilities personnel for purposes of providing access to or use of various public facilities including, but not limited to, municipal utilities, sewers, drainageways, trails, public access ways or any other such designated easement areas. All said easements shall remain open without any obstruction, and no building structures of any kind, whether permanent, temporary or portable, shall be permitted within said easement areas. All easement areas shall be free of building obstructions and made accessible in order to allow ease of entry and permit repair and maintenance activities as needed within said easement area. Property line fences, landscaping materials or driveways may be installed in said easement areas upon condition that all said components or obstructions shall be removed at the expense of the property owner in case of repair, maintenance, installation or excavation in the easement area. All required easements shall be clearly shown and labeled on subdivision plats and described further within the subdivision owner's statement of deed of dedication using standard easement provision language as specified by city officials. 
(1)  Public utilities. Where alleys are not provided, or where otherwise required by the present or future placement of public utilities, utility easements of not less than ten feet in width shall be granted by the owner along rear, and where necessary, along front or side lot lines for public utility requirements. Except where prohibited by topography, such easements shall be centered on lot lines. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines, or across lots when necessary for the placement and maintenance of utilities. No buildings or structures, except as necessary for utilities, shall be permitted on such easements. 
(2)  Easements along streams and watercourses. Wherever any stream or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at the subdivider's own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement along said stream or watercourse as necessary for the proper maintenance of the watercourse, as recommended by the city engineer. All said drainage easements must be kept free of any obstruction including landscaping features, fences, berms, re-grading or similar activities that alter or change the drainage patterns through the easement area. 
(e)  Maintenance bond required. The owner of the land being platted shall be required to provide to the city property maintenance bonds satisfactory to the city, so as to ensure that for a period of three years from the date of acceptance of any required public improvement the owner shall be responsible to maintain all such improvements in good repair. In those situations where repairs of certain infrastructure are necessary within the three-year bonding period, the city engineer shall determine whether a new maintenance bond shall be established by the owner for an additional three-year period following reconstruction/repair of said infrastructure. This additional bonding period shall be established only for the portion of failed infrastructure which has been repaired. 
(Code 2017, § 24-5; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-6. - Minimum standards for the design of subdivisions. 
(a)  Standards prescribed. The standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered the minimum standards necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Land suitability. No land shall be built upon which is found to be unsuitable for building construction by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory topography or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are corrected to the satisfaction of the city. Other land features that shall be deemed to be undevelopable shall be any that are judged to be an environmentally sensitive land feature including wetlands and adjacent drainage areas important to the natural function of the wetlands, steep slopes, natural prairie areas, and significant tree stands. These land features shall be identified and evaluated as to their environmentally sensitive importance by an environmental report to be provided by the owner. If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision for any of the reasons cited in this section, the city council shall state its reasons in writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present data regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the city council may reaffirm, modify or withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability. 
(c)  Lands subject to flooding. Any portion of a proposed subdivision or plat that encroaches into or incorporates into the plat any portion of the floodway zone of the 100-year flood hazard area (i.e., 100-year floodplain), said floodway zone shall be shown on the plat as an unbuildable tract or outlot and shall not be shown as part of any platted building lot or public street or as contributing to minimum required lot area of any proposed building lot. In appropriate circumstances, bridges or stream crossings may be approved subject to Iowa Department of Natural Resources (DNR) review and approval. Clearly stated restrictions or provisions permanently prohibiting any disturbances of said floodway zone (relating to activities such as excavation, landscaping, placement of fill material, establishment of building structures, fences, parking lots or other similar facilities) shall be stated in the subdivision deed of dedication and in any document transferring ownership to said tract or outlot. Such provision shall be made permanent by the owner granting a perpetual easement in favor of the city and the general public, in the nature of a permanent floodway easement, which shall be established across the floodway area for purposes of protecting the floodway zone perpetually from development or disturbance. It is intended that all floodway zones shall remain in open green space and/or shall be used for a passive public purpose with only such minimum level of disturbance as may be permitted, subject to city review and approval. Furthermore, with respect to areas of the 100-year (one percent) or 500-year (0.2 percent) flood hazard area extending beyond the floodway zone (i.e., floodway fringe areas), no subdivision shall contain a lot or part of a lot or property intended for new building construction that is either wholly or partially located within the 500-year flood hazard area and outside or beyond the floodway zone, provided, however, that the subdivision may include newly-created lots with a floodplain buildable area outside of the 500-year flood boundary, and, provided further, that the 500-year floodplain does not encompass more than 25 percent of the newly created lot, as provided in section 26-177(c). Said floodway fringe areas may be used for open space uses such as parks, playgrounds, gardens, and parking lots. No building structures including dwellings, commercial buildings, storage sheds or garages are to be allowed in the 500-year floodplain area. 
(d)  Wetlands. No portion of a proposed subdivision or plat shall establish building lots, streets or other facilities wholly or partially in areas that are identified as wetlands or contain characteristics of wetlands as defined herein or as defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. All such wetland areas shall be preserved and protected along with any adjacent stream or drainage area that is necessary to the natural function of said wetland. No said wetland or nearby stream or drainage channel shall be shown on the plat as part of any developable lot for purposes of satisfying minimum required lot area. All such wetland and corresponding drainage areas must be identified and shown on the subdivision plat as a separate undevelopable tract or outlot with provisions outlined in the deed of dedication and in any document transferring ownership of said tract or outlot with clearly stated provisions permanently prohibiting any disturbances of said wetland and adjacent stream or drainage channel relating to excavation, landscaping, placement of fill material, establishment of building structures, fences, parking lots or other facilities. Such provisions shall be made permanent by the owner granting a perpetual easement in favor of the city and the general public, in the nature of protecting said wetland area perpetually from development or disturbance. All natural vegetation associated with the wetland and adjacent stream or drainage area must be maintained. Furthermore, said wetland area and, where appropriate, any adjacent stream and drainage area shall be protected with a permanent drainage/wetland easement so as to ensure no future disturbance or alteration of said wetland and drainage area. In appropriate circumstances certain wetland areas may be deemed to be of "lesser quality" or to be "less critical" wetlands by an approved environmental report, in which cases said lesser quality or less critical wetlands may be removed via an approved mitigation approval process through the United States Army Corps of Engineers along with approval by the city council upon recommendation by the city engineer. 
(e)  Plat to conform to comprehensive plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets and the general nature and extent of the lots and land uses proposed shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city, provided such plan has been adopted by the city; and shall conform to other plans, including, but not limited to, a major street plan, a sanitary sewer system plan or a parks, trails and open space plan, provided such plan has been adopted by the city. 
(f)  Construction standards for improvements. In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the city engineer shall from time to time prepare, and the city council shall from time to time adopt by resolution, technical standards for the construction of public improvements. Such technical standards for public improvements shall contain the minimum acceptable specifications for the construction of public improvements. Such technical standards may vary for classes of improvements, giving due regard to the classification of streets or other improvements, and the extent and character of the area served by the improvements. Upon adoption by the city council by resolution, such technical standards for public improvements shall have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein. 
(g)  Parks and open space. All residential subdivisions shall be so designed as to meet the neighborhood park and open space needs of its residents. Such needs may be met by dedication and acceptance of public park land and/or by reservation by covenant of private open space, provided there shall exist sufficient covenants running with the land to ensure adequate maintenance by the property owners benefiting from such open space. 
(h)  Parks and school sites reserved. If a tract being subdivided includes lands proposed to be parks or school sites in the comprehensive plan or other official plan of the city, the owner shall indicate such areas on the plat and shall make provisions for reservation of said sites. 
(i)  Special development area (SDA). In those areas where a proposed subdivision plat incorporates special or unique environmentally sensitive land features such as floodways, floodplains, wetland areas and adjacent stream or drainage areas, steep slopes, highly erodible soils, prairie areas or significant tree areas, all said areas judged to be worthy of special protection and preservation, a special development area may be designated by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. A decision to allow a special development area shall be accompanied by evidence that the developer is unable to meet intended development goals due to unusual environmental features present on the property. The special development area shall afford to the subdivider an opportunity to alter the subdivision plat in such a manner that preserves and protects the identified environmentally sensitive areas while accommodating, to the maximum extent that is practicable, the density of uses envisioned by the subdivider. Only those land uses permitted in the zoning district shall be permitted. One hundred percent replacement or fulfillment of the subdivider's subdivision goals (i.e., creation of maximum number of building lots) is not ensured or guaranteed by this provision. The accommodations that may be considered by the city council as recommended by the commission are reduced lot areas, lot widths, lot depths and reduced building setback requirements, particularly relating to rear yard and side yard setback requirements, allowance of increased building height and also including minor reductions to on-site parking requirements specified in the zoning chapter along with possible reduced street widths. Reduced street widths are to be considered only in extremely unusual circumstances. As a general rule, exceptions to lot area, lot width, lot depth or building setback requirements are to be no less than 75 percent of the normal requirement for the district in which the development is located (i.e., up to 25 percent reduction). Parking requirement reductions, including certain design standards such as parking stall dimensions or driveway widths, shall be kept to a minimum and shall be allowed only the extent that such a reduction shall not create traffic or parking problems. These accommodations may be achieved through a "cluster development plan," which sets aside and preserves the identified environmentally sensitive areas and establishes a plan for the development to occur in a more compact, "cluster" development scheme on the remaining land area within the proposed subdivision. A special development area plan must be accompanied by a development agreement between the owner and the city that outlines the special accommodations, provisions and exceptions to normally required standards. The agreement must also identify the key environmentally sensitive land features to be preserved and protected and how those components will be maintained and protected in the future. 
(Code 2017, § 24-6; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2854, § 2, 10-5-2015) 
Secs. 20-7-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - MINOR PLAT 

Sec. 20-31. - Submission required. 
(a)  In a minor subdivision of land, the owner shall file for approval a minor plat which shall include six copies of said minor plat submitted to the city planner for initial review by city staff along with one reduced copy (no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches) for reproduction/copying purposes. An electronic copy of the proposed plat must also be submitted to the city engineering division utilizing a compatible AutoCAD program. The plats shall be accompanied by a signed statement from the property owner addressed to the planning and zoning commission stating the proposed intent and uses of the proposed minor plat. The plat fee must be submitted at the time of initial plat submittal. In certain cases a sanitary sewer tapping fee may be required in conjunction with minor plat approval. Said fee, if required, must be paid at the time of initial plat submittal. 
(b)  This minor plat provision shall not apply to lands acquired by the city or any city agency for use by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 24-16; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-32. - Required scale. 
    A minor plat required in this article shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger. 
(Code 2017, § 24-17; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-33. - Information required to be shown. 
    The minor plat shall be clearly labeled "minor subdivision plat" with a unique name and shall comply with relevant state code requirements pertaining to "plats of survey" and shall be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  A plat illustrating all contiguous holdings of the owner, with an indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided, the location of public streets and the manner wherein the property is to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired. 
(2)  All public streets, subdivisions, landowners and landowners' addresses within 200 feet of the boundaries of the plat. The location of adjacent landowners' properties must be shown on the plat. Addresses for each individual landowner may be provided on a separate sheet. 
(3)  A key location map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development and in relation to the city boundaries. 
(4)  The current zoning classification of the property under consideration along with zoning classifications of all abutting properties. In addition, the required building setbacks for the property as specified in the zoning chapter shall be provided on the plat and illustrated on each lot. 
(5)  The plat shall contain the location and dimensions of: 
a.  The proposed minor subdivision's exterior boundaries and proposed lots, streets, drives, or easements therein. 
b.  Existing property lines, streets, easements, buildings, drainageways, tree masses, soil types, and other existing features affecting the plat or affected thereby. 
c.  The location and width of proposed and existing accessways, streets, highways, roads and pedestrian ways. 
d.  The location and size of existing and proposed public sewer lines, gas mains, water mains, culverts, pipelines, cables or other underground utility installations, with a description of the effect on each utility capacity and service level. 
e.  Public and private parks and open spaces. 
f.  Lot and block numbers of proposed and existing lots with the area of each lot provided on the plat. 
g.  North arrow, scale, date, subdivision's name and address, and the property's legal description. 
h.  The distance from some corner of the subdivision to some corner of the congressional division of which it is a part. 
i.  The location and dimension of any and all wetland areas shall be clearly shown. Provisions regarding the disposition of such lands shall be stated. 
j.  Areas within the 500-year flood hazard area shall be clearly shown on the plat with no lots to be established in these areas, except to the extent specifically authorized by sections 20-6(3) and 26-177(c). 
k.  Topographic elevations and contours at two-foot intervals of the property along with a soils map analysis of the property, which describes soil types and soil characteristics. Topographic elevations and soils information may be shown on an attached plat that also shows proposed lot lines and street locations of the plat map. 
l.  A written environmental report for the proposed plat area shall be completed for all minor plats containing three acres or more. Following receipt of the environmental report, city staff shall evaluate whether the minor plat may be processed as submitted or if the plat must be modified in order to preserve or protect the identified environmentally sensitive land features. It may be necessary to establish a special development area (SDA) prior to or in conjunction with minor plat approval. In appropriate cases, the requirement for submittal of an environmental report may be waived by city staff if it is clear that the proposed minor plat is merely revising property boundaries and where no new building construction is anticipated or on properties already developed where it is clearly evident that no such environmentally sensitive land features exist. In those situations where a plat contains less than three acres in area, where it is clearly evident that an important environmentally sensitive land feature exists, measures shall be taken by the owner to preserve or protect said environmental features in conformance with this article. 
m.  A written and signed statement in which the owner sets forth the proposed land uses, current zoning district, restrictions, easements, building lines, public improvements (if any), or connections to public improvements within the area of the plat. Any tracts or outlots illustrated on the plat but not intended to be developed must be identified in the owner's statement as to their intended usage, future maintenance and ownership. 
(Code 2017, § 24-18; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2854, § 3, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 20-34. - Procedure for approval; effect of approval. 
(a)  Following review of the initial minor plat submittal to city staff, six copies of the final minor plat signed by a licensed land surveyor in the state along with one reproducible size plat (i.e., 11 inches by 17 inches), one affidavit of ownership addressed to the planning and zoning commission, and three copies of a written and signed statement of proposed restrictions, easements and improvements within the area of the plat shall be filed with said commission, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as stated within the city fee schedule and sanitary sewer tapping fee unless said fees have already been paid. Appropriate city council resolution forms must also be submitted by the owner (three copies each). There shall be forthwith referred to the city engineer and other city technical staff copies of said minor plat and a copy of the owner's statement along with other relevant information including the environmental report. The city engineer shall carefully examine the plat for its conformance with the laws, ordinances and policies of the city, the existing street system and good engineering practices, and shall submit findings in duplicate to the commission, together with a copy of the plat received. 
(b)  When said engineer's report is received by the planning and zoning commission, it shall as soon as possible thereafter consider the report and pass upon the minor plat. Said commission shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval, and, in case of modification or disapproval, give its reasons therefor. Thereafter, the commission must submit all six copies of the minor plat, together with a copy of the owner's statement, a copy of the engineer's report, and a signed copy of its recommendations, to the city council. 
(c)  After receipt of the foregoing documents, the city council shall take action upon the minor plat, certifying its approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor. If approved, all six copies shall be duly certified and one copy shall be delivered to the planning and zoning commission, one to the city engineer, one to the city clerk, two copies to CFU and the sixth shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. 
(d)  Following final approval of the minor plat the subdivider shall supply to the city engineer a reproducible full sized paper copy along with an electronic copy of the approved plat to the city engineering division utilizing a compatible AutoCAD format. 
(e)  The approval of the minor plat by the city council constitutes acceptance of the subdivision and authorization to proceed with development. 
(f)  Prior to approval of the minor plat by the city council, if any public improvements are required, the owner shall proceed with submittal of construction plans for all said required improvements to the city engineer and shall submit construction plans, bonds, financial security and other required documents and certifications in conformance with section 20-125. 
(Code 2017, § 24-19; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 20-35-20-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 20-57. - Submission required. 
    Requirements of the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall prepare and file with the city planner six copies of the preliminary plat, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger to be submitted for initial city staff review. A reduced size plat (i.e., 11 inches by 17 inches) shall be submitted for reproduction/copying purposes. A proposed owner's statement or deed of dedication shall also be submitted along with plat fee payment. Sheet size of full size plats shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Where more than one sheet is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the total number of sheets in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin. 
(Code 2017, § 24-27; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-58. - Information required to be shown. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall present the total land holdings of the owner on adjacent land or abutting the area intended for immediate development unless said larger property area is allowed to be excluded from the preliminary plat presentation by the city engineer. The preliminary plat shall show or have attached thereto, the following: 
(1)  Title, scale, north arrow and date. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or resemble existing subdivision names in the county, as approved by the county auditor. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner and the name, address and profession of the person preparing the plat. The agent, if any, representing the owner must be clearly identified with name, address and profession. 
(4)  A key location map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development and in relation to the city boundaries. 
(5)  The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land shall be shown on the plat. A list of all owners of record of property located within 200 feet of the subdivision boundary shall be attached. The addresses of all record owners within 200 feet shall also be provided. These addresses may be provided on a separate sheet. 
(6)  The location of existing property lines, streets and alleys, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses, and other existing features affecting the plat. 
(7)  Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining property with a statement of minimum required building setbacks on each lot as specified in the zoning chapter. 
(8)  Topographic elevations and contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet accompanied by a note on the plat briefly describing the nature and extent of any topographic changes. 
(9)  The legal description of the area being platted. 
(10)  The boundary of the area being platted, shown as a dark line, with the approximate length of boundary lines and the approximate location of the property in reference to known section lines. 
(11)  The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions and area of proposed lots. Building setback lines as specified in the zoning chapter, must be illustrated on each lot adjacent to all proposed public rights-of-way. 
(12)  The location, width and dimensions of all streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated for public use. If boulevard streets are proposed, said boulevards must be clearly illustrated and indicated whether the boulevard is to be landscaped or made up of other material, specifying such material. 
(13)  Illustrate the location of all existing and proposed public sidewalks, trails or other pedestrian pathways. 
(14)  The proposed names of all streets in the area being platted. Proposed street names shall not resemble or duplicate the names of existing streets within the city unless the proposed street is a continuation of an existing street. 
(15)  Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities. 
(16)  Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and limitations. 
(17)  Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public or community purposes, or shown for such purpose in the comprehensive plan or other adopted plans. 
(18)  Regulatory flood elevation data. Limits of the 500-year floodplain boundaries including floodway and floodway fringe, original and revised, must be shown upon the plat. 
(19)  The location and dimensions of any and all wetland areas, as defined herein, shall be clearly shown. Provisions regarding the disposition of such lands shall be stated. 
(20)  The plat shall be accompanied by a written and signed statement or deed of dedication in which the subdivider sets forth the proposed restrictions, easements, building lines, public improvements and other features, within the area of the plat. Any tracts or outlots illustrated on the plat but not intended to be developed must be identified in the owner's statement or deed of dedication as to their intended usage, future maintenance and ownership. 
(21)  The plat shall be accompanied by an aerial photograph of the proposed development site with soil types identified on said photograph. A soils analysis shall also be provided which describes soil types present on the site along with a description of the key characteristics of each soil type. 
(22)  Any other pertinent information, including, but not limited to, traffic reports, or more detailed soils reports, geotechnical soils reports as specified by the city engineer. 
(23)  The fee, as required by the city's fee schedule for subdivision plats. 
(Code 2017, § 24-28; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-59. - Submittal of environmental report. 
(a)  In all cases, where a preliminary plat is submitted for consideration, a written environmental report must be submitted in conjunction with plat submittal. 
(b)  Following receipt of the environmental report, city staff shall evaluate whether the preliminary plat can be processed as submitted or if the plat must be modified in order to preserve or protect any identified environmentally sensitive land features. 
(c)  If a preliminary plat is submitted at the time of year when it is not practical to produce a thorough environmental report or when it is difficult to conduct accurate on-site inspections (i.e., mid-winter), the preliminary plat may be considered with the understanding that a complete environmental report reflecting actual site conditions shall be submitted prior to final plat submittal. If the final environmental report indicates that streets or lot lines may need to be relocated or similar plat changes are necessary in order to accommodate environmentally sensitive land features, the preliminary plat shall be amended accordingly. The preliminary plat may need to be re-submitted illustrating the necessary revisions. In appropriate circumstances a special development area (SDA) shall be established with city council approval in conjunction with preliminary plat approval. In appropriate circumstances establishment of an SDA may involve rezoning a portion of said property, which shall be accomplished prior to final plat approval. Approval of the preliminary plat without an approved environmental report on file does not guarantee final plat approval based on the original preliminary plat submittal. A final plat shall not be approved without submittal of the required environmental report. 
(Code 2017, § 24-29; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-60. - Procedure for approval; effect of approval. 
(a)  Following preliminary staff review of the plat, six copies of the corrected preliminary plat shall be submitted along with one copy of an attorney's title opinion addressed to the city planning and zoning commission, together with three copies of the owner's statement or deed of dedication, shall be filed with the commission, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as stated within the city fee schedule. The attorney's title opinion shall state the names of the owners or holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Lien waivers and mortgage approvals shall be submitted prior to plat approval. The plat and plat fee along with all required documents shall be in order and in conformance with city requirements prior to referral of the plat to the planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  Appropriate city council resolution forms shall be submitted by the developer (three copies each). 
(2)  There shall forthwith be referred one copy of the plat and a copy of the owner's statement to the city engineer. The city engineer shall carefully examine the plat as to its compliance with the laws and ordinances of the city, the existing street system and good engineering practices, and shall submit the engineer's findings in duplicate to the commission, together with the copy of the plat received. 
(b)  When the engineer's report is received by the commission, it shall as soon as possible thereafter consider the report and pass upon the plat. It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor. The commission shall forthwith submit six copies of the preliminary plat, together with a copy of the owner's statement, a copy of the engineer's report and a signed copy of its recommendations to the city council. The preliminary plat shall be in complete conformance with city engineering specifications prior to submittal of the plat to the city council. 
(c)  The council shall then take action upon the preliminary plat, certifying its approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor. If approved, all six copies shall be duly certified and one copy shall be delivered to the commission, one to the city engineer, one to the city clerk, two to Cedar Falls Utilities and the sixth shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. 
(d)  Following final approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall supply to the city engineer a reproducible copy of the approved plat and an electronic version on a compatible AutoCAD program. Approval of the preliminary plat by the city council shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but shall be authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(e)  Duration of approval of preliminary plat. The approval of a preliminary plat by the city council shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of such approval, except upon application for and approval of an extension of such period of validity, by the city council. A preliminary plat shall remain valid indefinitely as long as some portion of the original preliminary plat area has been developed as part of a final plat during subsequent two-year intervals until the entire preliminary plat area is developed. 
(Code 2017, § 24-30; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-61. - Authorization to install improvements. 
(a)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization by the city council for the subdivider to proceed with installation and construction of required public improvements as required by this division, and as shown on the preliminary plat, subject to submittal of an approved environmental report. The environmental report shall be prepared by a qualified person or firm with demonstrated training and experience in environmental assessments. In those cases where a special development area (SDA) has been approved on a preliminary basis, construction of infrastructure shall not proceed until the SDA has gained final approval by the city council. In appropriate circumstances, approval of the SDA may involve rezoning of a portion of the property under consideration. In such circumstances, the rezoning must be completed prior to installation of any public infrastructure. 
(b)  No such improvement shall be constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles, cross sections, and other specifications for the construction of such improvement have been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the city engineer. All said construction plans, profiles and specifications for construction of all required improvements and public infrastructure as indicated on the preliminary plat, including cost estimates, shall be submitted and approved by the city engineer prior to submittal of the final plat to city staff for review and consideration. 
(Code 2017, § 24-31; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 20-62-20-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 20-100. - Submission required. 
    The owner shall, within two years from the date of approval of the preliminary plat, unless such time period has been extended by the city council, prepare and file with the city planner, six unsigned copies of the proposed final plat and required attachments, as set forth in this division along with at least one reproducible-size copy (no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches) of the final plat. An electronic copy of the plat in an approved AutoCAD program must also be submitted. The proposed deed of dedication or owner's statement shall be submitted along with the plat fee. Sewer tapping fees, if any, shall be submitted at the time of initial plat submittal. Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision as set forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the city council until and unless a preliminary plat for the area included in the proposed final plat has been approved. The final plat shall be in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat as determined by the city engineer. Furthermore, a final plat shall not be accepted for consideration by city staff until all required construction plans and specifications for all required improvements and public infrastructure as indicated on the approved preliminary plat, including cost estimates, have been submitted and approved by the city engineer. In addition a written environmental report shall be submitted and approved by the city engineer prior to final plat submittal. Lien waivers and mortgage releases of all interested parties shall be provided to the city prior to final plat approval. 
(Code 2017, § 24-38; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-101. - Required scale. 
    The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. Sheet size shall be no greater than 24 inches by 36 inches nor smaller than 81/2 inches by 11 inches and shall be of a size acceptable to the county auditor. If more than one sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly show the number of the sheet, the total number of sheets included in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin. 
(Code 2017, § 24-39; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-102. - Information to be shown. 
    The final plat shall be clearly marked "final plat" and shall comply with Iowa Code chs. 354 and 355 and show the following: 
(1)  The name of the subdivision. 
(2)  Name of the owner. 
(3)  Scale, and a graphic bar scale, north arrow and date on each sheet. 
(4)  Legal description of the property under consideration for platting. 
(5)  All monuments to be of record, as required by Iowa Code chs. 354 and 355. 
(6)  Identification of all public rights-of-way for street purposes and all other lands set aside for public purposes, said areas to be identified on the plat as separate tracts. 
(7)  Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every lot, block, street, easement, or other areas shown on the plat, as well as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands. 
(8)  All distance, bearing, curve, and other survey data, as required by Iowa Code chs. 354 and 355. 
(9)  Street names and clear designation of public alleys. 
(10)  Block and lot numbers including the area of each proposed lot. 
(11)  Identification of building setback lines, as specified in the zoning chapter, adjacent to all public rights-of-way. 
(12)  Identification of any outlots proposed within the plat. 
(13)  Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and the purpose for which such property is dedicated or reserved for public use. 
(14)  The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be confined to only those easements pertaining to public utilities including, but not limited to, natural gas, electric power, telephone, cable television, water, sewer; easements for recreational purposes, for pedestrian access, for ingress and egress; and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary for the orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat. 
(15)  All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled, "not a part of this plat." 
(16)  The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any individual lot. 
(17)  A statement by an state licensed land surveyor that the plat was prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor's direct personal supervision, signed and dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor's state registration number or seal. 
(Code 2017, § 24-40; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-103. - Submittal of environmental report. 
    A written environmental report shall be submitted unless an environmental report for the same property has previously been submitted in conjunction with the preliminary plat for the property. If a special development area (SDA) is recommended for approval, the SDA, including any rezoning if necessary, shall gain final approval of the city council prior to final plat approval. City staff shall evaluate whether the final plat may be processed as submitted or if the plat shall be modified in order to preserve or protect the identified environmentally sensitive land features. 
(Code 2017, § 24-41; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-104. - Attachments to the final plat. 
    The following shall be attached to and accompany any final plat: 
(1)  Statement by the owner that the plat is prepared with the owner's free consent, and in accordance with the desire of the owner. This statement shall be signed and acknowledged by the owner before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the owner shall also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designed for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property or other public use subject to such dedication being approved by the city council. 
(2)  A statement from the mortgage holders or lien holders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgement of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided in Iowa Code § 354.12 may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lien holder. When a mortgage holder or lien holder consents to the subdivision plat, a release of mortgage or lien shall be furnished for the areas of conveyance to the city or dedicated to the public. 
(3)  A complete abstract of title and an attorney's opinion showing that the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner and that the land is free from encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond. The attorney's opinion shall state the names of the owners or holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. 
(4)  The encumbrance bond, if any. 
(5)  A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lots. Any tracts or outlots illustrated on the plat but not intended to be developed must be identified in the owners' statement of restrictions as to their intended usage, future maintenance and ownership. 
(6)  A statement by the county auditor approving the name or title of the subdivision plat as required by Iowa Code § 354.11(1)e. 
(7)  A certificate by the city engineer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the construction plans as approved and in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat. Prior to such certification, reproduceable as built plans for all improvements shall have been provided to the city engineer in paper form and electronic AutoCAD format. In lieu thereof, the city clerk may certify that a payment and performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the city attorney and filed with the clerk, or that the city council has agreed that the city shall provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess the costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the subdivision. 
(8)  Where the improvements have been installed, a resolution accepting and approving such improvements, along with the maintenance bond required by this division. 
(9)  If private streets or other private improvements have been approved by an agreement in the form of a covenant running with the land, in a form approved by the city attorney, providing for the construction or reconstruction of any improvements to meet city standards, and the assessment of all costs to the property owners in the event of annexation and dedication and acceptance, shall be required. 
(10)  All resolution forms and certificates necessary for approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council and for signatures by the mayor and city clerk. 
a.  The maintenance bond required by sections 20-5(e) and 20-125(c). 
b.  The applicable plat fee, if any. 
(Code 2017, § 24-42; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-105. - Procedure for approval; disapproval to state reasons. 
(a)  Six copies of the final plat, signed by a state licensed land surveyor, together with three copies of a signed owner's statement or deed of dedication shall be submitted to the city planning and zoning commission, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as stated within the city fee schedule. Appropriate city council resolution forms must also be submitted by the developer (three copies each). There shall forthwith be referred one copy of the plat, together with a copy of the owner's statement, to the city engineer. The city engineer shall carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with the approved preliminary plat, and shall submit the engineer's findings in duplicate to the commission together with the copy of the plat received. 
(b)  When the engineer's report is received by the commission, it shall, as soon as possible, consider the report and pass upon the plat. When the final plat has been reviewed by the commission, six copies of the plat shall forthwith be transmitted to the city council, together with a copy of the owner's statement, a copy of the engineer's report and a signed copy of its approval to the city council. 
(c)  When the final plat has been approved by the city council and all six copies duly certified, one copy shall be delivered to the commission, one to the city engineer, one to the city clerk, two to Cedar Falls Utilities and the sixth copy to the owner or subdivider for filing with the county recorder. 
(d)  Following final approval of the final plat, the owner shall supply to the city engineer a reproducible copy of the approved plat in paper form and in electronic AutoCAD format. 
(e)  The city council shall apply reasonable standards and conditions in accordance with applicable state statutes and city ordinances for the review and approval of preliminary and final plats of subdivisions. The city council shall determine whether the subdivision conforms to the comprehensive plan, and shall give consideration to the possible burden on public improvements and to a balance of interests between the owner, future purchasers, and the public interest in the subdivision, when reviewing the proposed subdivision plat, and when requiring the installation of public improvements in conjunction with approval of a subdivision plat. The city council shall not issue final approval of a subdivision plat unless the subdivision plat conforms to all applicable city ordinances and state statutes, including Iowa Code §§ 354.6, 354.11 and 355.8. 
(f)  If said plat is disapproved by the council, such disapproval shall point out wherein the proposed plat is objectionable. 
(g)  Upon completion of the necessary improvements, reproducible as-built plans for all improvements shall be supplied to the city engineer in paper form and electronic AutoCAD format. 
(Code 2017, § 24-43; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 20-106-20-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 20-124. - Character of development to be in statement of plat. 
    The city planning and zoning commission and the city council may require that certain minimum regulations regarding type and character of subdivision development be incorporated in the owner's statement or deed of dedication. Such regulations shall be intended to protect the character and development of the platted subdivision, as well as that of the surrounding development. A "statement of character" shall generally refer to the intended uses to be established in the proposed subdivision and may refer to variables such as land uses, building square footage, building setbacks, size or height of structures or other physical characteristics of the intended development. The term "character" does not refer to plat details such as lot sizes, lot line locations or other technical details outlined on the proposed subdivision plat. 
(Code 2017, § 24-53; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-125. - Improvements; bond or cash required. 
(a)  Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements required in this section to the specifications and satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(b)  In lieu of final completion of the required improvements and before the final plat is finally approved by the city council, the owner shall enter into a contract with the city to ensure the completion of the improvements within a specific time. The performance of such contract shall be secured by the filing of a cash escrow account or payment and performance bond, which must be in the name of the owner. Said financial security instruments (cash escrow account or payment and performance bond) are to be approved by the city council. The payment and performance bond or cash escrow account shall be not less than the estimated cost of the improvements plus a design cost figure as estimated by the city engineer. The cash escrow account must be established in a city account with a financial institution where said city account exists. No letters of credit or other forms of financial statements will be accepted in place of an acceptable payment and performance bond or cash escrow account. 
(c)  Maintenance bond required. Prior to city council approval of the final plat, the owner shall submit to the city engineer a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the city engineer that will provide for protection of the city against future liability for structural failure of any required public infrastructure including streets, sewers, utility lines or any other such public infrastructure required as part of final plat approval for a period of three years. The maintenance bond must be in the name of the owner only. The three-year maintenance bond shall go into effect when the required public infrastructure is installed and accepted by the city. The bond must provide 100 percent coverage of all infrastructure costs or in an amount up to but not to exceed 100 percent cost estimates as recommended by the city engineer. In the event of any structural failure of any public infrastructure component following city acceptance of the infrastructure, the owner shall be responsible for the correction of any structural failures and maintenance requirements, failing which the maintenance bond shall be used for the repair of all such structural failures and maintenance requirements. Following repair and construction of any failed infrastructure component or elements the city engineer shall determine whether the three-year bond shall be renewed or extended beyond the original three-year bond period. In the event of major structural failures the maintenance bond shall be renewed if recommended by the city engineer for a new three-year period from the date of repair for that portion of the public improvements involved in the structural failure and repair. 
(d)  Building permits. No building permits or foundation permits for new building construction or construction of other private facilities such as parking lots within the proposed subdivision shall be issued until the final plat has been recorded at the county courthouse. However, site grading, installation of required public infrastructure or improvements, or installation of stormwater management structures or other structures necessary to protect environmentally sensitive land features, as approved by the city engineer, may be installed prior to final plat approval and in accordance with the approved preliminary plat specifications. 
(e)  Occupancy permits. No occupancy permit shall be allowed or issued for any building or structure constructed within the subdivision plat and intended for private use until all improvements and required public infrastructure are satisfactorily completed and formally accepted by the city council unless a request for occupancy by the owner is specifically allowed by the city council. 
(f)  Public services. No public services by city agencies such as snow plowing, refuse collection or other similar activities shall be provided to the proposed subdivision until all required public infrastructure and improvements are satisfactorily completed and formally accepted by the city council or until a special contract to furnish such services at the sole cost of the subdivider is approved by the city council. 
(g)  The required improvements are as follows: 
(1)  Street grading and surfacing. All streets shall be filled or excavated to the established grade and surfaced to the specifications of the city engineer for a minimum width as determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  Sewers. Where the subdivision lies within 500 feet of an existing sanitary sewer, and shall provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system including sewage pumping stations if required to make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Sanitary sewer systems shall be approved by the council and the state board of health, and the construction supervised by the city engineer. Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater in accordance with ordinance chapter 24, subject to the approval of the council and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(3)  Other street improvements. The city planning and zoning commission and the council may also require certain other street improvements, including the installation of sidewalks, water mains, curbing, paving or other street surfacing on any or all streets, such improvements to be installed in accordance with the specifications approved by the council and under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(4)  Underground installation of utilities required. All electrical, telephone, communication, street lighting, traffic signals, television wires and cables, and any other public utility or associated service providing service within any such subdivision shall be installed entirely underground in accordance with city ordinances and the rules, regulations and specifications of the public utility or agency providing such service. 
(h)  The subdivider shall furnish information that satisfactory arrangements have been made with the serving public utility or agency. 
(i)  The city planning and zoning commission may recommend to the council, after obtaining approval from the serving public utility or agency, that underground requirements may be waived if topographical, soil or other conditions make such installation unreasonable. 
(j)  For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, concealed ducts, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground as the regulations and policy of the serving public utility provide. 
(k)  Poles without overhead wires shall be permitted for street light poles, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, civil defense alarms or other municipal equipment installed under the direction of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 24-54; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-126. - Soil erosion control plans. 
    Following preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall not begin the installation and construction of said necessary improvements until an erosion control plan is submitted and approved by the city engineer. The erosion control plan shall strive to limit soil erosion from natural forces such as wind and rain and control stormwater runoff rates during the course of construction of public improvements. Requirements outlined in chapter 24 must be adhered to. Dust control measures shall be employed during all phases of construction. Appropriate soil erosion control measures, as specified by the city engineer, shall be installed before on site construction begins. 
(Code 2017, § 24-55; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-127. - Parks, recreational areas. 
    Where a public park or other recreational area shown on a plan prepared by the city planning and zoning commission as part of the master plan for the city and adopted by the city council is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the city council may, in those cases in which the city council deems such requirements to be reasonable, require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision for park, playground, or other recreational purposes. 
(Code 2017, § 24-56; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-128. - Subdivider to provide drainage, dedicate easement in presence of streams, etc. 
    Whenever any stream or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at the subdivider's own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water in accordance with chapter 24 and shall also provide and dedicate to the city an easement along such streams and watercourses meeting the approval of the city council. Said steams or watercourses shall not be altered or obstructed in any way by any structure, landscaping, fencing, re-grading or other activities not specifically allowed by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 24-57; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-129. - Lot lines. 
    All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation to this rule will give a better street and lot plan. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided. 
(Code 2017, § 24-58; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-130. - Required lot dimensions. 
    The minimum dimensions for lots in a subdivision shall be 60 feet for width as measured at the front property line unless the city engineer specifically allows a reduced frontage of no less than 40 feet on certain lots with curvilinear frontages. Minimum lot widths may also be reduced to no less than 40 feet in those districts where the zoning chapter does not specify a minimum lot width requirement. The minimum required lot depth shall be 100 feet for depth, except when parallel streets existing prior to May 1, 1954 are not less than 170 feet and not more than 200 feet apart, in which case, lots may be 85 feet in depth. In no case shall a lot that is to be used for residential purposes contain less area than is required by the lot area regulation of the zoning district in which the property is located. These requirements may be waived by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission in the event that a proposed subdivision or portion of a proposed subdivision is determined to be a SDA where certain environmentally sensitive land features have been identified. In those cases only minimum required standards with respect to lot width, lot area and building setbacks may be waived to provide the subdivider an opportunity to protect the environmentally sensitive land features and to still achieve all or most of the desired development density or capacity on the remaining property in conformance with section 20-6. 
(Code 2017, § 24-59; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-131. - Corner lots. 
    Corner lots in subdivisions at street intersections, and at all other points likely to be dangerous, shall have a radius of not less than 15 feet at the street corner. On business/commercial lots, a chord may be substituted for the circular arc. Corner lots shall not be less than 80 feet in width unless the city engineer determines that a lesser lot width can be allowed in special circumstances. In those cases where a SDA has been established, corner lot dimensions may be reduced provided that sufficient lot area is provided for new building development in consideration of required setback and street intersection sight vision requirements for said lots in accordance with the recommendation of the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 24-60; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-132. - Building lines. 
(a)  Building lines adjacent to public streets in subdivisions shall be shown on the plat. A statement regarding building lines must be included in the owner's statement whenever the depth of such building lines is greater than those required by the zoning chapter. 
(b)  Provisions shall be made in the owner's statement requiring all building structures, whether enclosed or unenclosed, to be established no closer to the lot line than allowed by the specified building lines whether required by the zoning chapter or established by the plat greater than zoning chapter requirements. 
(Code 2017, § 24-61; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-133. - Subdivisions to allow opening, extending of streets; easements may be required. 
(a)  Where a parcel of land is subdivided into larger tracts than ordinarily used for building lots, such parcel shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets. 
(b)  Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may, at the discretion of the city council, be made a requirement of the plat. 
(Code 2017, § 24-62; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-134. - Relation of streets to adjoining street systems. 
    New subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the streets so continued or projected, but shall not be less than the minimum width requirement. 
(Code 2017, § 24-63; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-135. - Street system to comply with city's plan; intersecting, parallel streets. 
(a)  The street system of a subdivision shall be so arranged to comply, as far as practicable, with the major street plan of the city, providing such a plan is in force. 
(b)  Intersecting streets, if possible, shall be near 90 degree angles to each other. No street shall be parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad, unless it is 150 feet or more from the line of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 2017, § 24-64; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-136. - Street right-of-way width. 
(a)  The widths for major street rights-of-way in subdivisions shall conform to the widths designated on the major street plan of the city or otherwise recommended by the city engineer, whichever is greater. 
(b)  The minimum width for residential street rights-of-way shall be 60 feet. The minimum right-of-way width for arterial streets shall be 100 feet. The minimum right-of-way width for collector streets shall be 80 feet. 
(c)  The minimum required paving width of all streets in new subdivisions shall be 31 feet from back of curb to back of curb unless a lesser paving width is specifically authorized by the city council upon recommendation by the city engineer and the planning and zoning commission. In certain situations (i.e., arterial streets or cul-de-sac streets longer than 600 feet) required paving width shall be greater than 31 feet as specified by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 24-65; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-137. - Street grades. 
    Street grades, if practical, shall not exceed six percent for major streets and ten percent for other streets and no grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
(Code 2017, § 24-66; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-138. - Street names and subdivision names. 
(a)  Street names. Streets in subdivisions that are obviously in alignment with other streets already existing and named in the same or adjoining subdivision shall bear the name of the pre-existing streets. However, in situations where there are clear divisions or separations between subdivisions by virtue of major street intersection separations or other physical barriers, an alternative street name may be approved by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission provided that said alternative street naming scheme will not cause undue confusion to the public or to public safety personnel such as police, ambulance and fire services. In all other cases, street names shall not duplicate existing street names in the city, and names similar to existing street names in the city shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Subdivision names. All proposed subdivisions must be named an "addition" in the city. Subdivision names must be unique and not similar to any other subdivision name in the city or in the county. All subdivision names must be approved in advance of final plat approval by the county auditor as required by Iowa Code § 354.11(1)e. Furthermore, when multiple phases of subdivisions of land are proposed utilizing the same identifying name, the first phase of subdivision shall be known as the "first addition" with each subsequent phase identified with a sequential number. 
(Code 2017, § 24-67; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-139. - Alleys. 
    The minimum width of an alley in a residential block in a subdivision shall be 16 feet. 
(Code 2017, § 24-68; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-140. - Easements required in absence of alleys. 
(a)  Where alleys are not provided in a subdivision, easements for utilities or other public facilities of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and side lines where necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains. Utility easements may also be required along front property lines. Easements of a greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers, utilities, drainage areas, pedestrian trails or sidewalks upon the recommendation of the city engineer or CFU personnel. 
(b)  The subdivider shall consult with the city engineer, general manager of CFU and the managers of the local telephone and other communication companies as for the need and location of such utility easements. 
(Code 2017, § 24-69; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-141. - Places; cul-de-sac streets. 
    Cul-de-sac streets or other streets or places that do not provide a through street connection to another street are to be discouraged due to interruption of traffic flows and inefficient provision of public services. Cul-de-sac streets are to be permitted by the city council only upon the recommendation of the city engineer and the planning and zoning commission. Where it is desired to subdivide a parcel of land, which, because of its size or location, does not permit a normal lot or street area, there may be established a "place" or cul-de-sac street subject to recommendation of approval by the city engineer and planning and zoning commission. Such a place may be in the form of a court, nonconnecting street or other arrangement, provided, however, that proper access shall be given to all lots from a dedicated street or court. Any dead-end place, cul-de-sac or court shall terminate in an open space for turning purposes, preferably circular, having a minimum diameter of 100 feet. Except in unusual instances, no dead-end street, cul-de-sac or place shall exceed 600 feet in length unless authorized by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and city engineer. In those situations where longer cul-de-sac streets are permitted (i.e., longer than 600 feet) the street paving width shall be greater than 31 feet in conformance with city engineering division recommendations. 
(Code 2017, § 24-70; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-142. - Plats outside corporate limits. 
(a)  The owners of proposed subdivision plats for property lying outside of but within two miles of the corporate limits of the city shall submit such proposed plats as described herein and shall develop such subdivisions in accordance with those provisions stated herein. This provision shall apply to major subdivision plats only, not to minor subdivision plats. 
(b)  Those areas outside of the city corporate limits and subject to subdivision review, as authorized by Iowa Code § 354.9, are as follows: All those areas lying within two miles of the corporate boundaries of the city and not lying within the corporate boundaries of any other city. 
(c)  Any lot outside the corporate limits described as or intended for use as a residential lot shall have an area of not less than 9,000 square feet and a width of not less than 60 feet for interior lots and 80 feet for corner lots. 
(d)  The owner's statement or deed of dedication concerning a subdivision outside the corporate limits shall include a statement to the effect that all buildings to be erected on any of the lots shall be constructed in accordance with the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 24-71; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-143. - Limitation on building permits for separate tracts, unless platted. 
    For all property that is being considered for subdivision under this section or property anticipated for subdivision in the near future, no building permits shall be issued for new building construction until final plats (including minor plats) have been approved by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 24-72; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-144. - Processing fees for dedication, vacation of city rights-of-way. 
    Applications to the planning and zoning commission for the dedication or vacation of city rights-of-way for streets or alleys shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as stated within the city fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. Said fee shall be exempt if the dedication or vacation is processed in the form of a plat and platting fees are paid in lieu thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 24-73; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-145. - Establishment of private streets, vehicular accessways. 
    With the exception of private residential driveways that may be included as part of certain minor subdivision plats (in accordance with zoning chapter section 26-125) all streets and vehicular accessways proposed with all subdivision plats shall be designated as public right-of-way areas and designated for public access and use. All such public streets shall be constructed to city specifications and standards. No private residential streets serving typical residential subdivisions where such subdivisions are characterized by separately platted, individual building lots shall be allowed. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may approve private streets or driveways for commercial, industrial or multi-unit development projects on a case-by-case basis. In general, such private streets or drives shall be discouraged. 
(Code 2017, § 24-74; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 20-146-20-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-165. - Ordinance not to limit other ordinances. 
    Nothing contained herein shall serve to abrogate, limit, repeal, or otherwise modify any other ordinance or regulation except as expressly set forth herein. If any provision of this article conflicts with the provisions of any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the most restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 2017, § 24-76; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-166. - Recording subdivision plats, plats of survey or other subdivisions of land. 
(a)  Review; approval stamp. All subdivision plats, plats of survey, or other subdivisions of land as defined in this chapter shall be reviewed for compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter prior to being recorded with the county recorder. Each subdivision plat, plat of survey or other subdivision of land shall have a completed stamp or signature block, which indicates that the subdivision plat, plat of survey or other subdivision of land was reviewed by the city planner or his designee for compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Plats of survey not involving a subdivision of land. Plats of survey or America Land Title Surveys or boundary location surveys not involving the subdivision of land as defined in this chapter, shall be clearly stamped as such on the survey or plat of survey. 
(c)  Requirement of stamp or signature block. Pursuant to Iowa Code § 354.18, the county recorder shall refuse to record a subdivision plat, plat of survey or other subdivision of land as defined in this chapter that does not bear the appropriate stamp or signature block signed by the city planner or his designee, unless such subdivision plat, plat of survey or other subdivision of land is accompanied by a resolution from the city council approving the subdivision plat, plat of survey or other subdivision of land, or waiving the right to review the same, or unless such plat is clearly stamped as a plat of survey or an America Land Title Survey not involving a subdivision of land. 
(Code 2017, § 24-77; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 20-167. - Language used on stamps or signature blocks. 
    The following language shall be used on said stamps or signature blocks: 
(1)  Stamp #1 (for use by the city when a subdivision of land is involved): 
    The Plat or Subdivision has been reviewed by the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
_____
Signature of 
Cedar Falls 
City Planner ___/___/_____ 
Date  
(2)  Stamp #2 (for use by surveyors and engineers when a subdivision of land is not involved): 
    This Plat or Survey is not a subdivision of land. 
    Reference: Doc. 
  # _____/_____/_____. 
_____
Signature of 
Surveyor or 
Engineer ___/___/_____ 
Date  
(Code 2017, § 24-78; Ord. No. 2724, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Chapter 21 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Transient lodgings occupancy tax. 
    A tax at the rate of seven percent shall be imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodginghouse, roominghouse, manufactured or mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist court, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals, within the city, except as provided by the law of the state. The revenue derived from the tax imposed in this section shall be used to support tourism, culture, parks, recreation, economic development and property tax relief, and shall be allocated in accordance with the law of the state. 
(Code 2017, § 25-1; Ord. No. 2189, § 1, 4-14-1997) 
Sec. 21-2. - Sales and services tax. 
(a)  Tax imposed. A tax at the rate of one percent shall be imposed in accordance with Iowa Code ch. 423B, as amended, on the local sales and services in the city to be effective on January 1, 2016, and ending December 31, 2025. 
(b)  Distribution. The revenue generated by the imposition of the local sales and services tax shall be allocated by the city as follows: 
(1)  100 percent of the revenue generated in the city during each fiscal year from said local sales and services tax is to be allocated for reconstruction/repair/replacement of existing streets, curbs, structures, storm sewers and sanitary sewers as they relate to streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The funds received from the local sales and services tax shall be considered additional funds which are allocated only for reconstruction/repair/replacement of existing streets, curbs, structures, storm sewers and sanitary sewers as they relate to streets and not as replacement funds for the present funding levels as authorized by the city council nor for widening of or creation of new streets. 
(3)  The funds received from the local sales and services tax shall be placed in a separate account solely devoted to street repair and replacement and have all interest income generated by the temporary investment of tax proceeds credited to this special account. 
(4)  The funds generated by the local sales and services tax during the ten-year taxing period are intended to replace the need for special assessments against real estate for local street repair. The street repair program proposed for funding by special assessment will be replaced with funding generated by the local sales and services tax proceeds generated during the ten year taxing period. 
(c)  Long-term planning. The city's street repair program requires a long-term and ongoing commitment. The ten-year imposition of the local option sales and services tax will not solve all of the street repair problems in the city. In an effort to ensure that all streets are properly repaired and maintained, the mayor is directed to submit to the city council prior to October 1, 2024, a report and recommendation relative to the ongoing maintenance of the city street repair program with financing alternatives, in view of the upcoming December 31, 2025, sales tax sunset date. 
(Code 2017, § 25-2; Ord. No. 1928, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 2089, §§ 1-3, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 2297, §§ 1-3, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 2520, §§ 1-3, 6-13-2005; Ord. No. 2723, §§ 1-3, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2804, §§ 1-3, 1-13-2014) 
Secs. 21-3-21-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-23-21-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARTIAL EXEMPTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 21-48. - Exemption granted; statutory authority. 
    There is hereby provided a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Iowa Code § 427A.1(1)e. 
(Code 2017, § 25-36; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Distribution center means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets. The term "distribution center" does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods. 
    New construction means new buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures. The term "new construction" does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the city council upon the recommendation of the state economic development authority. 
    Research service facilities means a building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate-research services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on site services to the public. 
    Warehouse means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 554, art. 7 (Iowa Code § 554.7101 et seq.), except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail. 
(Code 2017, § 25-37; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-50. - New machinery and equipment. 
    New machinery and equipment, as referred to in this division, means new machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Iowa Code § 427A.1(1)e., unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status. 
(Code 2017, § 25-38; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-51. - Determination of amount of exemption. 
    The actual value added to industrial real estate for the reasons specified in section 21-48 renders the property owner eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five years. However, if property ceases to be classified as industrial real estate or ceases to be used as a research-service facility, a warehouse, or a distribution center, the partial exemption for the value added shall not be allowed for subsequent assessment years. The term "actual value added," as used in this division, means the actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received. The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first assessment year after completion of construction: 75 percent. 
(2)  For the second assessment year after completion of construction: 60 percent. 
(3)  For the third assessment year after completion of construction: 45 percent. 
(4)  For the fourth assessment year after completion of construction: 30 percent. 
(5)  For the fifth assessment year after completion of construction: 15 percent. 
(Code 2017, § 25-39; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-52. - Limitation on amount of exemption. 
    The granting of the exemption under this division for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value for the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added. 
(Code 2017, § 25-40; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-53. - Application filing procedure. 
    An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed under this division. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the state director of revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the state director of revenue. 
(Code 2017, § 25-41; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-54. - Application for approval prior to construction. 
    A person may submit a proposal to the city council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption under this division on new construction. The city council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans for the city. The ordinance may be enacted not less than 30 days after holding a public hearing in accordance with Iowa Code § 362.3. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate. However, if the tax exemption for the new construction is not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal to the city council to approve or reject. 
(Code 2017, § 25-42; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-55. - Duration of exemption. 
    The partial exemption granted by this division shall be available until such time as this division is repealed by the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 25-43; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-56. - Effect of future repeal on existing exemptions. 
    When in the opinion of the city council continuation of the exemption granted by this division ceases to be of benefit to the city, the city council may repeal this division, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. 
(Code 2017, § 25-44; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Sec. 21-57. - Ineligibility of property receiving other exemption. 
    A property tax exemption under this division shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property exemption authorized by law. 
(Code 2017, § 25-45; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 7-6-2015) 
Chapter 22 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 22-1. - Franchise fees for cable and/or video services. 
    Any provider of cable television and/or video services in the city shall remit to the city a franchise fee, as provided under Iowa Code § 477A.7, in the sum of five percent of gross revenues. 
(Code 2017, § 8-1; Ord. No. 2803, § 1, 12-23-2013) 
Sec. 22-2. - Franchise fees affirmed. 
    The franchise fees of five percent of gross revenues, as imposed under the city's prior franchise agreements and collected by the city, are hereby ratified, affirmed and approved from the expiration date of said franchises forward and continuing under this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 8-2; Ord. No. 2803, § 2, 12-23-2013) 
Sec. 22-3. - Public, education and governmental channel capacity, support and transmission. 
    Any provider of cable television and/or video services in the city shall provide the city with public, educational and governmental channel capacity, and shall pay the amount established from time to time by resolution per subscriber, per month, in capital support for public, educational and governmental equipment and facilities. Each such provider shall provide four public, educational and governmental access channels, and shall transmit the public, educational and governmental channel signals through its cable and/or video system within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 8-3; Ord. No. 2803, § 3, 12-23-2013) 
Chapter 23 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate traffic and the use of the streets of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of the traffic regulations through the police operations division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-2) 
Sec. 23-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a thoroughfare laid out, established and platted as such by the council. 
    All-terrain vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to travel on three or more wheels and designed primarily for off-road recreational use but not including farm tractors or equipment, construction equipment, forestry vehicles, or lawn and grounds maintenance vehicles. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire operations division, police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles owned by the United States, this state or any subdivision of this state or any municipality therein, and such privately owned ambulances, rescue or disaster vehicles as are designated or authorized by the director of transportation under Iowa Code § 321.451. 
    Bicycle means either of the following: 
(1)  A device having two wheels and having at least one saddle or seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power; or 
(2)  A device having two or three wheels with fully-operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts (one horsepower), whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor while ridden, is less than 20 miles per hour. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a street or highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
    Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections, or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb or reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Driver's license means any license or permit issued to a person to operate a motor vehicle on the streets of this city or on the highways of this state, including, but not limited to, a temporary restricted or temporary license or intermediate license and an instruction, chauffer's instruction, commercial driver's instruction, or temporary permit. 
    Electric personal assistive mobility device means a self-balancing, non-tandem two-wheeled device powered by an electric propulsion system that averages 750 watts and is designed to transport one person, with a maximum speed on a paved level surface of less than 20 miles per hour. The maximum speed shall be calculated based on operation of the device by a person who weighs 170 pounds when the device is powered solely by the electric propulsion system. The term "electric personal assistive mobility device" does not include an assistive device as defined in Iowa Code § 216E.1. 
    Farm tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry. 
    Frontage occupied by the building means the linear measure of the plot of ground upon which the building is located abutting upon the street or highway. 
    Frontage on a highway for a distance of 300 feet or more means the total frontage on both sides of the highway for such distance. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
    Laned highway means a highway, the roadway of which is divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Light delivery truck, panel delivery truck or pickup means any motor vehicle designed to carry merchandise or freight of any kind not to exceed 2,000 pounds. 
    Motor truck means every motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying livestock, merchandise, freight of any kind or over nine persons as passengers. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and not operated upon rails. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including a motor scooter, but excluding a tractor, an autocycle and a motorized bicycle. 
    Motorized bicycle means a motor vehicle having a saddle or a seat for the use of a rider designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and not capable of operating at a speed in excess of 39 miles per hour on level ground unassisted by human power. 
    New car means a car which has not been sold at retail, as the term "at retail" is defined in Iowa Code ch. 322. 
    Nonresident means every person who is not a resident of the state. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Operator or driver means every person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a street or highway. 
    Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or, if a vehicle is the subject of a security agreement with an immediate right of possession vested in the debtor, then such debtor shall be deemed the owner. 
    Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Period of a periodic quantity means the smallest increment of time for the function to repeat itself. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. Where the term "person" is used in connection with the registration of a motor vehicle, it shall include any corporation, association, copartnership, company, firm or other aggregation of individuals which owns or controls such motor vehicle as actual owner or for the purpose of sale or for renting, whether as agent, salesman or otherwise. 
    Police officer means every officer of the city police operations division or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having expressed or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train means an engine or locomotive with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Residence district means the territory within the city contiguous to and including a street or highway, not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where 40 percent or more of the frontage on such street or highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by dwellings, or by dwellings and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway. 
    Road construction zone means the portion of a street or highway which is identified by posted or moving signs as the site of construction, maintenance, survey, or utility work. The zone starts upon meeting the first sign identifying the zone and continues until a posted or moving sign indicates that the construction zone has ended. 
    Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway or street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus means every vehicle operated for the transportation of children to or from school, except vehicles which are: 
(1)  Privately owned and not operated for compensation; 
(2)  Used exclusively in the transportation of the children in the immediate family of the driver; 
(3)  Operated by a municipally or privately owned urban transit company for the transportation of children as part of or in addition to its regularly scheduled service; or 
(4)  Designed to carry not more than nine persons as passengers, are either school-owned or privately owned, and are used to transport pupils to activity events in which the pupils are participants or used to transport pupils to their homes in case of illness or other emergency situations. The vehicles operated under the provisions of this subsection (4) shall be operated by employees of the school district who are specifically approved by the local superintendent of schools for the assignment. 
    School district means the territory contiguous to and including a street or highway for a distance of 200 feet in all directions from a schoolhouse in the city. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. Whenever the term "trailer" is used, it shall be construed to also include the term "semitrailer." A semitrailer shall be considered in this chapter separately from its power unit. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Special mobile equipment means every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and incidentally operated or moved over the highways, including trailers and bulk spreaders which are not self-propelled having a gross weight of not more than six tons used for the transportation of fertilizers and chemicals used for farm crop production, and other equipment used primarily for the application of fertilizers and chemicals in farm fields or for farm storage, but not including trucks mounted with applicators of such products, road construction or maintenance machinery and ditch digging apparatus. The enumeration in this subsection shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other such vehicles which are within the general terms of the subsection; provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to include portable mills or corn shellers mounted upon a motor vehicle or semitrailer. 
    Stop means a complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop, stopping or standing means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the property lines of every way or place, of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Suburban district means all parts of the city not included in the business, school or residence district. 
    Through street or through highway means every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets and highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the street or highway, and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter or such entrances are controlled by a police officer or traffic control signal. The term "arterial" shall be synonymous with the term "through" or "thru" when applied to streets and highways. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
    Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by motor vehicles, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Trailer coach means either a trailer or semitrailer designed for carrying persons. 
    Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. However, a truck tractor may have a box, deck, or plate for carrying freight, mounted on the frame behind the cab, and forward of the fifth-wheel connection point. 
    Used motor vehicle or secondhand motor vehicle means any motor vehicle of a type subject to registration under the laws of this state which has been sold at retail, as the term "at retail" is defined in Iowa Code ch. 322, and previously registered in this or any other state. 
    Vehicle. 
(1)  The term "vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
(2)  The term "vehicle" does not include: 
a.  Any device moved by human power. 
b.  Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
c.  Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another vehicle. 
d.  Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property but which cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-3; Ord. No. 1943, § 1, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 11-22-1993; Ord. No. 2618, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2007) 
Secs. 23-3-23-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND OBEDIENCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-23. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  It is a simple misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a simple misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)  The department of municipal operations and programs shall post signs informing motorists that the scheduled fine for committing a moving traffic violation on a road construction zone is doubled or is $100.00, whichever is less. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the scheduled fine for any moving traffic violation provided in this chapter shall be doubled or shall be set at $100.00, whichever is less, if the violation occurs within a road construction zone as defined in section 23-2. 
(Code 2017, § 26-31; Ord. No. 1943, § 23, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2036, § 2, 11-22-1993) 
Sec. 23-24. - Authority of police officers and officers of fire operations division. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police operations division, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)  Officers of the police operations division, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police operations division may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire operations division, when at the scene of a fire or emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 2017, § 26-32) 
Sec. 23-25. - Obedience to officials required. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or an official of the fire operations division invested by law or ordinance with the authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 2017, § 26-33) 
Sec. 23-26. - Applicability of chapter to public employees. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, the county or the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 2017, § 26-34) 
Sec. 23-27. - Applicability of chapter to persons riding animals, propelling pushcarts or driving animal-drawn vehicles. 
    Every person riding animals or propelling pushcarts upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 2017, § 26-35) 
Sec. 23-28. - Arrest; notice to appear. 
    Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of this chapter, such officer may do the following: 
(1)  Immediately arrest such person and take him before a judge or magistrate of the district court of the county; or 
(2)  Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a written uniform citation or memorandum containing the name and address of such person, the operator's or chauffeur's license, if any, the registration, if any, of his vehicle, the offense charged, and the time when and place where such person shall appear in court, and advise the person as to his options or rights under the laws of the state. In addition, the peace officer should obtain the written promise of the person to appear in court and provide the person with two copies of the uniform citation or complaint. The number of copies and the form of the citations and memorandums shall be as prescribed by the state and the state department of transportation. The uniform citation or complaint shall also, if the offense charged is speeding, specify the speed at which the person is alleged to have driven and the speed limit applicable within the district or location. 
(Code 2017, § 26-36; Ord. No. 1943, § 29, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-29. - Promise to appear in court. 
    Before a person arrested in accordance with section 23-28 may be released, he must give his written promise to appear in court by signing, in quadruplicate, the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of such notice shall be retained by the officer and a copy thereof shall be given to the person arrested. Thereupon, the officer may release the person arrested from custody. 
(Code 2017, § 26-37) 
Sec. 23-30. - Violation of promise to appear. 
(a)  Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided by section 23-29, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 23-23, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(b)  A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance in person or by counsel. 
(Code 2017, § 26-38) 
Sec. 23-31. - Attachment of citation when vehicle in violation found without driver. 
    Whenever any vehicle without a driver is found in violation of any restriction imposed by the ordinances of the city except parking violations, the officer finding such vehicle shall attach a written uniform citation or complaint as provided in section 23-28 to such vehicle in a conspicuous place, and the driver of such vehicle shall be held to appear at the time and place designated in the uniform citation or complaint. 
(Code 2017, § 26-39) 
Sec. 23-32. - Annual traffic report. 
    The police operations division shall annually prepare a traffic report, which shall be filed with the mayor. Such report shall contain the following information on traffic matters in the city: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the police operations division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 2017, § 26-40) 
Sec. 23-33. - Study and control of violating drivers. 
    The police operations division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the accidents or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked. 
(Code 2017, § 26-41) 
Sec. 23-34. - General duties of police operations division. 
    It shall be the duty of the police operations division to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties specially imposed on the police operations division by this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 26-42) 
Sec. 23-35. - Record of violations. 
    The police operations division shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and a total of each. The records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period, and from that time on the records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 2017, § 26-43) 
Sec. 23-36. - Investigation of accidents. 
    It shall be the duty of the police operations division to investigate traffic accidents, and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 2017, § 26-44) 
Sec. 23-37. - Accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police operations division shall conduct studies of such accidents and traffic conditions and determine remedial measures. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to present these measures to the council for corrective legislative action, if needed. 
(Code 2017, § 26-45) 
Sec. 23-38. - Maintenance of accident reports. 
    The police operations division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. 
(Code 2017, § 26-46) 
Sec. 23-39. - Maintenance of drivers' files. 
    The police operations division shall maintain a suitable record of traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period, and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 2017, § 26-47) 
Sec. 23-40. - Designation of identification for funeral vehicles. 
    The police operations division shall designate the type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify, the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Code 2017, § 26-48) 
Sec. 23-41. - Collection and disposition of money deposited in parking meters. 
    It shall be the duty of the parking enforcement and administration section of the public records division of the department of finance and business operations to make regular collections of the money deposited in the parking meters of the city. It shall be the duty of such persons removing the coins to place them in the approved container and to deliver the container to the city's financial institution so that the funds may be counted and deposited in the city's account. 
(Code 2017, § 26-49; Ord. No. 2729, § 1, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 2943, § 5, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 23-42-23-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS TRAFFIC STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2941, § 7, adopted June 3, 2019, renamed the former Div. 2, as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2017, §§ 26-62-26-74. 

Sec. 23-71. - Duty to erect and maintain signs. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of public works to cause necessary and appropriate signs to be posted and maintained along the streets designated in this chapter, informing the general public of restrictions on parking, speed and other traffic restrictions. 
(Code 2017, § 26-62; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-72. - Authority to place traffic control devices. 
    The department of public works may place and maintain such traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 2017, § 26-63; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-73. - Placement of one-way street signs. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the department of public works shall supervise the placing and maintaining of signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 2017, § 26-64; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-74. - Marking of traffic lanes. 
(a)  The director of the public works is hereby authorized to supervise the marking of the traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle, or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 2017, § 26-65; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-75. - Marking of turn lanes. 
    The director of public works may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in section 23-325 be taken by vehicles turning at intersections, and, when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 2017, § 26-66; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-76. - Placement of stop signs at intersections. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the department of public works to supervise the placing and maintenance of a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of the city, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the department director upon the basis of a traffic study. 
(Code 2017, § 26-67; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-77. - Establishment of crosswalks and safety zones. 
    The director of public works is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and supervise maintenance, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, of crosswalks at intersections where in the opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as the director may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as the director may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 2017, § 26-68; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-78. - Placement of stop signs at school zones. 
    The department of public works shall conspicuously place stop signs bearing the words "Stop School Zone" at the places designated by the council. Such signs shall be of sufficient size to be easily readable at a distance of 100 feet by persons using such streets. 
(Code 2017, § 26-69; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-79. - Erection of automatic stop signals at school zones. 
    The department of public works may cause to be erected automatically controlled school stop signs in place of movable school stop signs, and all motor vehicles approaching such zone when the automatic signal is in operation and displaying a flashing red light or steady red light shall stop and proceed only when the automatically controlled school stop sign changes to flashing amber or green or yellow. 
(Code 2017, § 26-70; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-80. - Painting of curbs or erection of signs prohibiting parking or standing. 
(a)  Where, because of restrictions for visibility and where standing or parked vehicles could constitute a hazard to moving traffic, the director of public works, as traffic conditions require, may cause curbings or portions of streets to be painted with a yellow or orange color, or erect "No Parking or Standing" signs prohibiting parking or standing, and it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park a vehicle in an area so painted or signposted. 
(b)  Immediately upon causing curbs to be painted or signs erected, the director shall notify the council in writing of the director's action, setting forth the area painted or posted and the reasons therefor. The council, at the next regular meeting, shall approve the actions of the director, or refuse to approve the actions and order the signs or the paint removed. 
(c)  The city council may also, on its own motion, by ordinance, as traffic conditions require, prohibit parking on certain streets; and when the council has so determined the director shall cause curbs to be painted or signs to be posted as directed. 
(Code 2017, § 26-71; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-81. - Regulation of parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The department of public works is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 2017, § 26-72; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-82. - Establishment of temporary no parking zones and one-way streets. 
(a)  The chief of police and director of public works, or persons designated by them, are hereby authorized to prohibit parking on streets within the city on a temporary basis and to establish temporary one-way traffic on streets to expedite traffic when a special event or unusual circumstance occurs in the city which creates an unusually large volume of traffic which, in the opinion of the chief of police, director of public works or others authorized by them, creates hazards to traffic and pedestrians. 
(b)  Whenever the chief of police, director of public works or persons authorized by them shall temporarily prohibit parking on a street or temporarily establish one-way traffic on a street, they shall cause appropriate notice to be given with a means of notice reasonably calculated to give notice to operators of motor vehicles of the prohibited parking or the one-way traffic movement. Such notice may be by special signs or by a temporary alteration of the existing signs or signing method which may be deemed appropriate, or by direction of individuals authorized by the chief of police to direct such traffic and such parking. 
(Code 2017, § 26-73; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-83. - Marking of parking spaces. 
(a)  The department of public works is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in parking meter zones designated and described in section 23-411, and in all other areas where parking in stalls is desired and authorized within the city. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. 
(b)  At each space so marked, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(Code 2017, § 26-74; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 23-84-23-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-110. - Use of restricted license. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed upon him by a restricted license issued to him. 
(Code 2017, § 26-96) 
Sec. 23-111. - Operator's license required; operation of motor vehicle with expired license. 
(a)  A person, except those expressly exempted by the laws of this state, shall not operate any motor vehicle upon a street or highway of the city unless the person has a valid driver's license issued by the state department of transportation valid for the vehicle's operation. 
(b)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway of the city with an expired driver's license. 
(Code 2017, § 26-97; Ord. No. 1943, § 4, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2553, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-112. - Possession and display of license; operation of commercial motor vehicles. 
(a)  A licensee shall have the licensee's driver's license in immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle, and shall display the same, upon demand of a judicial magistrate, district association judge, district judge, peace officer, or examiner of the state department of transportation. However, a person charged with violating this subsection shall not be convicted if the person produces to the clerk of the district court, prior to the licensee's court date indicated on the citation, a driver's license issued to that person and valid for the vehicle operated at the time of the person's arrest, or at the time the person was charged with the violation of this subsection. 
(b)  A person operating a commercial motor vehicle shall not have more than one driver's license. A nonresident may operate a commercial motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city if the nonresident has been issued a license by another state, a nonresident commercial driver's license, or a driver's license issued by a foreign jurisdiction which the federal highway administration has determined to be issued in conformity with the federal commercial driver testing and licensing standards, if the license, commercial driver's license, or driver's license is valid for the vehicle operated. A person who operates a commercial motor vehicle upon a street or highway of the city without having been issued a driver's license valid for the vehicle operated commits a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 26-98; Ord. No. 1943, § 5, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2553, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-113. - Driving while license denied, canceled, suspended or revoked. 
(a)  A person whose driver's license or operating privilege has been denied, canceled, suspended, or revoked, as provided by the laws of the state, and who operates a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city while the license or privilege is denied, canceled, suspended, or revoked, commits a simple misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalties, the punishment imposed for a violation of this subsection shall include assessment of a fine or not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,500.00. The sentence imposed under this section shall not be suspended by the court, notwithstanding provisions of Iowa Code § 907.3 or any other statute. 
(b)  A person who operates a commercial motor vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city when disqualified from operating the commercial motor vehicle under Iowa Code § 321.208 commits a simple misdemeanor if a commercial driver's license is required for the person to operate the commercial motor vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-99; Ord. No. 1943, § 6, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2553, § 3, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-114. - Unlawful use of license or nonoperator's identification card; penalty. 
    It is a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(4)b, for any person: 
(1)  To display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in the person's possession a canceled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, or fraudulently altered driver's license or nonoperator's identification card. 
(2)  To lend that person's driver's license or nonoperator's identification card to another person or knowingly permit the use of the license by another. 
(3)  To display or represent as one's own a driver's license or nonoperator's identification card not issued to that person. 
(4)  To fail or refuse to surrender to the state department of transportation upon its lawful demand a driver's license or nonoperator's identification card which has been suspended, revoked, or canceled. 
(5)  To permit an unlawful use of a driver's license or nonoperator's identification card issued to that person. 
(Code 2017, § 26-100; Ord. No. 2363, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-115. - Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person-To obtain alcohol. 
    A person who is under the age of 21 years who alters or displays or has in the person's possession a fictitious or fraudulently altered driver's license or nonoperator's identification card and who uses the license or card to violate or attempt to violate Iowa Code § 123.47, or section 5-11, commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(4)c. The court shall forward a copy of the conviction to the state department of transportation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-100A; Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-116. - Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person-To obtain cigarettes or tobacco products. 
    A person who is under the age of 18 years, who alters or displays or has in the person's possession a fictitious or fraudulently altered driver's license or nonoperator's identification card and who uses the license or card to violate or attempt to violate Iowa Code § 453A.2(2) or the corresponding section of this Code, commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(4). The court shall forward a copy of the conviction to the state department of transportation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-100B; Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-117. - Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. 
    No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any street or highway of the city when such minor is not authorized to drive by the laws of the state, or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 26-101) 
Sec. 23-118. - Permitting unauthorized person to drive. 
    A person shall not knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under the person's control to be driven upon any street or highway of the city by a person who is not issued a motor vehicle license valid for the vehicle's operation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-102; Ord. No. 1943, § 8, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-119. - Permitting illegal operation of vehicle. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to knowingly require or permit the operation of such vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city in any manner contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 26-103) 
Sec. 23-120. - Operation of vehicle without registration; registration card carried and exhibited. 
(a)  A person shall not operate, and an owner shall not knowingly permit to be operated upon any street or highway of the city, any vehicle required to be registered and titled under the laws of the state unless there shall be attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required by the laws of the state, a valid registration card and registration plate or plates issued therefor for the current registration year and unless a certificate of title has been issued for such vehicle except as expressly permitted by the laws of the state. 
(b)  A vehicle's registration card shall at all times be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be shown to any peace officer upon the officer's request. 
(Code 2017, § 26-104; Ord. No. 1943, § 9, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 2553, § 4, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-121. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as to indicate either a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. 
(Code 2017, § 26-105) 
Sec. 23-122. - Careless driving. 
    A person commits careless driving if the person intentionally operates a motor vehicle on a public road or highway in any one of the following ways: 
(1)  Creates or causes unnecessary tire squealing, skidding, or sliding upon acceleration or stopping. 
(2)  Simulates a temporary race. 
(3)  Causes any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with the ground. 
(4)  Causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-106; Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-123. - Privileges of drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of a felony or in response to an incident dangerous to the public or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section. 
(b)  The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for the minimum distance necessary before an alternative route that conforms to the traffic laws and regulations is available. 
(c)  The driver of a fire operations division vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance, or a peace officer riding a police bicycle in the line of duty may: 
(1)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(2)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or property. 
(d)  The exemptions granted to an authorized emergency vehicle under subsection (b) of this section and for a fire operations division vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of an audible signaling device meeting the requirements of Iowa Code § 321.433, or a visual signaling device approved by the state department of transportation, except that use of an audible or visual signaling device shall not be required when exercising the exemption granted under subsection (c)(2) of this section when the vehicle is operated by a peace officer pursuing a suspected violator of the speed restrictions imposed by or pursuant to this article, for the purpose of determining speed of travel of such suspected violator. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 2017, § 26-107) 
Sec. 23-124. - Duties of drivers on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "red light" or "blue light" means a light or lighting device that, when illuminated, will exhibit a solid flashing or strobing red or blue light. 
(b)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle with any lamp or device displaying a red light or red and blue lights, or an authorized emergency vehicle of a fire department displaying a blue light, or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(c)  Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as stated in this section, the motorman of every streetcar shall immediately stop such car clear of any intersection and keep it in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(d)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-108) 
Sec. 23-125. - Projecting loads on passenger vehicles. 
    No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof. Passengers shall not ride on any part of any vehicle unless it is expressly designed either for passenger use or designed for carrying livestock, merchandise, or freight. 
(Code 2017, § 26-109; Ord. No. 1997, § 1, 10-19-1992) 
Sec. 23-126. - Obstructing driver's view or control of vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such a position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-110) 
Sec. 23-127. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-111) 
Sec. 23-128. - Following or parking near fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where such fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 2017, § 26-112) 
Sec. 23-129. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire operations division when laid down on any street, alley or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire operations division official in command. 
(Code 2017, § 26-113) 
Sec. 23-130. - Coasting. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle, when traveling upon a downgrade, shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(b)  The driver of a commercial motor vehicle, when traveling upon a downgrade, shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(Code 2017, § 26-114) 
Sec. 23-131. - Driving on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-115) 
Sec. 23-132. - Evading railroad crossing gates and barriers. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 2017, § 26-116) 
Sec. 23-133. - Riding or driving animal or driving motor vehicle on parking or recreation trails. 
(a)  No person shall drive or ride an animal or operate a motor vehicle on that part of the street known as the parking. The term "parking," for the purposes of this section, shall mean that portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of the roadway, and the adjacent property line. 
(b)  No person shall drive or ride an animal or operate a motor vehicle on a recreational trail owned by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-117) 
Sec. 23-134. - Making ruts in pavement. 
    No person or driver of any heavily loaded vehicle or wagon belonging to any such person shall follow a certain path with one wheel of such vehicle along the curb or gutter of any paved street so that such vehicle may cut the pavement thus causing a cut or rut in such pavement by reason of repeatedly following such path. 
(Code 2017, § 26-118) 
Sec. 23-135. - Transport of hazardous materials. 
    A person shall not transport or have transported or shipped upon any street within the city any hazardous material except in compliance with rules adopted by the state department of transportation under Iowa Code ch. 17A. The rules shall be consistent with the federal hazardous materials regulations promulgated under USC title 49, and found in 49 CFR 107, 171-173, 177 and 178. However, rules adopted under this section concerning tank specifications shall not apply to cargo tank motor vehicles with a capacity of 4,000 gallons or less used to transport gasoline in intrastate commerce, which were manufactured between 1950 and 1979 and are in compliance with the American Society of Mechanical Engineers specifications in effect at the time of manufacture. 
(Code 2017, § 26-119; Ord. No. 1943, § 27, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-136. - Dragging materials which injure streets. 
    No person shall drag, or cause to be dragged, anything that will cut, injure or destroy the street or pavement of any street of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-121) 
Sec. 23-137. - Locations for stopping buses. 
    Buses within the limits of the city shall only stop at intersections of streets therein and on the near side of such intersections, except in cases of urgent necessity or emergency. 
(Code 2017, § 26-122) 
Sec. 23-138. - Driving on right-hand side of street. 
(a)  A vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway upon all roadways of sufficient width, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement. 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the roadway, provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon. 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic upon all roadways, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection, an alley, private road or driveway. 
(c)  A vehicle shall not be driven upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(1) of this section. This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-123) 
Sec. 23-139. - Obedience to one-way signs. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in section 23-140, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are properly erected and maintained. 
(Code 2017, § 26-124) 
Sec. 23-140. - Schedule of one-way streets and alleys. 
    The schedule of one-way streets and alleys is as follows: 
Street or Alley Direction of Traffic 23rd Street (West) From west to east between College Street and Olive Street. Fern Avenue From south to north between Green Avenue and East Lantz. Green Avenue From west to east between Center Street and Fern Avenue. Hawthorne Drive From east to west between Willow Lane and Rownd Street. Pearl Street From south to north between Seventh Street and Eighth Street on Sundays only. Public alley extending from Greely Street to Jefferson Street and running between Lincoln Street and Grant Street From east to west so as to enter the alley from Greely Street and depart therefrom on Jefferson Street. Public alley between Main Street and State Street From north to south between Second Street and Third Street and between Fourth Street and the railroad tracks lying north of Fifth Street. Public alley between Main Street and Washington Street From south to north between Fifth Street and First Street. Royal Drive From south to east between Melrose Drive and Seerley Boulevard. Seerley Boulevard From east to west between Royal Drive and Melrose Drive. Waterloo Road From southeast to northeast between East 14th Street and East 13th Street. Washington Street From West Sixth Street south to West 18th Street.  
(Code 2017, § 26-125; Ord. No. 1956, § 1, 10-14-1991; Ord. No. 2070, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 2611, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 23-141. - Signal when stopping or suddenly decreasing speed. 
    No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this article to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 2017, § 26-126) 
Sec. 23-142. - Authority to establish play streets. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to supervise placing of appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the play street. 
(Code 2017, § 26-127) 
Sec. 23-143. - Driving on play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 26-128) 
Sec. 23-144. - Operation of vehicle on closed street. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle over any street which has been closed to traffic by the proper authorities. 
(Code 2017, § 26-129) 
Sec. 23-145. - Discharging pupils; regulations. 
(a)  The driver of a school bus used to transport children to and from a public or private school shall, when stopping to receive or discharge pupils, turn on flashing warning lamps at a distance of not less than 300 feet nor more than 500 feet from the point where the pupils are to be received or discharged from the bus if the speed limit at that point is 45 miles per hour or greater and shall turn on flashing warning lamps at a distance of not less than 150 feet from the point where the pupils are to be received or discharged from the bus if the speed limit at that point is less than 45 miles per hour. At the point of receiving or discharging pupils the driver of the bus shall bring the bus to a stop, turn off the amber flashing warning lamps, turn on the red flashing warning lamps, and extend the stop arm. After receiving or discharging pupils, the bus driver shall turn off all flashing warning lamps, retract the stop arm and proceed on the route. Except to the extent that reduced visibility is caused by fog, snow, or other weather conditions, a school bus shall not stop to receive or discharge pupils unless there is at least 300 feet of unobstructed vision in each direction. However, the driver of a school bus is not required to use flashing warning lamps and the stop arm when receiving or discharging pupils at a designated loading and unloading zone at a school attendance center or at extracurricular or educational activity locations where students exiting the bus do not have to cross the street or highway. 
(1)  If a school district contracts with an urban transit system to transport children to and from a public or private school, the school bus which is provided by the urban transit system shall not be required to be equipped with flashing warning lights and a stop arm. If the school bus provided by an urban transit system is equipped with flashing warning lights and a stop arm, the driver of the school bus shall use the flashing warning light and stop arm as required by law. 
(2)  A school bus, when operating on a highway with four or more lanes, shall not stop to load or unload pupils who must cross the highway, except at designated stops where pupils who must cross the highway may do so at points where there are official traffic control devices or police officers. 
(3)  A school bus shall, while carrying passengers, have its headlights turned on. 
(b)  All pupils shall be received and discharged from the right front entrance of every school bus and if said pupils must cross the highway, they shall be required to pass in front of the bus, look in both directions, and proceed to cross the highway only on signal from the bus driver. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle, including the driver of a vehicle operating on a private road or driveway, when meeting a school bus with flashing amber warning lamps shall reduce the vehicle's speed to not more than 20 miles per hour, and shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop when the school bus stops and the stop signal arm is extended. The vehicle shall remain stopped until the stop signal arm is retracted after which time the driver may proceed with due caution. The driver of a vehicle, including the driver of a vehicle operating on a private road or driveway, overtaking a school bus shall not pass a school bus when red or amber warning signal lights are flashing. The driver shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop no closer than 15 feet from the school bus when it is stopped and the stop arm is extended, and the vehicle shall remain stopped until the stop arm is retracted and the school bus resumes motion. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway providing two or more lanes in each direction need not stop upon meeting a school bus which is traveling in the opposite direction even though the school bus is stopped. 
(Code 2017, § 26-130; Ord. No. 2613, § 1, 1-22-2007) 
Sec. 23-146. - Prompt investigation of reported violation of failing to obey school bus warning devices; citation issued to driver or owner. 
(a)  The driver of a school bus who observes a violation of section 23-145(c) may prepare a written report on a form provided by the Iowa Department of Public Safety indicating that a violation has occurred. The school bus driver or a school official may deliver the report not more than 72 hours after the violation occurred to a peace officer of the state or a peace officer of the county or municipality in which the violation occurred. The report shall state the time and the location at which the violation occurred and shall include the registration plate number and a description of the vehicle involved in the violation. 
(b)  Not more than seven calendar days after receiving a report of a violation of section 23-145(c), from a school bus driver or a school official, the peace officer shall initiate an investigation of the reported violation and contact the owner of the motor vehicle involved in the reported violation and request that the owner supply information identifying the driver in accordance with Iowa Code § 321.484. 
(1)  If, from the investigation, the peace officer is able to identify the driver and has reasonable cause to believe a violation of section 23-145(c), has occurred, the peace officer shall prepare a uniform traffic citation for the violation and shall serve it personally or by certified mail to the driver of the vehicle. 
(2)  If, from the investigation, the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of section 23-145(c), occurred but is unable to identify the driver, the peace officer shall serve a uniform traffic citation for the violation to the owner of the motor vehicle. Notwithstanding Iowa Code § 221.484, in a proceeding where the peace officer who conducted the investigation was not able to identify the driver of the motor vehicle, proof that the motor vehicle described in the uniform traffic citation was used to commit the violation of section 23-145(c), together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was the owner of the motor vehicle at the time the violation occurred, constitutes a permissible inference that the owner was the driver who committed the violation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-130A; Ord. No. 2613, § 1, 1-22-2007) 
Sec. 23-147. - Time of placement of movable school stop signs. 
    When movable school stop signs are used, they shall be placed in the streets at the designated places one-half hour before school opens in the morning, five minutes before school is dismissed at 12:00 noon, one-half hour before school opens in the afternoon and five minutes before school is dismissed in the afternoon. The movable stop signs shall be left standing in the streets for five minutes after school opens in the morning and afternoon and for 15 minutes after school is dismissed at 12:00 noon and in the afternoon. 
(Code 2017, § 26-131) 
Sec. 23-148. - School zones. 
    The following parts of streets are hereby established as school zones: 
(1)  First Street (West) from a line ten feet west of the west line of Catherine Street to a line ten feet east of the east line of Pearl Street. 
(2)  Second Street (West) from Pearl Street to Catherine Street. 
(3)  Fourth Street (West) from Hudson Road to Cedar Crest Drive. 
(4)  Seventh Street from Clay Street to Tremont Street. 
(5)  Seventh Street from the east line of Washington Street to the east line of the alley crossing Seventh Street between Washington and Clay Streets. 
(6)  Eighth Street from Clay Street to Tremont Street. 
(7)  Eighth Street (West) from Hudson Road to Warwick Drive. 
(8)  19th Street (West) from Campus Street to Hudson Road. 
(9)  27th Street (West) from College Street to Hudson Road. 
(10)  Campus Street from West 19th Street to West 23rd Street. 
(11)  Center Street from a point 200 feet south of its intersection with Green Avenue to a point 200 feet north of its intersection with Lantz Avenue. 
(12)  Clay Street from the south curb line of West Seventh Street south to the north curb line of West Eighth Street. 
(13)  College Street from West 23rd Street to West 27th Street. 
(14)  Division Street from West Eighth Street to West 12th Street. 
(15)  Franklin and Tremont Streets from a line ten feet north of the north line of Seventh Street to a line ten feet south of the south line of Eighth Street. 
(16)  Hawthorne Drive from California Street east to Willow Lane. 
(17)  Holmes Drive from the south line of Fourth Street, extending south on Holmes Drive to a point 673.5 feet measured along the centerline of Holmes Drive. 
(18)  Main Street from Eighth Street to Ninth Street. 
(19)  Melrose Drive from a point even with the west property line of Valley Park Schools to a point even with the east property line of Valley Park Schools on Melrose Drive. 
(20)  Pearl Street from First Street to Second Street. 
(21)  Rainbow Drive from a line ten feet westerly of the westerly line of the westerly drive to a line ten feet easterly of the easterly line of easterly drive of Cedar Heights School. 
(22)  Rownd Street from the north line of Primrose Drive to a point that is 690 feet south of the most southerly line of the east intersection of Rownd Street and Primrose Drive. 
(23)  Seerley Boulevard from a point even with the west property line of Peet Junior High School to a point even with the east property line of Peet Junior High School on Seerley Boulevard. 
(24)  Washington Street from a line 132 feet south of the south line of Sixth Street to the south line of Seventh Street. 
(25)  Waterloo Road from a point on Waterloo Road in the center of its intersection with Royal Drive a distance of 200 feet southeasterly and a distance of 200 feet northwesterly on Waterloo Road. 
(Code 2017, § 26-132; Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 2703, § 1, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-149. - Disturbing public peace with motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to disturb the public peace and quiet by squealing tires or by any other unnecessary noise made by the motor vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-133) 
Sec. 23-150. - Open containers in motor vehicles-Drivers. 
    A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. The term "passenger area" means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk. A person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(14)e. 
(Code 2017, § 26-134; Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-151. - Open containers in motor vehicles-Passengers. 
(a)  A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. The term "passenger area" means the area of a motor vehicle designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a passenger being transported in a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation, or a passenger being transported in the living quarters of a motor home, motorsports recreational vehicle, manufactured or mobile home, travel trailer, or fifth-wheel travel trailer. 
(c)  A person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(14)e. 
(Code 2017, § 26-135; Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 23-152. - Approaching certain stationary vehicles. 
(a)  The operator of a motor vehicle approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle that is displaying flashing yellow, amber, white, red, or red and blue lights shall approach the authorized emergency vehicle with due caution and shall proceed in one of the following manners, absent any other direction by a peace officer: 
(1)  Make a lane change into a lane not adjacent to the authorized emergency vehicle if possible in the existing safety and traffic conditions. 
(2)  If a lane change under subsection (a)(1) of this section would be impossible, prohibited by law, or unsafe, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a reasonable and proper speed for the existing road and traffic conditions, which speed shall be less than the posted speed limit, and be prepared to stop. 
(b)  The operator of a motor vehicle approaching a stationary towing or recovery vehicle, a stationary utility maintenance vehicle, a stationary municipal maintenance vehicle, or a stationary highway maintenance vehicle, that is displaying flashing yellow, amber, or red lights, shall approach the vehicle with due caution and shall proceed in one of the following manners, absent any other direction by a peace officer: 
(1)  Make a lane change into a lane not adjacent to the towing, recovery, utility maintenance, municipal maintenance, or highway maintenance vehicle if possible in the existing safety and traffic conditions. 
(2)  If a lane change under subsection (b)(1) of this section would be impossible, prohibited by law, or unsafe, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a reasonable and proper speed for the existing road and traffic conditions, which speed shall be less than the posted speed limit, and be prepared to stop. 
(Code 2017, § 26-136; Ord. No. 2553, § 5, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-153. - Radar jamming devices. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, operate or possess a radar jamming device, except as otherwise provided in this section, when the device is in a vehicle operated on the streets or highways of the city, or the device is held for sale in the city. 
(b)  This section does not apply to radar speed measuring devices purchased by, held for purchase for, or operated by peace officers using the devices in their official duties. 
(c)  A radar jamming device may be seized by a peace officer subject to forfeiture as provided by Iowa Code ch. 809 or 809A. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "radar jamming device" means any mechanism designed or used to transmit radio waves in the electromagnetic wave spectrum to interfere with the reception of those emitted from a device used by peace officers in the city to measure the speed of motor vehicles on the streets or highways of the city and which is not designed for two-way transmission and cannot transmit in plain language. 
(Code 2017, § 26-137; Ord. No. 2553, § 6, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-154. - All-terrain vehicles; street or highway use. 
(a)  All-terrain vehicles shall not be operated on a street or highway in the city unless one or more of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The operation is between sunrise and sunset and is incidental to the vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. For purposes of this subsection, the term "incidental to the vehicle's use for agricultural purposes" includes stopping in the course of agricultural use to obtain fuel for the all-terrain vehicle or to obtain food or a non-alcoholic beverage for the operator. 
(2)  The operation is incidental to the vehicle's use for the purpose of surveying by a licensed engineer or land surveyor. 
(3)  The all-terrain vehicle is operated by an employee or agent of a political subdivision or public utility for the purpose of construction or maintenance on or adjacent to the street or highway. 
(4)  The all-terrain vehicle is operated by an employee or agent of a public agency as defined in Iowa Code § 34.1 for the purpose of providing emergency services or rescue. 
(5)  The all-terrain vehicle is operated for the purpose of mowing, installing approved trail signs, or providing maintenance on a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle trail designated by the state department of natural resources. 
(6)  The all-terrain vehicle is operated on a street in the city in accordance with Iowa Code § 321I.10(3). 
(b)  A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway in the city shall have a valid driver's license and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of 35 miles per hour or less. 
(c)  An all-terrain vehicle that is owned by the owner of land adjacent to a street or highway in the city, other than an interstate road, may be operated by the owner of the all-terrain vehicle, or by a member of the owner's family, on the portion of the street or highway in the city right-of-way that is between the shoulder of the roadway, or at least five feet from the edge of the roadway, and the owner's property line. 
(Code 2017, § 26-138; Ord. No. 2725, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 23-155. - Electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
    An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated by a person at least 16 years of age on sidewalks and bikeways in the city in accordance with this section. 
(1)  None of the following is required for operation of an electric personal assistive mobility device in the city: 
a.  Licensure or registration of the electric personal assistive mobility device under Iowa Code ch. 321. 
b.  Possession of a driver's license or permit by the operator of the electric personal assistive mobility device. 
c.  Proof of financial responsibility. 
(2)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a sidewalk or bikeway in the city shall do all of the following: 
a.  Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and human-powered devices. 
b.  Give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian or human-powered device. 
(3)  A person shall not operate an electric personal assistive mobility device in the city at the times specified in section 23-517 unless the person or the electric personal assistive mobility device is equipped with a headlight visible from the front of the electric personal assistive mobility device and at least one red reflector visible from the rear of the electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(Code 2017, § 26-139; Ord. No. 2618, § 4, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 23-156. - Littering or putting debris on streets or highways. 
    A person shall not throw or deposit upon a street or highway in the city any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris. A person shall not throw or deposit upon a street or highway in the city a substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon the street or highway. A person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(14)d. 
(Code 2017, § 26-140; Ord. No. 2618, § 5, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 23-157. - Removing injurious material. 
    Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway in the city any destructive or injurious material and other material as defined in section 23-156 shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. A person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(14)d. 
(Code 2017, § 26-141; Ord. No. 2618, § 6, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 23-158. - Clearing up wrecks. 
    Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway in the city shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped from such vehicle upon the street or highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-142; Ord. No. 2618, § 7, 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 23-159. - Actions against bicyclists. 
(a)  A person operating a motor vehicle shall not steer the motor vehicle unreasonably close to or toward a person riding a bicycle on a street or highway, including the roadway or the shoulder adjacent to the roadway. 
(b)  A person shall not knowingly project any object or substance at or against a person riding a bicycle on a street or highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-143; Ord. No. 2725, § 2, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 23-160-23-186. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OVERTAKING AND PASSING 

Sec. 23-187. - General passing. 
    The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this division: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  Any driver of a vehicle that is overtaken by a faster moving vehicle who fails to heed the signal of the overtaking vehicle when it is given under such circumstances that he could, by the exercise of ordinary care and observation and precaution, hear such signal, and who fails to yield that part of the traveled way as provided in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(4)  Upon proof that a signal was given as contemplated by subsection (3) of this section, the burden shall rest upon the accused to prove that he did not hear the signal. 
(Code 2017, § 26-146) 
Sec. 23-188. - Overtaking or passing on right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. 
(b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the driver of a vehicle on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of traffic moving in the same direction as the vehicle being passed may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn when such movement can be made in safety. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway or upon the apron or roadway of an intersecting roadway in overtaking or passing on the right or the left. 
(Code 2017, § 26-147) 
Sec. 23-189. - Limitations on overtaking on left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. The overtaking vehicle shall return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 300 feet of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed limit in excess of 30 miles per hour, and the overtaking vehicle shall return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less. 
(Code 2017, § 26-148; Ord. No. 1943, § 10, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-190. - Limitations on passing on left on pavement of four or more lanes. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such movement can be made in safety. 
(Code 2017, § 26-149) 
Sec. 23-191. - Prohibited passing. 
    No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed for a distance of approximately 700 feet. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of any narrow bridge, viaduct or tunnel, when so signposted, or when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(3)  Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right or a distinctive centerline or off-centerline is marked, which distinctive line also so directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-150) 
Secs. 23-192-23-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 23-221. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 2017, § 26-161) 
Sec. 23-222. - Movement to right on meeting on roadway. 
    Except as provided by Iowa Code § 321.297, vehicles or persons on horseback meeting each other on any roadway shall give one-half of the traveled way thereof by turning to the right. 
(Code 2017, § 26-162) 
Sec. 23-223. - Backing vehicle on highway. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle on a highway in reverse gear unless and until such operation can be made with reasonable safety, and such person shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching vehicle on the highway or intersecting highway thereto which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 2017, § 26-163) 
Sec. 23-224. - Driving through parade. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle through a parade without the permission of a police or traffic officer. 
(Code 2017, § 26-164) 
Sec. 23-225. - Driving through funeral procession. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "funeral procession" means a procession of motor vehicles accompanying the body of a deceased person during daylight hours which is being escorted by a vehicle continually displaying its emergency signal lamps flashing simultaneously and using lighted headlamps and identifying flags, or an escort vehicle displaying a flashing or revolving red and amber light visible to pedestrians in all directions, and keeping all other motor vehicles with lighted headlamps in close formation. 
(b)  Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession unless the operation is reckless. 
(c)  The funeral establishment in charge of the funeral procession is liable only in connection with the procession for any negligent, reckless, or intentional act by the funeral establishment or any employee or agent of the funeral establishment that results in any death, personal injury or property damage suffered during a funeral procession. 
Sec. 23-226. - Drivers to yield right-of-way when lane ends. 
    Vehicles moving in a lane controlled by a yield sign shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles moving in the same direction in a lane not controlled by a yield sign, when such lanes merge to form a single lane. 
(Code 2017, § 26-165) 
Sec. 23-227. - Turning left at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching from the opposite direction which are within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, and then the driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this division, may make such left turn. 
(Code 2017, § 26-166) 
Sec. 23-228. - Right-of-way when two vehicles are approaching intersection. 
(a)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways or public streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The rule in subsection (a) of this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-167) 
Sec. 23-229. - Entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 2017, § 26-168; Ord. No. 1943, § 28, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-230. - Lettering of stop signs; location of stop signs. 
(a)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "stop" and shall conform to standards of the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the property line of the street at the entrance to which the stop must be made, or at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-169) 
Sec. 23-231. - Through streets designated. 
    The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through streets: 
Street Portion of Street 
Designated as Arterial 
Through Street First Street From Main Street west to the city limits. Second Street From Iowa Street to Hudson Road, except for Walnut Street and Division Street. Fourth Street From Franklin Street west to Pheasant Drive, except at Walnut Street, at Hudson Road, and at its intersection With Angie Drive and Holmes Drive. Sixth Street From Main Street west to Sartori Hospital, except at Franklin Street. Seventh Street (West) At the intersection of Division Street. At the intersection of Franklin Street. Eighth Street (West) From College Street west to Hudson Road, except at Division Street. At the intersection of Barrington Drive. At the intersection of Franklin Street. Ninth Street From College Street west to the west line of Division Street, except at Division Street. Tenth Street From College Street west to the west line of Division Street, except at Division Street. 11th Street From College Street west to the end of College Street, except at Division Street. 12th Street (East) From Main Street east to the end of 12th Street (East). 12th Street (West) From Main Street west to the city limits, except at Walnut Street, College Street, Hudson Road and Union Road. 13th Street (East) From Waterloo Road to Main Street east to Waterloo Road. 14th Street (East) From Main Street east to Waterloo Road. 18th Street From Waterloo Road west to Hudson Road, except at Main Street and College Street. 19th Street (West) From College Street to Hudson Road, except at its two intersections with Merner Avenue. 22nd Street From Main Street to Campus Street, except at Walnut Street and College Street. 23rd Street (West) From College Street to Hudson Road, except at Campus Street. 27th Street From Main Street west to College Street, and from Hudson Road west to the city limits. Barnett Drive From West Fourth Street to West 12th Street. Belle Avenue From Rainbow Drive to Waterloo Road. Bergstrom Boulevard From South Main Street Road to South Lawn Road, except at South Main Street and South Lawn Road. Big Woods Road From Independence Avenue to the north city limits, except at Lake Street and Dunkerton Road. Boulder Drive From Orchard Drive to University Avenue. Briarwood Drive From Orchard Drive south and east to Orchard Hill Drive. Campus Street From West 18th Street to the south line of West 23rd Street. Carlton Drive From Orchard Drive to Maplewood Drive. From Orchard Drive south to Briarwood Drive. Cedar Heights Drive From Rainbow Drive south to the south city limits, except at University Avenue. Center Street From First Street to the north city limits. Clay Street From First Street to 18th Street, except at Second Street, Third Street, Sixth Street and 12th Street. College Street From Sixth Street to end of street south of 29th Street, except at 12th Street, 18th Street and University Avenue. Crescent Drive From Highland Drive west to the end of said Crescent Drive. Division Street From First Street to 12th Street, except at Fourth Street, Eighth Street, Ninth Street, Tenth Street and 11th Street. Dunkerton Road From Center Street to the east city limits. Eastpark Road From Orchard Drive south and east to Briarwood Drive. Ellen Street (North) From First Street north to South Park Road. Enterprise Drive From Viking Road to Chancellor Drive. Franklin Street From First Street south to University Avenue, except at Sixth Street, 12th Street, 18th Street and Seerley Boulevard. Grand Boulevard From Waterloo Road to the intersection at Galloway Avenue, except at Edwards Street and Park Drive. Grant Street From Jefferson Street east to McKinley Street. Hawthorne Drive From Waterloo Road east to Neola Street, except at Rownd Street. Highland Drive From First Street to Fourth Street. Hudson Road From First Street south to the city limits, except at University Drive. Independence Avenue From Lincoln Street to Big Woods Road, except at the intersection of the railroad tracks which cross Independence Avenue. Knoll Ridge Drive From Orchard Drive south to Briarwood Drive. Lake Street From Central Avenue to Leversee Road, except at Big Woods Road. Laurinda Drive From Orchard Drive south to Elmridge Drive. Lantz (East) From Center Street to Jackson Avenue. Leversee Road From Lincoln Street to the north city limits, except at the intersection of the railroad tracks which cross Independence Avenue, and except at Dunkerton Road. Lilac Lane From Rownd Street to Boulder Drive, except at McClain Drive. Lincoln Street From the city limits to North Main Street. Lone Tree Road From Ford Road to Big Woods Road, except at Center Street. Lone Tree Road from Ford Road to Leversee Road, except at Center Street. Longview (East) From Central Avenue to Center Street. Madison Street From Valley Park Drive to Waterloo Road. Main Street From its intersection with North Main Street and Lincoln Street to University Avenue. Main Street (North) From its intersection with Lincoln Street and Main Street to Independence Avenue. Main Street Road (South) From University Avenue to the south city limits, except at Ridgeway Avenue. Maplewood Drive From Rownd Street to Boulder Drive, except at McClain Drive and Carlton Drive. McClain Drive From University Avenue to its southerly limit, except at Orchard Drive. Newman Avenue From Waterloo Road east to Gibson Street. Orchard Drive From South Main Street to the east city limits, except at Rownd Street and Cedar Heights Drive (South). Pleasant Drive From Rownd Street east to the city limits, except at Cedar Heights Drive. Rainbow Drive From Waterloo Road to the east city limits. Ridgeway Avenue From the east city limits to the west city limits, except at Hudson Road. Rownd Street From Rainbow Drive south to the city limits, except at University Avenue and Hawthorne Drive. Scenic Street From University Avenue to Pleasant Drive. Seerley Boulevard From Main Street to College Street and from Main Street east to Royal Drive, except at Valley Park Drive. South Lawn Road At its intersection with Bergstrom Boulevard. At the intersection of Bergstrom Boulevard and at the intersection of Stanwood Drive. State Street From East 13th Street to the intersection of First Street. Sunset Boulevard At the intersection of Willow Lane Tremont Street From West 9th Street to West 12th Street. From West 20th Street to West 22nd Street. Tucson Drive From the north line of University Avenue to the south line of Orchard Drive. Union Road From the south city limits to the north city limits, except at Dike Road, West 27th Street, West 12th Street and West First Street. University Drive From the east city limits to the west city limits, except at Hudson Road. U.S. Highway 20 From the east city limits to the west city limits. Valley High Drive From Rownd Street to Cedar Heights Drive. Valley Park Drive From University Avenue north to East 18th Street, except at East Seerley Boulevard. Veralta Drive From University Avenue to Green Hill Road, except at Valley High Drive and Orchard Drive. Victory Drive From Waterloo Road north to Rainbow Drive, except at Hawthorne Drive. Walnut Street From First Street to the end of the street south of 29th Street, except at Sixth Street, 18th Street, Seerley Boulevard and University Avenue. Washington Street From First Street to 18th Street, except at Sixth Street and 12th Street. Waterloo Road From University Avenue to Main Street. Western (East) From Central Avenue to Jackson Avenue.  
(Code 2017, § 26-170; Ord. No. 1929, § 1, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 1997, § 2, 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 2070, § 3, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2295, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 2311, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. No. 2384, § 1, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 2390, § 1, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 2441, § 1, 8-11-2003; Ord. No. 2494, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 2511, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2512, §§ 1-3, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2514, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2574, § 1, 5-22-2006; Ord. No. 2863, § 1, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 23-232. - Stopping at stop signs. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 2017, § 26-171) 
Sec. 23-233. - Entering through street. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as required by this division at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through street or highway or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute a hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed cautiously and with due care to enter said through street or highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-172) 
Sec. 23-234. - Stop at railroad crossing. 
(a)  When a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and a warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates, a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach of a train, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail, and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing and not traverse such a grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall also apply when stop signs are erected facing the approaching operator of a motor vehicle, the stop signs to be located at or near the railroad crossing. 
(Code 2017, § 26-173; Ord. No. 1943, § 11, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-235. - Emerging from private roadway, alley, driveway or building. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area, and shall enter the street only when the driver can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic, and the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the driver's vehicle is entering. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle about to enter or cross a public street in the city from a private roadway or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto such public street, and shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public street. 
(Code 2017, § 26-174) 
Secs. 23-236-23-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 23-264. - Operation of heavy vehicles prohibited on specific streets; exceptions. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of ten tons, nor shall any person operate any vehicle licensed for in excess of ten tons, at any time upon the following streets or portions of streets: 
(1)  Fourth Street (West), from Franklin Street to College Street. 
(2)  12th Street (West), from Hudson Road to Main Street. 
(3)  16th Street (West), from Clay Street to Main Street. 
(4)  Big Woods Road, from Dunkerton Road to North Main Street. 
(5)  Dunkerton Road, from Center Street to the east city limits. 
(6)  Independence Street, from North Main Street to Lincoln Street. 
(7)  Leversee Road, from Lincoln Street to the north city limits. 
(8)  Main Street, from First Street to Sixth Street. 
(9)  Maplewood Drive, from Rownd Street to McLain Drive. 
(10)  Rainbow Drive, from Waterloo Road to the east city limits. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to school buses, city-owned vehicles, vehicles to receive service or repair, or other vehicles making deliveries or pickups, on the portions of streets named in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The portion of subsection (a) of this section dealing with Main Street between First Street and Sixth Street shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries to or pickups from any business located on Main Street between First Street and Sixth Street that does not have a delivery or service door at the rear of such business that affords truck access to such business by means of the use of the public alley located behind such business. 
(Code 2017, § 26-186; Ord. No. 2234, § 1, 4-27-1998; Ord. No. 2611, §§ 3-5, 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 23-265. - Operation of heavy vehicles prohibited on specific bridges. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight as designated in this section, nor shall any person operate a vehicle licensed for in excess of the weight limits specified in this section, at any time upon the following bridges: 
Bridge No. Location Weight Limit 
(tons) 1 Waterloo Road 12 12 East 18th Street 20 15 Viking Road 16 17 North Union Road 18 19 Lincoln Street 20 24 South Union Road 14  
(Code 2017, § 26-187) 
Secs. 23-266-23-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPEED 

Sec. 23-294. - Applicability of state speed laws. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except as this division, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this division when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 26-201) 
Sec. 23-295. - Drag racing. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway of the city, and no person shall aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or speed exhibition on any street or highway of the city, except that a passenger shall not be considered as aiding and abetting. A motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is defined as one or more persons competing in speed in excess of the applicable speed limit in vehicles on the public streets or highways. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of drag racing, and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. 
(Code 2017, § 26-202) 
Sec. 23-296. - Minimum speed. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance with this section, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 26-203) 
Sec. 23-297. - Control of vehicle; reduced speed. 
(a)  A person operating a motor vehicle shall have the vehicle under control at all times. 
(b)  A person operating a motor vehicle shall reduce the speed to a reasonable and proper rate: 
(1)  When approaching and passing a person walking in the traveled portion of the public highway. 
(2)  When approaching and passing an animal which is being led, ridden or driven upon a public highway. 
(3)  When approaching and traversing a crossing or intersection of public highways, or a bridge, sharp turn, curve or steep descent, in a public highway. 
(4)  When approaching or passing an emergency warning device displayed in accordance with rules adopted under Iowa Code § 321.449, or an emergency vehicle displaying a revolving or flashing light. 
(Code 2017, § 26-204) 
Sec. 23-298. - Operators to drive at prudent speed. 
    Any person driving a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city shall drive the vehicle at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and any other condition that is existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a street at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using such street will observe the law. 
(Code 2017, § 26-205) 
Sec. 23-299. - State speed limit altered in certain areas. 
    It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon those streets or portions thereof described in section 23-300 is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation of such streets as U.S. highways, or by reason of the designation of such streets as boulevards or by reason of alternating residential and suburban districts and widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof described in section 23-300 shall be as therein stated. 
(Code 2017, § 26-206) 
Sec. 23-300. - Lawful speed limits established. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this division or other city ordinances and appropriately posted, the speed limits established in this section shall be the lawful speed, and any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful. 
(1)  Parks, cemeteries and alleys. 15 miles per hour in any park, cemetery or public alley. 
(2)  Business districts. 20 miles per hour in any business district. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 25 miles per hour in any industrial district. 
(4)  Residence districts; school districts. 25 miles per hour in any residence or school district. 
(5)  Suburban districts. 45 miles per hour in any suburban district. 
(6)  Fifteen miles per hour. 15 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
a.  Clay Street, from West Third Street north to West Second Street. 
b.  Pheasant Drive, for a distance of 210 feet east of the centerline of the jog in Pheasant Drive and for a distance of 200 feet west of the centerline of the jog in Pheasant Drive. 
(7)  Twenty miles per hour. 20 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
Waterloo Road, from its intersection with 14th Street northwesterly to the intersection of Bluff Street and East 13th Street. 
(8)  Twenty-five miles per hour. 25 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
a.  27th Street (West), from its intersection with Hudson Road west a distance of 1,800 feet. 
b.  Brandilynn Boulevard, from 400 feet east of Wal-Mart Drive west to the west end of the street. 
c.  Center Street, from its intersection with First Street to a point 300 feet north of First Street. 
d.  Center Street, from a point 200 feet south of its intersection with Green Avenue north to a point 200 feet north of its intersection with Lantz Avenue. 
e.  Chancellor Drive, from Viking Road south to Ridgeway Avenue. 
f.  Cottage Row Road, from Center Street south to a point 800 feet west of the south end of the Snag Creek Bridge. 
g.  Technology Parkway, from Hudson Road east to Chancellor Drive. 
h.  Wal-Mart Drive, from Brandilynn Boulevard south to Viking Road. 
i.  Westminster Drive, from Viking Road north and east to Nordic Drive. 
(9)  30 miles per hour. 30 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
a.  First Street (East) eastbound, from Main Street east to a point 850 feet east of Main Street. 
b.  First Street (East) westbound, from a point 520 feet east of Main Street west to Main Street. 
c.  First Street (West), from Main Street west to Highland Drive. 
d.  Brandilynn Boulevard, from 400 feet east of Wal-Mart Drive east to the east end of the street. 
e.  Main Street (South), from University Avenue south to Orchard Drive. 
f.  Prairie Parkway, from Brandilynn Boulevard south to Viking Road. 
g.  Winterberry Drive, from Brandilynn Boulevard south to Viking Road. 
(10)  35 miles per hour. 35 miles per hour on any of the following streets as indicated: 
a.  12th Street (West), from a point 425 feet west of the Carriage Lane intersection with West 12th Street to a point 125 feet west of the intersection of Barnett Drive with West 12th Street. 
b.  18th Street (East), from Main Street to Waterloo Road. 
c.  27th Street (West), from a point 1,800 feet west of Hudson Road west to a point 4,000 feet west of Hudson Road. 
d.  Big Woods Road, from Lake Street north to the north city limits. 
e.  Cedar Heights Drive, from its intersection with University Avenue to a point 1,200 feet south of University Avenue. 
f.  Center Street, from a point 300 feet north of First Street north to a point 200 feet south of its intersection with Green Avenue, and from a point 200 feet north of its intersection with Lantz Avenue north to the north city limits. 
g.  Cottage Row Road, from 800 feet west of the south end of the Snag Creek Bridge west to the end of said road. 
h.  Dunkerton Road, from its intersection with Center Street east to its intersection with U. S. Highway 218. 
i.  Greenhill Road, from Hudson Road west and north to West 27th Street. 
j.  Hudson Road, from its intersection with the south line of University Avenue north to its intersection with First Street. 
k.  Independence Avenue, from Lincoln Street north to Big Woods Road. 
l.  Lake Street, from a point 600 feet east of Central Avenue east to U.S. Highway 218. 
m.  Lincoln Street, from its intersection with Jefferson Street east to its intersection with Vermont Street. 
n.  Lone Tree Road, from its intersection with Ford Road to Center Street. 
o.  Main Street, from 13th Street to University Avenue, inclusive. 
p.  Main Street (South), from Orchard Drive south to the end of the street. 
q.  Production Drive, from Viking Road west and south to Technology Parkway. 
r.  Rainbow Drive, from its intersection with Waterloo Road east to the city limits. 
s.  Technology Parkway, from Hudson Road west to the west end of the street. 
t.  University Avenue, from Hudson Road east to the east city limits. 
u.  Viking Road, from its intersection with the west line of Hudson Road west to the west city limits. 
v.  Waterloo Road, from its intersection with East 14th Street southeasterly to its intersection of University Avenue. 
(11)  40 miles per hour. 40 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
Reserved. 
(12)  45 miles per hour. 45 miles per hour on the following streets as indicated: 
a.  First Street (East) eastbound, from a point 850 feet east of Main Street to a point 1,520 feet east of Main Street. 
b.  First Street (East) westbound, from a point 1,200 feet east of Main Street west to a point 520 feet east of Main Street. 
c.  First Street (West), from Highland Drive west to a point 340 feet west of Lake Ridge Drive. 
d.  12th Street (West), from a point 125 feet west of the intersection of Barnett Drive with West 12th Street to the west city limits. 
e.  27th Street (West), from a point 4,000 feet west of Hudson Road west to the west city limits. 
f.  Cedar Heights Drive, from a point 1,200 feet south of University Avenue south to the city limits. 
g.  Center Street, from a point 300 feet north of First Street to Cottage Row Road. 
h.  Dunkerton Road, from its intersection with U. S. Highway 218 east to the east city limits. 
i.  Fitkin Road, from its intersection with Ford Road to Center Street. 
j.  Ford Road, from its intersection with Fitkin Road south to Lone Tree Road. 
k.  Greenhill Road, from its intersection with Hudson Road to the east city limits. 
l.  Hudson Road, from its intersection with the south line of University Avenue south to the south city limits. 
m.  Iowa Highway 58, from its intersection with Ridgeway Avenue south to the south city limits. 
n.  Lake Street, from U.S. Highway 218 east to the east city limits. 
o.  Leversee Road (West half), from a point one-quarter mile north of Lincoln Street to the north city limits. 
p.  Lincoln Street, from its intersection with Vermont Street easterly to the city limits. 
q.  Lone Tree Road, from its intersection with Center Street to Leversee Road. 
r.  Main Street (South), from Viking Road south to the city limits. 
s.  Ridgeway Avenue, from the east city limits to the west city limits. 
t.  Union Road, from the south city limits to West 1st Street. 
u.  Viking Road, from the east city limits to its intersection with the east line of Hudson Road. 
(13)  50 miles per hour. 50 miles per hour on the following streets and/or highways as indicated: 
a.  First Street (West), from a point 340 feet west of Lake Ridge Drive west to Union Road. 
b.  Union Road, from West First Street north to the north city limits. 
(14)  55 miles per hour. 55 miles per hour on the following streets and/or highways as indicated: 
a.  First Street (East) eastbound, from a point 1,520 feet east of Main Street east to a point 700 feet east of the midpoint between the Iowa Highway 58 northbound overpass and the Iowa Highway 58 southbound overpass. 
b.  First Street (East) westbound, from a point 600 feet west of the midpoint between the Iowa Highway 58 northbound overpass and the Iowa Highway 58 southbound overpass west to a point 1,200 feet east of Main Street. 
c.  First Street (West), from Union Road west to the west city limits. 
d.  Iowa Highway 58, from a point 1,300 feet north of its intersection with Greenhill Road south to its intersection with Ridgeway Avenue. 
e.  University Avenue, from a point 3,100 feet west of its intersection with Hudson Road to the west city limits. 
(15)  60 miles per hour. 60 miles per hour on the following streets and/or highways as indicated: 
a.  First Street (East), from its intersection with the midpoint between the Iowa Highway 58 northbound overpass and the Iowa Highway 58 southbound overpass east a distance of 700 feet. 
b.  Iowa Highway 58, from its intersection with First Street south to a point 1,300 feet north of its intersection with Greenhill Road. 
c.  U.S. Highway 218 southbound, from a point 2,000 feet north of its intersection with Lincoln Street south to its intersection with First Street. 
d.  U.S. Highway 218 northbound, from its intersection with First Street north to a point 410 feet north of its intersection with Lincoln Street. 
(16)  65 miles per hour. 65 miles per hour on the following streets and/or highways as indicated: 
a.  First Street (East) eastbound, from a point 700 feet east of its intersection with the midpoint between the Iowa Highway 58 northbound overpass and the Iowa Highway 58 southbound overpass east to the east city limits. 
b.  First Street (East) westbound, from the east city limits west to a point 600 feet east of its intersection with the midpoint between the Iowa Highway 58 northbound overpass and the Iowa Highway 58 southbound overpass. 
c.  U.S. Highway 218 southbound, from the north city limits south to a point 2,000 feet north of its intersection with Lincoln Street. 
d.  U.S. Highway 218 northbound, from a point 410 feet north of its intersection with Lincoln Street north to the north city limits. 
(Code 2017, § 26-207; Ord. No. 1935, §§ 2, 3, 2-25-1991; Ord. No. 1981, §§ 1-5, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 2002, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1993; Ord. No. 2005, §§ 1, 2, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. 2116, §§ 2, 3, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2199, § 1, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2238, §§ 1, 2, 6-22-1998; Ord. No. 2244, § 2, 10-12-1998; Ord. No. 2314, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-2000; Ord. No. 2315, §§ 1-5, 11-13-2000; Ord. No. 2325, §§ 1-3, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2358, §§ 1-3, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 2402, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 2403, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 2440, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-2003; Ord. No. 2451, §§ 1-3, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 2543, §§ 1, 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 2589, §§ 1-6, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2601, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2704, §§ 1-3, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2732, § 1, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 2767, §§ 1-4, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2772, §§ 1, 2, 7-23-2012; Ord. No. 2835, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 2898, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 2917, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-2018; Ord. No. 2927, 6-18-2018) 
Secs. 23-301-23-318. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 23-319. - Position for turning from one-way street into private drive. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private drive from a one-way street shall do as follows: 
(1)  A left turn shall be made from the traveled lane nearest the left-hand curb. 
(2)  A right turn shall be made from the traveled lane nearest the right-hand curb. 
(Code 2017, § 26-221) 
Sec. 23-320. - Obedience to turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that a turn is required, or that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 2017, § 26-222) 
Sec. 23-321. - Signals required when turning. 
    No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this division if any other vehicle may be affected by such movement. 
(Code 2017, § 26-223) 
Sec. 23-322. - Turn signal to be continuous; distance of giving signal. 
    A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning when the speed limit is 45 miles per hour or less, and continuously during not less than the last 300 feet when the speed limit is in excess of 45 miles per hour. 
(Code 2017, § 26-224) 
Sec. 23-323. - Signals to be by hand and arm or signal device. 
    The signals required under the provisions of this chapter may be given either by means of the hand and arm as provided in this division, or by a mechanical or electrical directional signal device or light of a type approved by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-225) 
Sec. 23-324. - Method of giving hand and arm signals. 
    All signals required by this chapter which may be given by the hand and arm shall, when so given, be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 2017, § 26-226) 
Sec. 23-325. - Methods of turning at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made from the traveled lane nearest the left-hand curb and by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. When both streets are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  When the city has caused markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby required and directed that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs. 
(Code 2017, § 26-227) 
Sec. 23-326. - U-turns. 
(a)  When signs are posted, U-turns are permitted: 
(1)  At all intersections located on University Avenue, except at the intersection of University Avenue and Waterloo Road and except at the intersections on University Avenue located west of Main Street; and 
(2)  On Hudson Road at its intersection with West 12th Street. Such U-turns must be made from the left storage lane only. Such U-turns made at any intersection that is governed by traffic control signals shall be made only on a green left turn arrow. 
(b)  U-turns are prohibited on Division Street at the intersections of Eighth Street, Tenth Street and 12th Street. 
(c)  Other U-turns are permitted only at an intersection; provided, however, that other U-turns are prohibited at the intersections within a business district and at other intersections where there are automatic traffic signals. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle in an intersection who is intending to make a U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which are in the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, having so yielded, may proceed to make the U-turn with caution. 
(Code 2017, § 26-228; Ord. No. 2462, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Secs. 23-327-23-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-356. - Fines for parking violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article or by state law, the fine for a violation of this article shall be $10.00, payable to the city. If said fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, the fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-251; Ord. No. 1922, § 5, 11-26-1990; Ord. No. 2035, § 1, 11-22-1993; Ord. No. 2057, § 1, 5-23-1994; Ord. No. 2445, § 1, 8-25-2003) 
Sec. 23-357. - Notice of parking violation. 
    The parking meter attendants or police officers, or their designees, of the city shall attach to the vehicles in violation of this article a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this article and informing the owner or operator of the amount of the fine, how the fine may be paid, and the penalty for failure to pay the fine within the time required in section 23-356. 
(Code 2017, § 26-252; Ord. No. 2705, § 1, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 23-358. - Presumption regarding responsibility for illegal parking. 
    In any proceeding charging any violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that a particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the information was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 2017, § 26-253) 
Sec. 23-359. - Impoundment or immobilization of vehicles. 
(a)  Impoundment of vehicles. Members of the police t operations division and parking meter attendants, or their designees, are hereby authorized to impound, that is, to remove, or have removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, bridge, highway, municipally owned or leased parking lot, or, in the event of a violation of section 23-389, from private property, to a place of safety designated or maintained by the police t operations division whenever any such vehicle is parked in violation of this article. 
(b)  Immobilization of vehicles. As an alternative to impoundment under subsection (a) of this section, members of the police t operations division and parking meter attendants, or their designees, are hereby authorized to immobilize a vehicle on a street, public alley, bridge, highway, municipally owned or leased parking lot, or, in the event of a violation of section 23-389, on private property, whenever any such vehicle is parked in violation of this article. 
(c)  Payment. In addition to the penalty provided in this chapter, the owner or operator of any vehicle impounded or immobilized for violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be required to pay for all outstanding penalties, fines and fees owed for all parking citations, plus either all towing, storage and impoundment fees, or all immobilization fees, together with all administrative fees. 
(d)  Impoundment or immobilization for accumulated parking violations. 
(1)  Whenever it is determined that any vehicle has accumulated unpaid parking violations with fines totaling $30.00 or more, as defined in this Code, then, until such time as all fines for such accumulated parking violations have been paid, such vehicle may be either impounded, or, in the alternative, immobilized by installing a device which clamps and locks onto the wheel and impedes vehicle movement, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Impoundment or immobilization shall occur only after notice and opportunity for an administrative hearing is sent to the last known registered owner of such motor vehicle. 
b.  Notice shall consist of the following: Written notification by first class mail to the last known address of the registered owner, stating the license number of the vehicle; the owner's name; and a brief description of the parking tickets issued to such vehicle. Said notice shall also state that the registered owner has the right to request an administrative hearing before impoundment or immobilization, if such request is made within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice; that the hearing shall determine the merits of whether to impound or immobilize such motor vehicle for unpaid parking violations; that failure to request a hearing in a timely manner, or failure to appear at such hearing, shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing; and that the owner shall be responsible for all charges and costs incurred in impounding or immobilizing such vehicle. 
c.  A request for an administrative hearing must be made in writing to the city clerk or the city clerk's designee. The request shall be reviewed to determine whether to impound or immobilize, as the case may be, the motor vehicle for unpaid parking violations. 
d.  The hearing shall be conducted before the police chief of the city or the police chief's designee, and shall be limited to a determination of whether such vehicle should be impounded or immobilized, as the case may be, for unpaid parking tickets. The owner may at that time pay for all outstanding fines for parking tickets. 
e.  Should the police chief or the police chief's designee determine that the vehicle shall be impounded or immobilized, as the case may be, said police chief or designee shall notify the owner, either orally at the conclusion of the hearing or by letter; however, no such notice need be given should the owner or a designated representative of the owner fail to appear at such hearing. 
f.  After the vehicle has been impounded or immobilized, the city shall notify the last known registered owner of such vehicle thereof, by certified mail if the name and address of such owner can be ascertained with reasonable diligence, unless the owner or operator has appeared and has made claim to the seized vehicle. 
(2)  Any vehicle that remains immobilized for a consecutive period of 48 hours or more, shall be subject to towing and impoundment as provided in this section. 
(3)  Any vehicle that is immobilized pursuant to this section shall not be issued any parking citations for the period during which the vehicle remains immobilized. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove an immobilization device which has been attached to any vehicle as provided in this section, to damage the device, or to move the vehicle with the device attached. No person other than a member of the police operations division, a parking meter attendant, or their designees, shall remove the immobilization device. 
(5)  No vehicle shall be impounded by towing or immobilized, unless such vehicle is on a public street or other publicly owned or leased property, or, in the event of a violation of section 23-389, is on private property. 
a.  Entrance into impounded or immobilized vehicles. If it is necessary to enter a locked or unlocked vehicle in order to impound or immobilize such vehicle, such entrance must be made in the presence of a police officer. The police officer shall conduct such search of such vehicle as said officer deems necessary to protect the contents thereof. However, such search need not be a complete inventory of the contents of the vehicle. 
b.  Release of impounded or immobilized vehicles. 
1.  The registered owner or operator may reclaim any vehicle impounded or immobilized pursuant to the provisions herein by appearing before the police chief or the police chief's designee. At such time, the owner or the operator shall sign a certificate that he is the registered owner or operator of the impounded or immobilized vehicle, and at that time shall pay for all outstanding parking tickets, together with all costs of towing, storage and impoundment, or of immobilization, as the case may be. All charges and costs incurred in impounding the vehicle will be paid by the registered owner or operator to the towing service. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to reclaim any vehicle impounded or immobilized pursuant to the provisions herein, contrary to the procedure set forth in this section. 
(e)  Charges. The charges for impoundment and immobilization shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Penalty for violations. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 26-254; Ord. No. 2705, § 2, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2813, § 1, 5-27-2014) 
Sec. 23-360. - Driver's responsibility when leaving motor vehicle unattended. 
    A person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit the vehicle to stand unattended upon any perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street or highway 
(Code 2017, § 26-255) 
Sec. 23-361. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no light need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps, which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side which shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(c)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(d)  The provisions of this section requiring the exhibition of a light shall not apply when an accident extinguishes the light and renders a vehicle incapable of use, and when the person in control of the vehicle erects, at the earliest opportunity after the accident, such proper light at or near the vehicle as will give warning of the presence of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-256) 
Sec. 23-362. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 2017, § 26-257) 
Sec. 23-363. - Manner of parallel parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street in any manner other than in the direction of the lawful traffic movement and with both wheels on one side of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the street. Where individual stalls are designated by sign or line or marker, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marker of a particular parking space or in such position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such lines or markers. 
(Code 2017, § 26-258) 
Sec. 23-364. - Designation of streets for angle parking. 
(a)  The council shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon a federal aid or state highway within the city unless the state department of transportation has determined, by resolution or order entered in its minutes, that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 2017, § 26-259) 
Sec. 23-365. - Obedience to angle parking signs or markers. 
    Upon those streets which have been designated for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 2017, § 26-260) 
Sec. 23-366. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within five feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic division has indicated a different length by signs or markings. 
(8)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light. 
(9)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance, only when properly signposted. 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. 
(14)  Upon any street within the corporate limits of the city when parking is prohibited by a general ordinance of uniform application relating to the removal of snow and ice from the streets. 
(15)  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property, in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp. 
(16)  On that part of any street in the city between the curb line, if there be a curb, and the sidewalk line of the abutting property, nor shall any vehicle be parked on that part of any street not having a curb between the edge of the traveled portion of such street and the sidewalk line of the abutting property. 
(17)  On any street in the city for a continuous period of more than 48 hours. A vehicle in violation of this subsection shall constitute a nuisance to be abated as provided by law, or members of the police operations division may impound such vehicle as provided in this article. 
(b)  Signs shall not be required to give notice to the public of the prohibited areas in this section. 
(c)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 2017, § 26-261) 
Sec. 23-367. - Parking for purpose of selling, washing, greasing or repairing vehicle. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 2017, § 26-262) 
Sec. 23-368. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley except only for the period of 15 minutes to load or unload said vehicle, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 2017, § 26-263; Ord. No. 2036, § 3, 11-22-1993) 
Sec. 23-369. - Parking near intersection. 
    It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle within and up to a distance of 60 feet of any intersection where the curb is painted yellow or signs are posted prohibiting parking. 
(Code 2017, § 26-264) 
Sec. 23-370. - Persons with disabilities parking sign; persons with disabilities parking. 
(a)  Persons with disabilities parking sign. A persons with disabilities parking sign shall be displayed designating each person with disabilities parking space required by Iowa Code § 321L.5. The persons with disabilities parking sign shall have a blue background and bear the international symbol of accessibility in white. If an entity who owns or leases real property in the city is required to provide persons with disabilities parking spaces, the city shall provide, upon request, the signs for the entity at cost. The persons with disabilities parking sign shall be affixed vertically on another object so that it is readily visible to a driver of a motor vehicle approaching the persons with disabilities parking space. A persons with disabilities parking space designated only by the international symbol of accessibility being painted or otherwise placed horizontally on the parking space does not meet the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Persons with disabilities parking. 
(1)  A persons with disabilities parking permit shall be displayed in a motor vehicle as a removable windshield placard or on a motor vehicle as a plate or sticker as provided in Iowa Code § 321L.2 when being used by a person with a disability, either as an operator or passenger. Each removable windshield placard shall be of uniform design and fabricated of durable material, suitable for display from within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, and readily transferable from one vehicle to another. The placard shall only be displayed when the motor vehicle is parked in a persons with disabilities parking space. 
(2)  The use of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property within the city as provided in Iowa Code § 321L.5 by an operator of a motor vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit; by an operator of a motor vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being transported in accordance with Iowa Code § 321L.2(1)b; or by a motor vehicle in violation of the rules adopted by the state department of transportation under Iowa Code § 321L.8 constitutes improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a misdemeanor for which a fine of $200.00 shall be imposed upon the owner, operator, or lessee of the motor vehicle or the person to whom the persons with disabilities parking permit is issued. Proof of conviction of two or more violations involving improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is grounds for revocation by the court or the state department of transportation of the holder's privilege to possess or use the persons with disabilities parking permit. 
(3)  Each police officer who is a peace officer as designated in Iowa Code § 801.4(11) and each parking meter attendant, or their designees, shall have the authority to and shall enforce the provisions of this section on public and private property within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-265; Ord. No. 2006, § 9, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2263, § 1, 4-26-1999; Ord. No. 2705, § 3, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2716, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 23-371. - Establishment of taxicab stands. 
    Taxicab stands of a minimum of 18 feet in length per cab space are to be established by the council for the use of the taxicab companies. 
(Code 2017, § 26-266) 
Sec. 23-372. - Loading zones at theaters, hotels and auditoriums. 
    A space, not to exceed 50 feet, is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of every theater, hotel and auditorium having more than 25 sleeping rooms, or other buildings where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose. 
(Code 2017, § 26-267; Ord. No. 1943, § 12, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-373. - Loading and unloading on Main Street and College Street. 
    From 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., on Main Street between First Street and Fifth Street and College Street from 22nd Street to 23rd Street on the east side, trucks and drays are prohibited from loading and unloading freight, goods and merchandise at all places, stores and buildings where it is feasible or possible to perform such work in the adjacent alley. 
(Code 2017, § 26-268) 
Sec. 23-374. - Parking of large trucks in streets and municipal parking lots. 
    Except as otherwise provided, trucks of a gross capacity of one ton or more shall not park upon the streets or municipal parking lots of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-269) 
Sec. 23-375. - Parking prohibited on city property located adjacent to city hall and city hall annex. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except a vehicle authorized by the city, in the municipally owned area lying adjacent to the city hall and city hall annex, such area being legally described as follows: Lots 3 and 4 and the east half of lot 8, all in block 9 in the original town plat of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-270) 
Sec. 23-376. - Parking prohibited on specific streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portions of streets enumerated in this section. 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited First Street (West) On both sides between Main Street and the west city limits. Second Street (West) On both sides between Walnut Street and Francis Street. On the north side between Francis Street and Hudson Road. On the north side from the west line of Washington Street west to the alley. On the south side from a point 67 feet west of the west line of Washington Street to a point 24 feet west thereof. Third Street (East) On the north side from the east line of Main Street to a point 25 feet east thereof. Third Street (West) On the north side from the alley between Main Street and Washington Street west to a point 18 feet west thereof. On the north side from the east line of the alley between Washington Street and Clay Street to a point 17 feet east thereof; and from the west line of the alley to a point 17 feet east thereof; and from the west line of the alley to a point 17 feet west thereof. On the north side from the alley between Main Street and Washington Street west to a point 37 feet east of the east line of Washington Street. On the south side from the west line of Washington Street to a point 35 feet west thereof. On both sides of said street between Clay Street and Franklin Street on Saturday mornings only commencing with the first Saturday of May of each year and continuing through the last Saturday of October each year during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. On the north side of said street from the most westerly point of the flare-out of the driveway approach to the north-south alley located in the 200 block between Washington Street and Clay Street, west a distance of 143 feet to the east curb line of Clay Street, extended northerly, as such east curb line is located in the 300 block of Clay Street, on Saturday mornings only commencing with the first Saturday of May of each year and continuing through the last Saturday of October of each year during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. On the south side of said street from the most westerly point of the flare-out of the driveway approach to the north-south alley located in the 300 block between Washington Street and Clay Street, west a distance of 143 feet to the east curb line of Clay Street, extended northerly, as such east curb line is located in the 300 block of Clay Street, on Saturday mornings only commencing with the first Saturday of May of each year and continuing through the last Saturday of October of each year during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. On the south side of said street from the west curb line of Ellen Street west to the east curb line of Hudson Road. On the north side from the west curb line of Tremont Street west to the east curb line of Ellen Street. On the north side of said street from Cedar Crest Drive to Magnolia Drive. Fourth Street On both sides from College Street to Hudson Road. On the south side between Franklin Street and College Street. Fourth Street (East) On the north side from the east line of Main Street to a point ten feet east thereof. On the south side from the west line of State Street to a point 26 feet west thereof. Fourth Street (West) On both sides from College Street to Hudson Road; on the north side from the west line of Main Street to a point 20 feet west thereof; on the north side from the west line of Cedar Crest Drive a distance of 30 feet west, and from the east line of Cedar Crest Drive a distance of 30 feet east; on the north side from the east line of Angie Drive to the west line of Hudson Road; on both sides of said street from the west line of Chateau Court to Hudson Road; on the south side from the west line of Main Street to a point ten feet west thereof; on the south side between Washington Street and College Street. On the north side from the west line, extended north, of Jessica Lane to a point 200 feet west thereof. Fifth Street (West) On the north side from the west line of Main Street west a distance of 150 feet. On the south side from a point 48 feet east of the east line of Clay Street west to the alley between Clay Street and Franklin Street. On the north side from the west curb line of Franklin Street west to the east curb line of College Street. Sixth Street (East) On the north side from the east curb line of Main Street east a distance of 200 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Main Street east to the west curb line of State Street. Sixth Street (West) On both sides between Main Street and Franklin Street, except that on the north side of West Sixth Street, from a point 40 feet west of the west curb line of Washington Street to a point 144 feet west of the west curb line of Washington Street, parking shall be limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily; and except that on the north side of West Sixth Street, from a point 55 feet east of the east curb line of Clay Street to a point 147 feet east of the east curb line of Clay Street, parking shall be limited to 12 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily. On the north side from the east curb line of College Street east a distance of 150 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of College Street east a distance of 75 feet. Seventh Street (East) On the south side from State Street to the west line of Bluff Street. Seventh Street (West) On the north side from Washington Street to Clay Street, except Saturdays and Sundays. On the north side from the west curb line of Division Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the north side from the east curb line of Division Street east a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Division Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Division Street east a distance of 40 feet. Eighth Street (East) On the north side from Main Street to State Street. Eighth Street (West) On the north side between Franklin Street and College Street. On the north side between Division Street and Ellen Street. On the south side between College Street and Pearl Street. On the south side from the centerline of Barrington Drive east a distance of 500 feet. On the north side from the centerline of Barrington Drive east a distance of 110 feet. On the north side from the centerline of Barrington Drive west a distance of 50 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Catherine Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Catherine Street east a distance of 40 feet. Ninth Street (East) On the north side from Bluff Street east to Grove Street, except Sundays. Ninth Street (West) On the north side from Clay Street east 100 feet. On the north side from the west line of Tremont Street west to the east line of Catherine Street. On the north side from the west curb line of Catherine Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Catherine Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Catherine Street east a distance of 40 feet. Tenth Street (East) On both sides from a point 180 feet east of the east curb line of Grove Street to a point 250 feet east of the east line of Grove Street. On the north side from Main Street to Grove Street. Tenth Street (West) On the north side from the west curb line of Tremont Street west to the east curb line of Division Street. On the south side from the west curb line of Iowa Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Catherine Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Catherine Street east a distance of 40 feet. 11th Street (East) On the north side from State Street to Grove Street. On the north side from Main Street to State Street. On the south side from the east curb line of State Street east a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Grove Street west a distance of 40 feet. 11th Street (West) On the north side between Franklin Street and Walnut Street. On the north side from the west curb line of College Street west to the east curb line of Division Street. On the south side from the west curb line of Catherine Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Catherine Street east a distance of 40 feet. 12th Street (West) On both sides from Main Street to College Street. On the south side from the east line of Clark Drive east a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west line of Clark Drive west a distance of 40 feet. On both sides from Hudson Road to Union Road. 13th Street (West) On both sides from the east curb line of Walnut Street east a distance of 20 feet. On both sides from the west curb line of Walnut Street west a distance of 20 feet. On the north side from the west curb line of Clay Street west to the east curb line of Franklin Street. 14th Street (East) On the south side between State Street and Waterloo Road. 14th Street Court (East) On the north side from the east curb line of Bluff Street east to the end of the street. 14th Street (West) On the north side of said street from Main Street to Franklin Street. 15th Street (West) On the north side of said street from the west curb line of Clay Street west to the east curb line of Franklin Street. 16th Street (West) On the south side from the west curb line of Main Street to the east curb line of Franklin Street. 18th Street (East) On both sides from Main Street to Waterloo Road. 18th Street (West) On both sides of the street from the west curb line of Main Street west to the east curb line of College Street. On the north side from the west curb line of College Street west to the east curb line of Hudson Road. On the north side from the west line of Hudson Road west a distance of 200 feet. On the north side from a point 455 feet west of the west line of Hudson Road west a distance of 101 feet. On the north side from a point 922 feet west of the west line of Hudson Road west a distance of 101 feet. On the south side from the west line of Hudson Road west a distance of 1,116 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Summit Drive west a distance of 100 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Summit Drive east a distance of 100 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Campus Street west a distance of 20 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Campus Street east a distance of 20 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Merner Avenue west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue east a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of College Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Hudson Road east a distance of 40 feet. 19th Street (West) On the north side between College Street and Hudson Road, between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Mondays through Fridays. On the south side from the west curb line of College Street west to the east curb line of Campus Street. On the south side from the west curb line of Campus Street west a distance of 30 feet. On the south side from the east curb line of Hudson Road east a distance of 30 feet. On the north side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue east a distance of 30 feet. On the north side from the west curb line of Merner Avenue west a distance of 30 feet. 20th Street (West) On the south side from the east curb line of Campus Street east to the west curb line of Main Street. On the south side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue east a distance of 45 feet. On the north side from the east line of Merner Avenue east a distance of 45 feet. On the north side from the west curb line of Campus Street east to the west curb line of Merner Avenue, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. 21st Street (West) On the south side from the west line of Franklin Street west to the east line of College Street. On the south side from the west curb line of College Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the north side from the west curb line of College Street west a distance of 40 feet. On the north side from the east curb line of College Street east a distance of 40 feet. 22nd Street (West) On the north side from College Street to Campus Street from 1:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday and from 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on Sunday. On the south side from College Street to Campus Street. On the south side between Main Street and Tremont Street. On the north side from the west curb line of Tremont Street west to the east curb line of College Street. 23rd Street (West) On the north side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue east a distance of 40 feet. On the north side between Campus Street and Hudson Road. On the south side from the west line of Minnesota Street, which belongs to the state, to the east line of Hudson Road. On both sides from the east curb line of Merner Avenue west to the west curb line of Campus Street. On the south side from the west curb line of Campus Street west to the east curb line of Minnesota Street, one-hour parking is allowed between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except on weekends and holidays. 29th Street On the south side from 225 feet west of the centerline of College Street to 290 feet west of the centerline of College Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 29th Street (West) On the north side from the east curb line of College Street east to the west curb line of Walnut Street. 31st Street (West) On both sides from Hudson Road to the west end of the street. Adams Street On the east side of said street from the north curb line of East 18th Street north to the end of the street. On both sides of said street from East 18th Street south. Alexis Boulevard On the south and west sides from the north line of West 12th Street northerly and westerly to the east edge of the cul-de-sac. On the east side from the north line of West 12th Street north a distance of 120 feet. Algonquin Drive On the north and east sides of the street from the east curb line of Ashworth Drive east and south to the north curb line of Amelia Drive, extended east. Balboa Street On the north side from the west line of South Main Street to a point 403 feet west of the west line of South Main Street. On the south side from the west line of South Main Street to a point 119 feet west of the west line of South Main Street. Barkwood Drive On the north side from the west curb line of Ironwood Drive west to the east curb line of Applewood Lane. Barnett Drive On the west side from the south curb line of Crescent Drive south to the north curb line of West Twelfth Street. On the east side from a point 150 feet north of the north curb line of West Fourth Street north to a point 50 feet north thereof. On the east side from the north curb line of West Twelfth Street north a distance of 60 feet. Barrington Drive On the west, south and east sides of Barrington Drive from the south line of West Eighth Street south, east and north to the south edge of the cul-de-sac. Bicentennial Drive On both sides of said street from Cedar Heights Drive west a distance of 500 feet. Big Woods Road On both sides from Independence Avenue to the north city limits. Birch Street On the east side from Grand Boulevard to Rainbow Drive. Birdsall Drive (East) On the north side from Birdsall Drive east to the end of the street. Blair Ridge Road On the west side from Wild Horse Drive north to the end of the street. Bluegrass Circle Along the outside edge from the east curb line of the north intersection with Prairie Parkway to the east curb line of the south intersection with Prairie Parkway. Bluff Street On the east side from the south curb line of East Ninth Street south to a point 70 feet south of the south curb line of East 12th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of East 13th Street to the north curb line of East 15th Street. On the west side from the north curb line of East 15th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On both sides from the south curb line of East 15th Street south a distance of 40 feet. Bonita Boulevard On the south side from the west line of South Lawn Road west a distance of 60 feet. Boulder Drive On both sides from University Avenue to Orchard Drive. Boxwood Drive On the north side from the west curb line of Ironwood Drive west to the east curb line of Applewood Lane. Brookside Drive On the north side from the east curb line of Hudson Road east to the west curb line of Starview Drive. On the south side from the east curb line of Hudson Road east to the southerly extension of the east curb line of Starview Drive. California Drive On the east side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south to the north curb line of Hawthorne Drive. Campus Street On the east side from the north curb line of West 18th Street north to the south curb line of West 16th Street. On the west side from the north curb line of West 18th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West 19th Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of West 19th Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West 20th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the north line of the parking lot situated on the west side of the 2000 block of Campus Street, south a distance of 188 feet. On both sides from the south curb line of West 22nd Street south to the north curb line of West 23rd Street. Catherine Street On the west side from the south curb line of West First Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of West First Street south to the north curb line of West Fourth Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West Eighth Street to the north curb line of West 12th Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West Eighth Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West Ninth Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West Ninth Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West Tenth Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West Tenth Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West 11th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West 11th Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West 12th Street north a distance of 40 feet. Cedar Heights Drive On both sides from Rainbow Drive to University Avenue. Cedar Hills Road On both sides from the east curb line of Chadwick Road east to the west curb line of Cedar Heights Drive. Cedar Street On the south side from Center Street to Vine Street. Center Street On both sides from First Street to the north city limits. Chadwick Road On the west side from a point 10 feet north of the northwest edge of the cul-de-sac at the south end of Chadwick Road, south to the northwest edge of said cul-de-sac. From the northwest edge of the cul-de-sac at the south end of Chadwick Road, south, east and north to the northeast edge of said cul-de-sac. From the southwest edge of the cul-de-sac at the north end of Chadwick Road, north, east and south to the southeast edge of said cul-de-sac. On the east side from the southeast edge of the cul-de-sac at the north end of Chadwick Road, south to the northeast edge of the cul-de-sac at the south end of Chadwick Road. Clark Drive On the west side from the south line of West 12th Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south line of West 12th Street south a distance of 40 feet. Clay Street On both sides between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. On both sides of said street from the south curb line of West Third Street north a distance of 245 feet to the north line of the driveway entrance to the city police station parking lot, extended westerly, on Saturday mornings only commencing with the first Saturday of May of each year and continuing through the last Saturday of October of each year during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. On both sides of said street from the south curb line of West Third Street south a distance of 134 feet to the north line of the northerly driveway entrance to the Cedar Falls Women's Club parking lot, on Saturday mornings only, commencing with the first Saturday of May of each year and continuing through the last Saturday of October of each year during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. On the east side from the south curb line of West Third Street south a distance of 35 feet. On the east side from a point 35 feet south of the south curb line of West Third Street south a distance of 100 feet, parking shall be limited to two hours during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. On both sides from the south curb line of West Fourth Street south a distance of 48 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West Fifth Street north a distance of 32 feet. On the west side from a point 15 feet north of the point where the north edge of the driveway entrance to the private parking lot at 415 Clay Street intersects the west curb line of Clay Street, south to the north curb line of West Fifth Street. On the west side from the north curb line of West Sixth Street north a distance of 41 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West Sixth Street north a distance of 41 feet. On the west side from a point 41 feet north of the north curb line of West Sixth Street north a distance of 100 feet, parking shall be limited to 30 minutes during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. On the east side from a point 41 feet north of the north curb line of West Sixth Street to a point 190 feet north thereof, parking shall be limited to 30 minutes during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. On the east side from the south line of Sixth Street to a point 63 feet south thereof, parking shall be limited to 12 minutes during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. On the east side from 15th Street to 18th Street. On the west side between 15th Street and 18th Street. On both sides between 18th Street and Seerley Boulevard. College Street (North) On the west side from the north curb line of Higby Drive north to the end of the street. On the west side from the south curb line of Higby Drive south a distance of 75 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West First Street north a distance of 120 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West First Street north to the north end of the street. College Street (South) On the east side from the south curb line of West Fifth Street south to the north curb line of West Sixth Street. On both sides from the south curb line of West Sixth Street south a distance of 100 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of West Eighth Street south to the north curb line of West 12th Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West 12th Street south to the north curb line of West 18th Street. On the east side from a point 50 feet north of the north curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 20th Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south a distance of 80 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West 19th Street north a distance of 50 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West 19th Street south a distance of 50 feet. On the west side from the north curb line of West 20th Street north a distance of 50 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West 20th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West 21st Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West 23rd Street south a distance of 60 feet. On the west side from a point 75 feet north of the westerly extension of the north curb line of West Seerley Boulevard south to a point 95 feet north of the north curb line of West 26th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West 23rd Street south to the north curb line of University Avenue. On the west side from the south curb line of West 26th Street south to the north curb line of University Avenue. On both sides from the south curb line of University Avenue south a distance of 65 feet. Colorado Road On the south side from the west curb line of Tucson Drive west to the west end of the cul-de-sac situated about 250 feet west of Dallas Drive. Columbia Drive On the north and east sides of Columbia Drive from West 16th Street south and east to College Street. Cottage Lane On the west side from the south curb line of Columbia Drive to the north curb line of West 18th Street. Cottonwood Lane On both sides from Garden Avenue east to the end of the street. Covey Court On the north side from Quail Ridge Road west to the end of the street. On the north side from Quail Ridge Road east to the end of the street. Crescent Drive On the south side from the east curb line of Lakeview Drive east to the west curb line of Brentwood Drive Dallas Drive On the west side from the north curb line of Idaho Street north to the south curb line of University Avenue. On the east side from the north curb line of Idaho Street north a distance of 50 feet. On the east side from a point 125 feet north of the north curb line of Idaho Street north to the south curb line of University Avenue. On the east side from the south curb line of Idaho Street south a distance of 25 feet. Division Street On the west side from the driveway south of Tenth Street to 11 th Street. On the east side of said street from the north line of West Eighth Street a distance of 120 feet north. On the west side from the north curb line of West Seventh Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West Seventh Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West Seventh Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of West Seventh Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West Eighth Street south a distance of 50 feet. Drury Lane On the west side from the south curb line of Columbia Drive to the north curb line of West 18th Street. Dunkerton Road On both sides from Center Street to the east city limits. Eagle Ridge Road On the west and south sides of Eagle Ridge Road from the intersection of the west curb line of Eagle Ridge Road with the north curb line of Falcon Lane, in a northerly and westerly direction to the southeast edge of the cul-de-sac. Around the perimeter of the curb adjacent to the center island of the cul-de-sac located at the west end of Eagle Ridge Road. East Street On the west side of East Street from the south curb line of 19th Street a distance of 100 feet south Ellen Street On both sides between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. On the east side from the south line of Parkway Avenue south to the north line of First Street. Erik Road On the north side between the east curb line of Hudson Road east to the west curb line of Norse Drive. On the south side from the east curb line of Hudson Road east a distance of 70 feet. On the south side from the west curb line of Norse Drive west a distance of 25 feet. Feather Ridge Drive On the north side from Quail Run Lane to Feather Run Trail. Floral Court On both sides of the radius of the cul-de-sac. On the north side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue to the cul-de-sac. On the south side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue to the cul-de-sac, from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. each day. Forrest Road On the west side from the north curb line of South Park Road north to River Bluff Drive. Fox View Drive On the east side from the north curb line of Hunter Drive north to the end of the street. Francis Street On both sides between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. Franklin Street On both sides from First Street to Sixth Street. On both sides from First Street north to the north city limits. On the east side between 12th Street and Seerley Boulevard. On the west side from the north curb line of 18th Street north a distance of 100 feet. Frontage roads along the south side of University Avenue On both sides of the frontage road from the east curb line of Boulder Drive east to the end of said frontage road near the east line of Black Hawk Village, near McClain Drive. On both sides of the frontage road from the east curb line of Cedar Heights Drive east to the west curb line of Midway Drive. Frontage roads along the north side of University Avenue On both sides of said frontage road from the east curb line of Valley Park Drive east to the end of said frontage road at the entrance to the Holiday Inn Motel. On both sides of said frontage road from the west curb line of Ohio Street (UNI Institutional Road) west to the east curb line of Hudson Road. On both sides of the frontage road along the north side of University Avenue between Main Street and Tremont Street, from the most westerly curb cut on said frontage road, west to the end of said frontage road. Frontage road on the west side of Hudson Road On both sides from West 31st Street south to the end of the street. Galloway Avenue On the east side from Grand Boulevard to Rainbow Drive. On the west side from Grand Boulevard a distance of 50 feet south, and from Rainbow Drive a distance of 50 feet north. Genevieve Street On both sides between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. On both sides from the north right-of-way line of First Street north a distance of 132 feet. On the northwest side from First Street north to the end of the street. Gibson Street On the west side from Rainbow Drive to Grand Boulevard. Grand Boulevard On the south side from the east line of East Street east to the west line of Park Drive. On the north side from the west line of East Street east to the east line of Scoggin Street. On the north side from the west line, extended, of Schreiber Street east to a point 75 feet east of the east line, extended, of Schreiber Street. On the north side from the west line, extended, of Birch Street east to a point 65 feet east of the east line, extended, of Birch Street. On the north side from the east line of Belle Avenue east to the west line of Park Drive. On the north side from the east line of Edwards Street east a distance of 170 feet. Green Creek Road On the north and west sides from the east line of Rownd Street east and north to the south line of Greenhill Road. Greenhill Drive On the south side from the east curb line of Rownd Street east to the west curb line of Veralta Drive. Grove Street On the east side from the south curb line of East Ninth Street to the north curb line of East 12th Street. Harvest Lane On the west, north and east sides of the street proceeding west from the eastern intersection of Harvest Lane with Autumn Ridge Road to the western intersection of Harvest Lane with Autumn Ridge Road. Hawthorne Drive On the north side from the east curb line of Waterloo Road to the west curb line of Victory Drive. On both sides of said street from the centerline of Willow Lane, west a distance of 50 feet. Hedgewood Circle On the east side from the north curb line of Boxwood Drive north to the southeast edge of the cul-de-sac. Heritage Road On the east and north sides from Bergstrom Boulevard in a southerly and easterly direction to the east end of Heritage Road. On the west side from the north line of West Gate Avenue north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south line of West Gate Avenue south a distance of 40 feet. Hickory Lane On the east side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south to the north curb line of Hawthorne Drive. Highland Drive On the east side from the south curb line of West First Street south a distance of 89 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West First Street south a distance of 54 feet. Highview Court On the east side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south to the north curb line of Parker Street. Holmes Drive On the east side between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, from Fourth Street to the south end. Hudson Road On both sides between First Street and the south city limits. Hunter Drive On the south side from the east line of Center Street east to the east end of the street. Ida Street On both sides of the street from the east curb line of North College Street east to the end of the street. Idaho Street On the north side from Dallas Drive to Boulder Drive. On the south side of Idaho Street a distance of 25 feet west from the west curb line of Boulder Drive. Independence Avenue On both sides from Lincoln Street to Big Woods Road. Iowa Highway 58/U.S. Highway 218 On both sides of said Highway from Greenhill Road north to the north city limits. Iowa Street On both sides between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. On the west side between West Third Street and West 11th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West Fourth Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West Fourth Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of West 11th Street south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West 11th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On both sides from the south curb line of West 18th Street south a distance of 40 feet. Ironwood Drive On the west side from the north end of Erik Road south and east to the northwest edge of the cul-de-sac. Irving Street On the east side from 11th Street to 12th Street. Jaclyn Street On the west side from the north curb line of Lantz Avenue north to the end of the street. Kaspend Place On the east side from the south line of Pheasant Drive south to the north edge of the cul-de-sac. Lake Street On both sides from Central Avenue to Leversee Road. Lantz (East) On the north side from Center Street to Jackson Avenue. Laurie Avenue On the east side from the south curb line of Grand Boulevard south to the north curb line of Rainbow Drive. Leversee Road On the west side from Lincoln Street to the north city limits. Lilac Lane On the north side from Boulder Drive to Carlton Drive. Lincoln Street On both sides from Main Street east to the city limits. Lone Tree Road On both sides from Ford Road to Big Woods Road. Longview (West) On both sides from Central Avenue to Center Street. Madison Street On the north side from Belle Avenue to Ashland Drive. On the south side from the intersection of Belle Avenue east for a distance of 200 feet. Main Street On both sides from First Street north to the north end of the river bridge. On both sides between Sixth Street and the south city limits, except that parking is allowed from Sixth to 14th Street on Sundays between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. Main Street (North) On the south side between the existing entrance of Calhoun Manufacturing Company and Second Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Mandalay Drive On the north and west sides of the street from the north curb line of Grand Boulevard north and east to the west curb line of Park Drive. Maplewood Drive On both sides from Carlton Drive to Boulder Drive. McClain Drive On the east side from the south curb line of University Avenue south a distance of 77 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of University Avenue south a distance of 647 feet. Meadow View Circle On the north side from the east curb line of Meadowlark Lane east to the northwest edge of the cul-de-sac. Meadowlark Lane On the east side from the south curb line of Erik Road south to the northeast edge of the cul-de-sac. Melrose Court On both sides of the street for its entire length, including the entire cul-de-sac. Melrose Drive On the north side from Linwood Drive west to Melrose Court. On the west side from Royal Drive to Seerley Boulevard from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Merner Avenue On the east side from the south curb line of West 19th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. On both sides from the south curb line of West 22nd Street south to the north curb line of West 23rd Street. On the west side from the north end of the bridge over Dry Run Creek south to the south end of the bridge. Nordic Drive On both sides of said street from Viking Road north to the end of said street. On the east side from Viking Road south a distance of 610 feet. Norse Drive On the west side from the south curb line of Erik Road south a distance of 25 feet. North College Street On the west side from the south line of Higby Drive south 75 feet. Oak Avenue On the north side from the north curb line of Madison Street north and west to the east curb line of Ashland Avenue. Olive Street On the east side from the south curb line of West First Street south to the south curb line of West 12th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West 16th Street south to the north curb line of West 17th Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south to a point 75 feet south of the south curb line of West 18th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 21st Street. Orchard Drive On the south side from South Main Street Road to Rownd Street, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays only, excluding the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or the days on which such holidays are observed. On the south side from Veralta Drive to Chapman Court. Panther Lane On the east side from University Avenue to Starview Drive. On the west side from the south curb line of University Avenue to the north curb line of the south leg of Starbeck Circle. On the west side from the south curb line of Starview Drive south a distance of 40 feet. Park Drive On both sides from Rainbow Drive to Park Circle. Parker Street On the south side from Belle Avenue to Victory Drive. Parrish Street On the east side from Rainbow Drive to West Winter Ridge Road. Pearl Street On the east side between First Street and Third Street. On the west side between First Street and a point 35 feet south of the south line of First Street. On the east side between the south curb line of West Eighth Street to the north curb line of West 11th Street. Pendleton Drive On the east and north sides from Quail Hollow Lane north and west to Lexington Drive. Pheasant Drive For a distance of 120 feet east of the centerline of the jog in Pheasant Drive and for a distance of 120 feet west of the center of the jog in Pheasant Drive. Quail Hollow Lane On the north side from Quail Run Lane west to the end of the street. Quail Ridge Road On the west side from West 12th Street south to Quail Hollow Lane. Quail Run Lane On the west side from Quail Ridge Road south to Quail Hollow Lane. Rainbow Drive On both sides from Waterloo Road to the east city limits. Ravine Drive On both sides from the north curb line of Forrest Road north to the south curb line of Willow Avenue. Ridgeway Lane On the west side from the east curb line of Merner Avenue east to the west curb line of Columbia Drive. River Ridge Lane On the north side from the west curb line of River Ridge Road north and west to the northeast edge of the cul-de-sac. River Ridge Road On the east, north and west sides from the easterly intersection of River Ridge Road with Timberledge Drive, northwest, west, and south to the westerly intersection with Timberledge Drive. Rownd Street On both sides from Rainbow Drive to Sunnyside Drive. On the east side from Sunnyside Drive to Greenhill Road. On both sides from Rainbow Drive to Sunnyside Drive except that parking is allowed from a point 60 feet south of Rainbow Drive on the west side of said street on Sundays between 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. On the east side from Sunnyside Drive to Greenhill Road. On the west side from the north line of Primrose Drive north a distance of 20 feet. Anywhere within the vehicle drop-off lane located on the west side of Rownd Street adjacent to Orchard Hill School, from a point 141 feet north of the north curb line of Valley High Drive north to a point 365 feet north of the north curb line of Valley High Drive, except that parking is permitted in the angle parking area east of the raised curb which separates the vehicle drop-off lane from the traveled portion of Rownd Street. First Street (West) On both sides between Main Street and the west city limits. On the west side from the south line of Primrose Drive south a distance of 40 feet. Royal Drive On both sides from Waterloo Road to Melrose Drive. Russell Drive On the east side from the south curb line of Sunnyside Drive south to the north curb line of Hawthorne Drive. Sandahlwood Circle From the intersection of the north curb line of Pheasant Drive with the west curb line of the east leg of Sandahlwood Circle, along such curb line of Sandahlwood Circle in a northerly, westerly and southerly direction to the intersection of the north curb line of Pheasant Drive with the east curb line of the west leg of Sandahlwood Circle. Scenic Drive On both sides from Cottonwood Lane north to the end of the street. On the east side from the south curb line of Cadillac Drive south to the north curb line of Sunray Drive. On the west side from the south curb line of Cadillac Drive south a distance of 250 feet, from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily. Schreiber Street On the east side from the south end of the street north to the south curb line of Grand Boulevard. On the west side from the south end of the street north a distance of 70 feet. Scoggin Street On the east side from the north curb line of Newman Avenue north to the south curb line of Grand Boulevard. Seerley Boulevard On both sides between Clay Street and Valley Park Drive. Shady Lane On the east side from the north curb line of Terrace Drive north and east to the south curb line of Loma Street. South Lawn Road On the east side from the north line of Bonita Boulevard south a distance of 200 feet. On the west side from the south line of Bonita Boulevard south a distance of 60 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of Stanwood Drive south a distance of 240 feet. Springbrook Drive On the north side from Starview Drive east to Panther Lane. Spruce Hills Drive On the west and south sides, from the south curb line of Westgate Avenue to the west curb line of Estate Drive. Starbeck Circle From the intersection of the west right-of-way line, extended, of Panther Lane with the north leg of Starbeck Circle, along the north curb line of Starbeck Circle in a southwesterly, southerly, easterly and northeasterly direction to the intersection of the west right-of-way line, extended, of Panther Lane with the south leg of Starbeck Circle. From the intersection of the west right-of-way line, extended, of Panther Lane with the north leg of Starbeck Circle, southwest along the south curb line of Starbeck Circle a distance of approximately 545 feet, between 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Starview Drive On the east side from the north curb line of Brookside Drive north to a point 240 feet north of the north curb line of Springbrook Drive. On the north, northwesterly and west sides of the street from the west curb line of Panther Lane in a westerly, southwesterly and southerly direction to a point 140 feet north of the north curb line of Springbrook Drive. State Street On the east side from the south curb line of East Seventh Street to the north curb line of East 18th Street. On the west side from the south curb line of East Second Street to the north curb line of Waterloo Road. Summit Drive On both sides from the north curb line of West 18th Street north a distance of 100 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 19th Street. On the east side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south a distance of 50 feet. On the east side from the north curb line of West 1 th Street north a distance of 50 feet. Terrace Drive On the north side from Cedar Heights Drive to a point 400 feet west of Neola Street. On the south side a distance of 165 feet west of the west line of Neola Street. Timber Drive On the east and north sides from the north curb line of Grand Boulevard north and west to the south curb line of Greenwood Avenue. Timberledge Drive On the north side from the east curb line of the westerly intersection of Timberledge Drive and River Ridge Road east to the west curb line of Westwood Drive. Timberledge Place On the east side from the west curb line of the easterly intersection of Timberledge Drive westerly to the north curb line of the westerly intersection with Timberledge Drive. Tremont Street On east side between Seventh Street and Eighth Street. On the west side from the south curb line of West 12th Street south to the north curb line of West 18th Street. On the east side of said street for a distance of 60 feet north of the curb line of 18th Street (West). On the east side from the south curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. Tucson Drive On the west side from University Avenue to Arizona Road. On the east side from University Avenue to a point 40 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Idaho Road. Utility Parkway On the west and north sides from the east curb line of Waterloo Road northerly and easterly to the entrance to Washington Park. University Avenue On both sides from the east city limits to the west city limits. Valley Park Drive On the west side from the north curb line of University Avenue north a distance of 110 feet. On the east side from University Avenue north to Waterloo Road. Victory Drive On the west side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south a distance of 40 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south a distance of 150 feet. Viking Road On both sides from the east curb line of Highway 58 east to the west curb line of Cedar Heights Drive. On both sides from the west curb line of Highway 58 west to the east curb line of Hudson Road. On both sides from the west curb line of Hudson Road west to the west city limits. Vine Street cul-de-sac Around the entire length of the cul-de-sac a distance of 240 feet from the north line of the Cedar Street right-of-way. Virgil Street On the east side from the south curb line of Rainbow Drive south to the north curb line of Hawthorne Drive. Walnut Street On the west side from the north curb line of 18th Street north a distance of 80 feet. On both sides from the north curb line of 13th Street north a distance of 40 feet. On the west side from the south curb line of 13th Street south a distance of 60 feet. On the east side from the south curb line of 13th Street south a distance of 15 feet. Washington Street On the west side from the north curb line of West Sixth Street north a distance of 35 feet. On the east side from 10th Street to 18th Street. On the east side from west Sixth Street to West 10th Street, except from 3:00 p.m. Saturday to 1:00 p.m. Sunday. On the east side from the West First Street to West Sixth Street. On the west side from the north curb line of West Seventh Street north a distance of 100 feet. Waterloo Road On both sides from the east curb line of Main Street east to University Avenue. West Gate Avenue On the south side from South Main Street to Heritage Road. On the north side from the west line of Heritage Road west a distance of 40 feet. Westminster Drive On both sides of said street from Nordic Drive to the end of said street. Whiteway Drive On both sides for the entire length of the street. Willow Avenue On the north side from the west curb line of Ravine Drive west to the east curb line of Westwood Drive. Winters Drive On the south side of the east-west portion of Winters Drive from the east edge of the enlarged semi-circular corner east to the east end of the street. On the east side of the north-south portion of Winters Drive from the south line of Hunter Drive south to the north edge of the enlarged semi-circular corner.  
(Code 2017, § 26-271; Ord. No. 2635, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2659, § 1, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 2662, § 2, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 2664, § 3, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2666, §§ 1-4, 11-24-2008; Ord. No. 2667, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2670, § 1, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 2684, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 2686, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2689, § 1, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 2692, § 1, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 2710, § 1, 6-14-2010; Ord. No. 2720, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2733, §§ 1-10, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 2739, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-2011; Ord. No. 2753, § 1, 8-29-2011; Ord. No. 2756, § 1, 12-12-2012[11]; Ord. No. 2768, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2769, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 2811, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 2829, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2832, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 2858, § 1, 11-16-2015; Ord. No. 2890, § 1, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2893, § 1, 1-16-2017) 
Sec. 23-377. - Parking prohibited on Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., south and west sides of street. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the south and west sides of the following streets or portions of streets during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, or Thursday or Saturday: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Eighth Street (West) From the west line of Pearl Street to the east line of Division Street. Ninth Street (West) From the west line of Catherine Street west to the east line of Division Street. 11th Street (West) From the west line of Pearl Street to the east line of Division Street. 19th Street (West) From the west side of Olive Street to the east line of College Street. 22nd Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of College Street. 23rd Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of Iowa Street. 25th Street (West) From the west line of Olive Street to the east line of College Street. 26th Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of College Street. 28th Street (West) From the west line of Walnut Street to the east line of College Street. Brookside Drive From the southerly extension of the east curb line of Starview Drive east to the west curb line of Panther Lane. Campus Street From a point 248 feet south of the westerly extension of the south curb line of West 20th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. College Street From a point 65 feet south of the south curb line of University Avenue south to the south curb line of West 29th Street. Division Street From the north line of Eighth Street to the south line of Sixth Street. Ellen Street From the south curb line of West 7th Street to the north curb line of West 12th Street. Floral Court The entire length of the street except the radius of the cul-de-sac. Iowa Street From the south line of West 21st Street to the north line of University Avenue. From the south line of First Street to the north line of 11th Street. Merner Avenue From the south curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 19th Street. From the south end of the bridge over Dry Run Creek south to the north line of West 22nd Street. Olive Street From the south curb line of West 21st Street to the north curb line of University Avenue. From the south line of First Street to the north line of 12th Street. Pearl Street From the south line of Eighth to the north line of 11th Street. Seerley Boulevard From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of Olive Street. Tremont Street From the south line of West 20th Street to the north line of University Avenue. Walnut Street From the south line of West 18th Street to the north line of University Avenue.  
(Code 2017, § 26-272; Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 2078, § 2, 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 2101, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 2130, § 2, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 2240, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2252, § 1, 1-25-1999; Ord. No. 2257, § 2, 4-12-1999; Ord. No. 2277, § 1, 10-25-1999; Ord. No. 2288, § 1, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 2290, § 1, 2-28-2000; Ord. No. 2328, § 1, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 2401, §§ 1-3, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 2418, § 1, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 2466, § 1, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2565, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 2592, § 1, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2636, § 1, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2664, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2670, § 2, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 2757, § 1, 12-12-2012[11]; Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 2811, § 4, 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 2834, § 1, 3-2-2015; Ord. No. 2866, § 1, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2897, § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 23-378. - Parking prohibited on Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., north and east sides of street. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the north and east sides of the following streets or portions of streets during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Walnut Street From the south line of University Avenue to the north line of West 29th Street.  
(Code 2017, § 26-272.1; Ord. No. 2867, § 1, 6-20-2016) 
Sec. 23-379. - Parking prohibited on Monday, Wednesday or Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., north and east sides of street. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the north and east sides of the following streets or portions of streets during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday, or Wednesday or Friday: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Eighth Street (West) From the west line of Pearl Street to the east line of Division Street. Ninth Street (West) From the west line of Catherine Street west to the east line of Division Street. 11th Street (West) From the east line of Pearl Street to the west line of Division Street. 19th Street (West) From the west side of Olive Street to the east line of College Street. 22nd Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of College Street. 23rd Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of Iowa Street. 25th Street (West) From the west line of Olive Street to the east line of College Street. 26th Street (West) From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of College Street. 28th Street (West) From the west line of Walnut Street to the east line of College Street. Brookside Drive From the east curb line of Starview Drive east to the west curb line of Panther Lane. Campus Street From a point 248 feet south of the south curb line of West 20th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street. College Street From a point 65 feet south of the south curb line of University Avenue south to the north curb line of West 29th Street. Division Street From a point 120 feet north of the north line of Eighth Street to the south line of Sixth Street. Ellen Street From the south curb line of West 7th Street to the north curb line of West 12th Street. Floral Court The entire length of the street except the radius of the cul-de-sac. Iowa Street From the south line of West 21st Street to the north line of University Avenue. From the north line of First Street to the south line of 11th Street. Merner Avenue From the south curb line of West 18th Street south to the north curb line of West 19th Street. From the south end of the bridge over Dry Run Creek south to the north line of West 22nd Street. Olive Street From the south curb line of West 21st Street to the north curb line of University Avenue. From the north line of First Street to the south line of 12th Street. Pearl Street From the north line of Eighth Street to the south line of 11th Street. Seerley Boulevard From the west line of Tremont Street to the east line of Olive Street. Tremont Street From the south line of West 20th Street to the north line of University Avenue. Walnut Street From the south line of West 18th Street to the north line of University Avenue.  
(Code 2017, § 26-273; Ord. No. 1960, § 2, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 2078, § 3, 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 2101, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 2130, § 3, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2252, § 2, 1-25-1999; Ord. No. 2257, § 3, 4-12-1999; Ord. No. 2277, § 1, 10-25-1999; Ord. No. 2288, § 2, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 2290, § 2, 2-28-2000; Ord. No. 2328, § 2, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 2401, §§ 4-6, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 2418, § 2, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 2466, § 2, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 2489, § 2, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2565, § 2, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 2592, § 2, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2637, § 1, 2, 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2664, § 2, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2670, § 3, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 2757, § 2, 12-12-2012[11]; Ord. No. 2781, § 2, 10-22-2012; Ord. No. 2811, § 5, 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 2834, § 2, 3-2-2015; Ord. No. 2866, § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2897, § 2, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 23-380. - Parking prohibited on Monday, Wednesday or Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., south and west sides of street. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the south and west sides of the following streets or portions of streets during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday, Wednesday or Friday: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Walnut Street From the south line of University Avenue to the north line of West 29th Street.  
(Code 2017, § 26-273.1; Ord. No. 2867, § 2, 6-20-2016) 
Sec. 23-381. - Limited parking on specific streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or portions of streets for a period longer than the time limit specified in this section unless the vehicle so parked displays a vehicle parking permit on the driver's side rear window. A vehicle so displaying such parking permit shall be allowed unlimited parking on the portions where parking is limited on 3rd Street (West), Clay Street and Washington Street. 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Limited Third Street (West) On the north side from a point 21 feet west of the west line of Washington Street to the east line of Clay Street, parking shall be marked off into stalls and limited to a 30-minute period. On the south side, beginning at a point 35 feet west of the west curb line of Franklin Street, then west 20 feet to the west curb line of Franklin Street, parking shall be marked off into stalls and shall be limited to a 30-minute period. Fourth Street (East) On the north side, from State Street to a point 300 feet east of the east line of State Street, parking shall be limited to a 30-minute period. 23rd Street (West) On the north side, between the east line of Merner Avenue and the west side of Campus Street, parking shall be marked off in parking stalls and limited to a one-hour period. Clay Street On the east side, from the south line of West Second Street to a point 147 feet south of the south line of West Second Street, parking shall be marked off into parking stalls and parking shall be limited to a 30-minute period. On the east side from the intersection of Clay Street and West 3rd Street a distance of 102 feet north, parking shall be marked off into parking stalls and limited to a 30-minute period. On the west side from a point 48 feet south of the south curb line of West Fourth Street south to a point 15 feet north of the point where the north edge of the driveway entrance from the private parking lot at 415 Clay Street intersects the west curb line of Clay Street, parking shall be limited to a two-hour period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. College Street On the east side, from the south curb line of West 20th Street south to the north curb line of 21st Street, parking shall be limited to a two-hour period. College Street (South) On the east side, from the south curb line of West 20th Street south to the north curb line of West 22nd Street, parking shall be limited to a two-hour period. On the west side, from the south curb line of West 20th Street to a point 40 feet north of the north curb line of West 22nd Street, parking shall be limited to a two-hour period. Washington Street On the west side, from a point 40 feet north of the north line of West Third Street to a point 64 feet north of West Third Street, parking shall be limited to a 30-minute period.  
(Code 2017, § 26-274; Ord. No. 1922, §§ 3, 4, 11-26-1990; Ord. No. 1926, § 2, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 10, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2011, § 2, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 2024, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. No. 2564, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 2577, § 2, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2596, § 1, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2662, § 1, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 2807, § 2, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 23-382. - All-night parking prohibited on specific streets. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Second Street On both sides between State Street and Washington Street. Third Street On both sides between State Street and Washington Street. Fourth Street On both sides between State Street and Washington Street. 23rd Street (West) On both sides, between College Street and Merner Avenue. On the south side between Merner Avenue and Minnesota Street. 31st Street (West) On the south side between Hudson Road and a point 1,300 feet west of Hudson Road. College Street On both sides between 20th Street and 23rd Street. Main Street On both sides between First Street and Fifth Street. On the west side between Fifth Street and Sixth Street. Washington Street On the west side between Second Street and Fourth Street.  
(Code 2017, § 26-275; Ord. No. 2690, § 1, 8-24-2009) 
Sec. 23-383. - Angle parking zones. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or portions of streets, which have been signed or marked for angle parking, other than within the lines so marked: 
Street Portion Zoned Second Street (West) On the north side from State Street to Clay Street. On the south side between Franklin Street and Clay Street. Fourth Street (East) On the south side from the east curb line of State Street east to the end of the street. Eighth Street (West) On the north side between College Street and Pearl Street. 11th Street (West) On both sides from Division Street west to a point 400 feet west of the west line of Division Street. Clay Street On the west side between Second Street and Third Street. Division Street On both sides between Eighth Street and 12th Street. Main Street On both sides between First Street and Sixth Street. Pearl Street On both sides between Seventh Street and Eighth Street. Rownd Street On the west side from a point 185 feet north from the north curb line of Valley High Drive to a point 307 feet north of the north curb line of Valley High Drive. State Street On the east side from the north curb line of Fourth Street north to the south curb line of Third Street. On the east side from the north curb line of Third Street north to the south curb line of Second Street.  
(Code 2017, § 26-276; Ord. No. 2690, § 2, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 2734, § 1, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-384. - Loading zones on specific streets. 
    The streets or portions of streets enumerated in this section, when properly signposted, are hereby declared to be curb loading zones. No vehicle shall park in a curb loading zone other than while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Limited Second Street (East) Loading zone: On the south side beginning at a point 30 feet west of the west curb line of the north-south alley that is between State Street and Main Street and extending west to a point 54 feet west of the west curb line. Third Street (West) Loading zone: On the south side from a point 85 feet west of the west line of Clay Street to a point 109 feet west of the west line of Clay Street. Fourth Street (East) Loading zone: From the east line of the north-south alley between Main Street and State Street and extending to a point 28 feet east of the alley line. Fourth Street (West) Bus stop zone: On the north side from a point 74 feet east of the east line of the alley between Washington Street and Main Street east to Main Street; and on the south side from the east line of the alley between Washington Street and Main Street to a point 48 feet east of the east line of the alley. Loading zone: From a point 100 feet east of the centerline of Francis Street to a point east of the centerline of Francis Street. Fifth Street (West) Loading Zone: On the south side from the west line of Main Street west a distance of 140 feet, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Seventh Street (West) Loading zone: On the north side from the east curb line of Washington Street east a distance of 112 feet during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Eighth Street (West) Loading zone: On the south side from the east line of Tremont Street to a point 65 feet east of the east line of Tremont Street. Loading zone: On the north side from a point 203.5 feet east of the centerline of Barrington Drive, thence a distance of 150 feet east, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Ninth Street (East) Loading zone: On the south side from a point 59 feet east of the east right-of-way line, thence east 40 feet. 20th Street (West) Loading zone: On the south side, commencing at the east right-of-way line of College Street and extending 55 feet east. 22nd Street (West) Loading zone: On the north side commencing 160 feet west of College Street and continuing west a distance of 81 feet. 23rd Street (West) Loading zone: On the north side from the west line of College Street to a point 95 feet west thereof. Clay Street Loading zone: On the east side commencing at a point 63 feet south of the south curb line of Sixth Street and extending south 36 feet. Loading zone: On the east side beginning at a point 77 feet north of the north line of Ninth Street and extending to a point 117 feet north of the north line of Ninth Street. On the west side between Third Street (west) and Fourth Street (west) commencing at the south line of the driveway and continuing south for a distance of 35 feet. Dallas Drive Loading zone: On the east side from a point 50 feet north of the north curb line of Idaho Street north a distance of 30 feet. Loading zone: On the east side from a point 100 feet north of the north curb line of Idaho Street north a distance of 25 feet. Grand Boulevard Loading zone: On the south side commencing at a point 188 feet west of the centerline of Park Drive and extending to a point 245 feet west of the centerline of Park Drive. Main Street Loading zone: On the east side of said street from a point 145 feet south of the centerline on Ninth Street a distance of 50 feet south. Rownd Street On the west side from a point 380 feet north of the north curb line of Valley High Drive to a point 520 feet north of the north curb line of Valley High Drive from 8:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; from 3:15 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday; and from 2:00 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. on Wednesday. Seerley Boulevard Loading Zone: On the north side from a point 133 feet west of the west line of Melrose Drive west a distance of 250 feet, from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Walnut Street On the west side from the north curb line of 18th Street north a distance of 80 feet. Loading Zone: On the east side commencing at a point 15 feet south of the south curb line of West 13th Street south a distance of 45 feet. Washington Street Loading zone: On the west side commencing at a point 99 feet north of the north curb line of Eighth Street at its intersection with Washington Street and continuing north a distance of 46 feet. Loading zone: One the west side commencing at the north curb line of Eighth Street at its intersection with Washington Street north a distance of 99 feet during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.  
(Code 2017, § 26-277; Ord. No. 1966, §§ 1, 3, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 2002, § 4, 1-11-1993; Ord. No. 2048, § 1, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 11-14-1994; Ord. No. 2090, § 2, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 2094, § 1, 4-10-1995; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 2172, § 2, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 2228, § 1, 4-13-1998; Ord. No. 2247, § 1, 11-9-1998; Ord. No. 2268, §§ 3, 4, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 2272, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. No. 2285, § 2, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 2471, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2538, § 1, 8-8-2005; Ord. No. 2558, § 2, 11-14-2005; Ord. No. 2577, § 3, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2606, § 1, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 2610, § 2, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 2734, § 2, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 2807, § 3, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 2811, § 3, 5-12-2014) 
Sec. 23-385. - School bus loading and unloading zones. 
    The streets or portions of streets enumerated in this section, when properly signposted, are hereby declared to be school bus loading or unloading zones. No vehicle other than a school bus shall park in any school bus loading or unloading zone. 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Lantz Avenue On the east side of said street from a point 50 feet south of the southeast corner of Lantz Avenue and Fern Street a distance of 61 feet south. Seerley Boulevard On the north side from a point 383 feet west of the west line of Melrose Drive west a distance of 100 feet, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. On the south side, from a point 350 feet east of Grove Street to a point 525 feet east of Grove Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Washington Street On the west side from a point 100 feet north of the north curb line of West Seventh Street north to a point 25 feet south of the south curb line of West Sixth Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.  
(Code 2017, § 26-278; Ord. No. 2004, § 5, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 3-27-1995; Ord. No. 2215, § 1, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 2285, § 3, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 2510, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2734, § 3, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 23-386. - Restricting parking in a loading zone. 
    The street or portions of streets or alleys or portions of alleys enumerated in this section, when properly sign posted, are hereby declared to be loading zones. No vehicle shall park in a loading zone other than while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Street or Alley Loading Zone The east west alley between West 1st Street and West 2nd Street. From the east line of the north south alley between West 1st Street and West 2nd Street, a distance of 73 feet east, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.  
(Code 2017, § 26-279; Ord. No. 1991, § 1(158.2), 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 23-387. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
    Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent to the roadway, outside of a business district whether attended or unattended during the times mentioned in section 23-517, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 2017, § 26-280; Ord. No. 1995, § 1(243A), 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 23-388. - Prohibited parking during snow removal. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor or director of public works or the director's designee finds on the basis of excess accumulation of snow, that weather conditions have created or are likely to create hazardous road and driving conditions which will impede or are likely to impede movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vital vehicular traffic, the mayor or director of public works or the director's designee may declare a snow emergency, and declare that snow removal from priority streets shall begin and shall prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on designated snow removal routes. While the snow emergency is in effect, no person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle upon any snow removal route or portion of such route, as designated as such by subsection (d) of this section. Each street designated as a snow removal route shall be marked with signs displaying the words, "Emergency Snow Route." A snow removal parking ban shall continue from its declaration through the duration of the snow storm, and until the mayor or director of public works or the director's designee issues notice that the snow emergency is at an end. The public will be notified via local radio, television and newspaper when the snow emergency begins and is concluded. The parking prohibition on snow removal routes shall not go into effect until two hours after the snow emergency has been declared in accordance with this section. Termination of the parking prohibition shall be effective immediately upon the announcement that the snow emergency is at an end. 
(b)  When it is declared that snow removal operations are to begin, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to impede or block traffic on designated snow removal routes. 
(c)  Any police officer of the city police operations division, including duly authorized volunteer officers, or the director of public works or the director's designee shall be authorized to cause the towing of vehicles blocking traffic or parking on designated snow removal routes during snow removal operations in violation of this section. The owner of the vehicle shall pay the costs of towing and storage occasioned by the removal of the vehicle as provided herein. In addition any police officer of the city police operations division, including duly authorized volunteer officers, the director of public works or the director's designee shall be authorized to issue parking tickets for violations of this section, parking on designated snow removal routes during snow removal operations. 
(d)  Priority snow removal routes are designated as follows: 
Street Portion Where 
Parking Prohibited Second Street From State Street to Franklin Street Third Street From State Street to Franklin Street Fourth Street From State Street to Washington Street Fifth Street From State Street to Washington Street Sixth Street From State Street to Clay Street 18th Street (West) From College Street to Hudson Road 23rd Street From College Street to Merner Avenue Clay Street From First Street to Sixth Street College Street From University Avenue to 18th Street Division Street From Eighth Street to 12th Street Franklin Street From Sixth Street to First Street Main Street From First Street to Sixth Street Orchard Drive From South Main Street to Cedar Heights Drive State Street From First Street to Sixth Street Walnut Street From First Street to 18th Street Washington Street From First Street to Sixth Street  
(e)  Special penalty. Any person violating this parking ban shall be fined $25.00 for each offense, in addition to the costs of towing and storage. 
(f)  In any proceeding for violation of this section, the registration plates displayed on a motor vehicle involved in such violation shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the point where such violation occurred. 
(Code 2017, § 26-281; Ord. No. 2679, § 1, 3-9-2009; Ord. No. 2855, § 1, 10-19-2015; Ord. No. 2941, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 23-389. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure or portion of a structure which meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Privately owned commercial property zoned commercial under the zoning chapter of specifically zoned in the following commercial districts: S-1, C-1, C-2, and C-3. 
(2)  Privately owned residential property under the zoning chapter specifically zoned as RP. 
    Commercial vehicle means a motor driven car or truck which is designated by lettering on the vehicle's body indicating a commercial purpose or which has a commercial license plate attached and is duly registered to the vehicle. 
    Fire lane means an opening not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width measured from the farthest building projection or walkway/curb, whichever is the greatest distance from the building wall, and shall have no vertical obstructions. The length of a fire lane shall be properly posted as set forth below. 
(b)  Violation. No person shall park a vehicle in any place designated by the fire operations division as a fire lane and posted as hereinafter provided, whether such fire lane be upon publicly owned property or right-of-way, or upon privately owned property. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. In addition, members of the police t operations division or parking meter attendants, or their designees, may remove such vehicle to a storage place as provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Signs. A fire lane shall be posted with metal signs reading "No Parking-Fire Lane Violators Subject to Towing and Citation under code section 23-389 of the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa" at least every 50 linear feet thereof. 
(d)  Presumption. When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a presumption shall arise that said area was designated as a fire lane by or with the authority of the fire operations division. 
(e)  Maintenance and construction expense. Fire lanes shall be constructed and maintained at the owner's expense, which shall include the purchase of properly marked signs. 
(f)  Free and clear of all obstructions. Fire lanes shall at all times be free and clear of all obstructions, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Normal movement of vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Actively loading and unloading of commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles shall be limited to a period of not more than 30 minutes' obstruction of the fire lane. 
(Code 2017, § 26-282; Ord. No. 2232, § 2, 4-27-1998; Ord. No. 2705, §§ 4, 5, 2-22-2010) 
Secs. 23-390-23-406. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS AND OTHER PARKING FACILITIES 

Sec. 23-407. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal parking lot means any municipal parking area, not including streets or highways, designated as a municipal parking lot. 
    Operator means every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street or municipal parking lot, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, and other than an involuntary stopping of a vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of such vehicle. 
    Parking meter means any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this division placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this division. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city, and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
    Parking meter space means any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter, which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter. 
    Parking meter zone means any restricted street or municipal parking lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
    Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
    Street means any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Code 2017, § 26-291) 
Sec. 23-408. - Rights reserved by city. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands and for other matters of a similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans or other commercial vehicles. 
(Code 2017, § 26-293) 
Sec. 23-409. - Supervision of parking meters. 
    The council shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of parking meters in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-294) 
Sec. 23-410. - Use of parking meter zones for loading and unloading. 
    Commercial trucks may park in parking meter zones to load and unload merchandise where no facilities are available to load or unload in alleys. Such parking shall not exceed 15 minutes, and parking beyond such time limit shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-296) 
Sec. 23-411. - Parking meter zones described. 
(a)  The following named and described lots, areas, streets or portions of streets, lying within the corporate limits of the city, shall constitute a parking meter zone: 
(1)  Second Street from State Street to Clay Street. 
(2)  Third Street from State Street to Clay Street. 
(3)  Fourth Street from State Street to Washington Street. 
(4)  Fifth Street from Main Street to Washington Street. 
(5)  23rd Street from College Street to Merner Avenue. 
(6)  College Street from 22nd Street to 23rd Street. 
(7)  Main Street from First Street to Sixth Street. 
(8)  Washington Street from First Street to Fifth Street. 
(b)  The following described municipal parking lots shall constitute a parking meter zone: 
(1)  A parcel of land situated in lots 46, 47 and 48 of Auditor Rainbow's Plat No. 3 in the city, to be known as lot G, being more particularly described as follows: 
a.  Lot 46 of the plat, except the west 90.72 feet thereof. 
b.  Lot 47 of the plat, except the east 143 feet thereof. 
c.  Lot 48 of the plat, except the west 11 feet thereof, and except the part described as follows: beginning at the southeast corner of lot 48; thence west along the south line a distance of 116.25 feet; thence north and parallel to the east line a distance of 47.05 feet; thence northwesterly a distance of 53.5 feet more or less to the southwest corner of the east 143 feet of the north 22.5 feet of lot 48; thence north and parallel to the east line 22.5 feet to the north line of lot 48; thence east along the north line a distance of 143 feet to the northeast corner of lot 48; thence south along the east line a distance of 115.5 feet to the place of beginning, and except Parcel "B" of Plat of Survey Document #2005-20107. 
d.  Parcel "A" of Plat of Survey Document #2005-20107, being part of Lot No. 46 in Auditor Rainbow's Plat No. 3. 
e.  Parcel "B" of Plat of Survey Document #2005-20107, being part of Lot No. 48 in Auditor Rainbow's Plat No. 3. (Leased from University Book & Supply.) 
(2)  Lots 1, 2 and 3 in block 9 in Normal Addition to the city, and lots 2, 3 and 9, except the 12 feet of lot 9, in Auditor's Plat No. 18, to be known as lot J. 
(3)  Lots 5, 6 and 7, fractional block east of Block 11, in the Original Plat of the city, to be known as lot A. 
(4)  Lot 7 except the west 44 feet thereof and except the south 33 feet thereof, also Lot 8 except the west 44 feet thereof, all in Block 2, Original Plat of the city, to be known as lot B. 
(5)  Lot 3 and Lot 4 in Block 5, Original Plat of the city, to be known as lot C. 
(6)  Lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 in Mill Square Addition to Cedar Falls, Iowa and that part of lots 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 ,16 and Race Street in Auditor's Mill Company Plat, Cedar Falls, Iowa lying westerly and southwesterly of a line described as commencing at a point on the south line of said Lot 6 which is 9.0 feet east of the southwest corner of said Lot 6; thence north parallel with the west line of said Lot 6 a distance of 54.7 feet; thence northwesterly along a line which is 16.0 feet northeasterly from and parallel with the northeasterly line of said Lots 8 and 9 a distance of 197.7 feet to a point on the northerly extension of the west line of said Lot 8 which is 141.2 feet north of the southwest corner of said Lot 8; thence north along the northerly extension of said Lot 8 a distance of 78.8 feet to a the southerly right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 57 (formerly U.S. Highway 20), to be known as lot D. 
(7)  Lots 7 and Lot 8 in Block 3, Original Plat of the city, to be known as lot H. 
(8)  The east 25.0 feet of the north 55.0 feet of Lot 7, Block 13 of Railroad Addition to the city, to be known as lot M. 
(9)  The east five rods of Lot 4 in Normal Plat and all of Lot 4 in Block 8 of Normal Addition to the city, to be known as lot N. 
(10)  That part of vacated West Twenty-third Street in Auditor's Plat No. 18 and in Normal Addition lying east of the east line of College Street and west of the west line of Olive Street, all in the city, to be known as lot O. 
(c)  All frontage in the squares, streets or avenues defining zones are to be included therein. 
(Code 2017, § 26-297; Ord. No. 2691, § 1, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 2705, § 6, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 23-412. - Parking time limits in parking meter zones. 
(a)  Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space in a parking meter zone shall be lawful as follows: 
(1)  One hour spaces and two hour spaces in parking lot J: one hour for deposit of $0.25. 
(2)  Ten-hour spaces in lots A, B, C, D and H: one hour for deposit of $0.10. 
(b)  In parking meter zones, the meters shall be marked to permit a maximum length of parking of one hour, two hours or ten hours. 
(c)  Parking meters shall be operated in the parking meter zones between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of each weekday. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply on weekends or the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or the days on which such holidays are officially observed. 
(Code 2017, § 26-298; Ord. No. 1926, §§ 3, 4, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 11, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2206, § 1, 10-13-1997; Ord. No. 2342, § 1, 8-13-2001; Ord. No. 2559, § 1, 10-24-2005; Ord. No. 2705, § 7, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 23-413. - Installation of parking meters. 
    In parking meter zones, the council shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalks immediately adjacent to the parking spaces provided for in section 23-411. Such installation shall be placed not more than two feet from the curb and not more than four feet from the front or rear line of the parking space as indicated. 
(Code 2017, § 26-299) 
Sec. 23-414. - Display of signals on parking meters. 
    Every parking meter shall be so set that it shall display a signal showing the legal parking time upon the deposit of the appropriate coin, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by this division. Each device shall be so arranged that, upon the expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-300) 
Sec. 23-415. - Operation of parking meters. 
(a)  Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire operations division or police operations division, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle is parked in any parking space alongside of or next to a parking meter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter the proper coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter. When required by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin, shall also set the timing mechanism in operation on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon. Failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(b)  Upon the deposit of such coin, and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which such parking space is located, provided that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant in the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of such space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, or if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-301) 
Sec. 23-416. - Use of funds collected from parking meters. 
(a)  Funds derived from the operation of parking meters shall be used for the following purposes and none other: 
(1)  Payment of the cost of acquisition and installation of meters purchased. 
(2)  Payment of the cost of maintenance and repair of meters, the collection of meter taxes, and the enforcement of traffic laws in the parking meter district. 
(3)  Payment of the purchase and installation costs of other parking or traffic control devices installed on such portions of streets as are equipped with parking meters. 
(4)  Payment of the cost of acquiring, by purchase, lease or similar arrangement, parking lots or other off-street parking areas, including operation, enlargement or improvement thereof or the facilities thereof, within 0.4 mile of the metered portion of the streets within the meter district, and widening the streets within the meter district or within two blocks thereof to provide additional parking facilities. 
(5)  Retirement of revenue bonds. 
(b)  All revenues derived from the operation of parking meters or other similar devices not required for the payment of costs under subsection (a) of this section shall be expended for the improvement of existing facilities or the acquisition and improvement of additional off-street parking areas, provided that such funds may be retained and accumulated for such purpose for such length of time and in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to effectuate such program of acquisition of parking lots or other off-street parking areas. 
(Code 2017, § 26-302) 
Sec. 23-417. - Parking meter violations. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to: 
(1)  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone. 
(2)  Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in a parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. 
a.  Each consecutive 45-minute period during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked, as provided in this subsection, at a meter with a maximum time limit of 45 minutes, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate 45 minutes after the time a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each 45-minutes period thereafter. 
b.  Each consecutive one hour during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked, as provided in this subsection, at a meter with a maximum time limit of one hour or more, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate one hour after the time a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each one-hour period thereafter. 
(3)  Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. Where angle or straight-in parking is provided, a vehicle must be parked entirely between the lines or markings with one of the front wheels of the vehicle touching the bumper block or curb. 
(4)  Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(5)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, device or substance or other substitute for lawful coins. 
(6)  Back any vehicle into a parking meter space where angle or straight-in parking is provided. The fronts of all vehicles shall be headed in towards the parking meter. 
(Code 2017, § 26-303; Ord. No. 2006, § 12, 3-1-1993) 
Sec. 23-418. - Notice of parking meter violation. 
    The parking meter attendants or police officers of the city shall attach to the vehicles in violation of this division a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this division and informing the owner or operator of the amount of the fine, how the fine may be paid, and the penalty for failure to pay the fine. 
(Code 2017, § 26-304) 
Sec. 23-419. - Report of parking meter violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the parking attendants and the police officers of the city, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the city clerk and as approved by the council, to report the following: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parking in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  The time during which such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Any other facts which are necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-305; Ord. No. 2583, § 3, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 23-420. - Evidence of parking meter violation. 
    All parking is prohibited in any parking space where a meter is installed which displays a signal showing that parking is not permitted, unless the deposit of a coin is made as provided in this division. The fact that a vehicle is in an individual parking space when the time signal on the parking meter shows that no parking shall be permitted unless the deposit of a proper coin is made as provided in this division shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such motor vehicle by its operator or owner. 
(Code 2017, § 26-306) 
Sec. 23-421. - Fines for parking meter violations. 
(a)  The following is the schedule of fines for parking meter and other violations as described in sections 23-417(1)-(3), and (6): 
(1)  The fine is $10.00, payable to the city. 
(2)  If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, the fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(b)  The schedule of fines for violations as described in sections 23-417(4) and (5) shall be the penalty provided in section 23-23. 
(Code 2017, § 26-307; Ord. No. 2722, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 23-422. - Maximum parking time in non-metered spaces in municipal lots; maximum parking time when parking meter is missing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided for with respect to municipal lot G in section 23-427, in all municipally owned or leased off-street parking lots not metered as provided in this division, or any portion thereof that is not equipped with parking meters, there is hereby ordered and declared a 24-hour limit of parking for each vehicle; except that, for municipal lots A, B, C, D, and the north two rows of parking lot H, consisting of 17 spaces, there is hereby ordered a total four-hour limit of parking for each vehicle on each weekday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. The provisions of this section shall not apply on weekends or the following named holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or the days on which such holidays are officially observed. 
(b)  If any parking meter is missing from a parking space within an area included in the parking meter zone described in section 23-411, there is hereby declared a total four-hour limit of parking for each vehicle on each weekday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays as stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 26-308; Ord. No. 2722, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 23-423. - Manner of parking in nonmetered municipal lots. 
    In any municipally owned or leased nonmetered off-street parking lot having parking designated by sign or line or marker, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marker of a particular parking space or in such position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such lines or markers. No vehicle shall be backed into an individual diagonal parking space. The front of all vehicles shall be headed into all such diagonal parking spaces. Vehicles may be backed into individual parking spaces which are not diagonal parking spaces. 
(Code 2017, § 26-309; Ord. No. 2370, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 23-424. - Fine for violation of section 23-422 or 23-423. 
    The fine for a violation of section 23-422 or 23-223 shall be $10.00, payable to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, such fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-310; Ord. No. 2722, § 3, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 23-425. - Daily, monthly and annual parking permits for municipal lots. 
(a)  Generally. In all municipally owned or leased off-street parking lots, metered or unmetered, except all of parking lot O, and except in the north two rows of parking lot H consisting of 17 spaces, the owner or operator of a motor vehicle may obtain a daily, monthly or annual parking permit for use in the off-street parking facilities. The parking permit is to be displayed in the lower left-hand corner of the windshield of the vehicle. The daily parking fee, monthly parking fee and annual parking fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The purchase and proper display, as required in this subsection, of a daily, monthly or annual parking permit shall entitle the motor vehicle to be parked in the off-street municipal parking lots, except in all of parking lot O, and except in the north two rows of parking lot H consisting of 17 spaces, without penalty for overtime parking. 
(b)  Persons 62 years of age or older. In all municipally owned or leased off-street unmetered parking lots, except in all of parking lot O, and except in the north two rows of parking lot H consisting of 17 spaces, the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who is 62 years of age or older may obtain an annual parking permit for use in the off-street parking facilities upon payment of a fee per year as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The parking permit is to be displayed in the lower left-hand corner of the windshield of the vehicle. The person 62 years of age or over seeking the annual parking lot permit may obtain the permit by presenting proof of age to the city clerk. The parking permit shall be valid for the calendar year in which the permit is obtained. The acquisition and proper display, as required in this subsection, of the annual parking permit shall entitle the motor vehicle to be parked in the off-street unmetered parking lots, except in parking lot O, and except in the north two rows of parking lot H consisting of 17 spaces, without penalty for overtime parking. 
(Code 2017, § 26-311; Ord. No. 2771, § 1, 7-9-2012) 
Sec. 23-426. - Two-hour limit on parking in certain parking spaces on certain streets. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space shall be limited to a total of two hours of parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays as stated in section 23-422(a), on the following streets or portions of streets within the city: 
(1)  Second Street from State Street to Clay Street. 
(2)  Third Street from State Street to Clay Street. 
(3)  Fourth Street from State Street to Washington Street. 
(4)  Fifth Street from State Street to Washington Street. 
(5)  Main Street from First Street to Sixth Street. 
(6)  State Street from Second Street to Fourth Street. 
(7)  Washington Street from First Street to Fifth Street. 
Each consecutive two-hour period during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked in a designated space as provided in this subsection shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate two hours after the time a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each two-hour period thereafter. 
(b)  The parking meters adjacent to the parking spaces on the streets or portions of streets designated in subsection (a) of this section are hereby withdrawn from operation as parking meters, and the provisions of section 23-412(c) and sections 23-413 through 23-415 shall not be applicable thereto, the provisions of those sections to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  The schedule of fines for violations described in subsection (a) of this section shall be the fines as stated in section 23-421(a). 
(Code 2017, § 26-312; Ord. No. 2722, § 4, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2874, § 1, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 23-427. - Two-hour limit on parking in municipal lots G, M and N and on certain portions of College Street and 23rd Street. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space shall be limited to a total of two hours for each vehicle on each weekday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays as stated in section 23-422(a), in the following places: 
(1)  Anywhere within municipal lots G, M and N. 
(2)  23rd Street from that portion of said street adjacent to 1019 West 23rd Street west to Merner Avenue. 
(3)  Each consecutive two-hour minute period during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked in a designated space as provided in this subsection shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate two hours after a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each two-hour period thereafter. 
(b)  The parking meters adjacent to the parking spaces in municipal lots G, M and N and on the portions of the streets designated in subsection (a) of this section are hereby withdrawn from operation as parking meters, and the provisions of sections 23-412 through 23-415 shall not be applicable thereto, the provisions of those sections to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  The schedule of fines for violations described in subsection (a) of this section shall be $10.00, payable to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, such fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-313; Ord. No. 2691, § 2, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2705, §§ 5, 8, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 23-428. - One-hour limit on parking in certain parking spaces on certain portions of 23rd Street and College Street. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space shall be limited to a total of one hour of parking for each vehicle on each weekday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays as stated in section 23-422(a), on the following portions of streets within the city: 
(1)  23rd Street from College Street west to and including that portion of West 23rd Street adjacent to 1009 West 23rd Street. 
(2)  College Street from 22nd Street to 23rd Street. 
(3)  Each consecutive one-hour period during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked in a designated space as provided in this subsection shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate one hour after the time a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each one-hour period thereafter. 
(b)  The parking meters adjacent to the parking spaces on the portions of the streets designated in subsection (a) of this section are hereby withdrawn from operation as parking meters, and the provisions of sections 23-412 through 23-415 shall not be applicable thereto, the provisions of those sections to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  The schedule of fines for violations described in subsection (a) of this section shall be $10.00, payable to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, such fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-314; Ord. No. 2691, § 3, 7-27-2009) 
Sec. 23-429. - One-hour limit on parking in municipal lot O. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking or standing a vehicle in a designated parking space shall be limited to a total of one hour of parking for each vehicle on each weekday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on holidays as stated in subsection 23-422(a), on the following portions of streets within the city: 
(1)  Anywhere within municipal lot O. 
(2)  Each consecutive one-hour period during one calendar day that a vehicle remains illegally parked in a designated space as provided in this subsection shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The first offense shall terminate one-hour after the time a ticket charging the offense is issued, which time shall be noted on the ticket, and a separate and new offense shall occur during each one-hour period thereafter. 
(b)  The parking meters adjacent to the parking spaces in what is now municipal lot O designated in subsection (a) of this section are hereby withdrawn from operation as parking meters, and the provisions of sections 23-412, 23-413, 23-414, and 23-415 shall not be applicable thereto, the provisions of those sections to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  The schedule of fines for violations described in subsection (a) of this section shall be $10.00, payable to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of the violation, such fine shall be increased to $15.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-315; Ord. No. 2691, § 4, 7-27-2009) 
Sec. 23-430. - Parking prohibited in portions of municipal lot G during certain hours. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking or standing a vehicle shall be prohibited in the 20 angled parking spaces located in the northeast leg of municipal lot G on Thursday afternoons only commencing with the first Thursday of June of each year and continuing through the last Thursday of October of each year during the hours of 2:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 2017, § 26-316; Ord. No. 2833, § 1, 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 23-431-23-458. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 23-459. - Immediate notice required when accident involves injury or death. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury to or the death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police operations division if such accident occurs within the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-331; Ord. No. 1943, § 13, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-460. - Report to police operations division. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or the death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $1,500.00 or more shall, within 72 hours after such accident, make in person or forward a written report of such accident to the police operations division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-332; Ord. No. 2725, § 3, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 23-461. - Filing of copy of reports required by state. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the city shall file a copy of the accident report as and when required by the state department of transportation. The report shall be filed with the traffic division, and all such reports shall be for the confidential use of the police operations division and shall be subject to Iowa Code § 321.271. 
(Code 2017, § 26-333) 
Sec. 23-462. - Passenger to report when driver unable. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made such report. 
(Code 2017, § 26-334) 
Sec. 23-463. - Duty of driver to give information and aid; leaving scene of accident. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a person or damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by a person shall give the driver's name, address and the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit the driver's motor vehicle license to the person struck, the driver or occupant of, or the person attending the vehicle involved in the accident and shall render to a person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the transporting or arranging for the transporting of the person for medical treatment if it is apparent that medical treatment is necessary or if transportation for medical treatment is requested by the injured person. 
(b)  If the accident causes the death of a person, all surviving drivers shall remain at the scene of the accident except to seek necessary aid or to report the accident to law enforcement authorities. Before leaving the scene of the fatal accident, each surviving driver shall leave the surviving driver's motor vehicle license, automobile registration receipt or other identification data at the scene of the accident. After leaving the scene of the accident, a surviving driver shall promptly report the accident to law enforcement authorities, and shall immediately return to the scene of the accident or inform the law enforcement authorities where the surviving driver can be located. 
(Code 2017, § 26-335; Ord. No. 1943, § 15, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-464. - Duty of driver when damage is to vehicle only. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Iowa Code § 321.263. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with the requirements of this section under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2017, § 26-336) 
Sec. 23-465. - Duty of driver upon striking fixtures on highway. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to property legally upon or adjacent to a highway or street shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner, a peace officer or person in charge of the damaged property of the damage, shall inform the person of the driver's name and address and the registration number of the vehicle causing the damage and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit the driver's motor vehicle license, and shall report the accident when and as required in Iowa Code § 321.266. 
(Code 2017, § 26-337; Ord. No. 1943, § 16, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-466. - Duty of driver upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 26-338) 
Secs. 23-467-23-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EQUIPMENT AND OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE SUPPLIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-486. - Display of plates. 
(a)  Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motorized bicycle or a truck tractor shall be attached to the motor vehicle, one in the front and the other in the rear. The registration plate issued for a motorcycle or other vehicle required to be registered under the laws of the state shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle. The registration plate issued for a truck tractor shall be attached to the front of the truck tractor. The special plate issued to a dealer shall be attached on the rear of the vehicle when operated on the streets or highways of the city. 
(b)  Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle which is model year 1948 or older, and reconstructed or specially constructed vehicles built to resemble a model year 1948 vehicle or older, other than a truck registered for more than five tons, motorcycle, or truck tractor, may display one registration plate on the rear of the vehicle if the other registration plate issued to the vehicle is carried in the vehicle at all times when the vehicle is operated on the streets or highways of the city. 
(c)  It is unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to place any frame around or over the registration plate which does not permit full view of all numerals and letters printed on the registration plate. 
(Code 2017, § 26-361; Ord. No. 2552, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-487. - Method of attaching plates; imitations prohibited. 
    Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at a height of not less than 12 inches from the ground, measuring the bottom of the plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. An imitation plate or plates imitating or purporting to imitate the official registration plate of any other state or territory of the United States or of any foreign government shall not be fastened to the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-362; Ord. No. 2552, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-488. - Illuminating plates. 
    Either the rear lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. When the rear registration plate is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear lamp, the two lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times when head lamps are lighted. 
(Code 2017, § 26-363; Ord. No. 2552, § 3, 10-10-2005) 
Secs. 23-489-23-514. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 23-515. - Operation of unsafe vehicle. 
    No person shall drive or move, nor shall the owner cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street, any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person and which does not contain those parts or is not equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by law, or which is equipped with one or more unsafe tires, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of the law. 
(Code 2017, § 26-371; Ord. No. 1943, § 17, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-516. - Brakes. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(b)  Every motorcycle and motorized bicycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
(c)  Every trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle when operated on the highways of the city. Every trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer with a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more shall be equipped with a separate, auxiliary means of applying the brakes on the trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer from the cab of the towing vehicle, or with self-actuating brakes, and shall also be equipped with a weight equalizing hitch with a sway control. Trailers or semitrailers with a truck or truck tractor need only comply with the brake requirements. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, every new motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer hereafter sold in this state and operated upon the highways of the city shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every such vehicle with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any motorcycle or motorized bicycle. 
(2)  Any trailer or semitrailer of less than 3,000 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes. 
(3)  Trucks and truck tractors equipped with three or more axles and manufactured before July 25, 1980, need not have brakes on the front wheels, except that such vehicles equipped with two or more front axles shall be equipped with brakes on at least one of the axles; however, the service brakes of the vehicle shall comply with the performance requirements of this section. 
(4)  Only such brakes on the vehicle or vehicles being towed in a driveaway-towaway operation need be operative as may be necessary to ensure compliance by the combination of vehicles with the performance requirements of Iowa Code § 321.431. The term "driveaway-towaway" operation as used in this subsection means any operation in which any motor vehicle or motor vehicles, new or used, constitute the commodity being transported, when one set or more of wheels of any such motor vehicle or motor vehicles are on the roadway during the course of transportation, whether or not any such motor vehicle furnishes the motive power. 
a.  The service brakes upon any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles, when upon dry asphalt or concrete pavement surface free from loose material where the grade does not exceed one percent, when traveling 20 miles an hour shall be adequate: 
1.  To stop such vehicle or vehicles having a gross weight of less than 5,000 pounds within a distance of 30 feet. 
2.  To stop such vehicle or vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 5,000 pounds within a distance of 45 feet. 
b.  Under the above conditions, the hand brake shall be adequate to hold such vehicle or vehicles stationary on any grade upon which operated. 
c.  Under the above conditions, the service brakes upon a motor vehicle equipped with two-wheel brakes only, and when permitted hereunder, shall be adequate to stop the vehicle within a distance of 45 feet and the hand brake adequate to stop the vehicle within a distance of 55 feet. 
d.  All braking distances specified in this section shall apply to all vehicles mentioned, whether such vehicles are not loaded or are loaded to the maximum capacity permitted by law. 
e.  All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-372; Ord. No. 1943, § 18, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-517. - Required lamps; lighting of lamps. 
    All motor vehicles operated upon the streets of the city during the period from sunset until sunrise, and at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet or rain provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on streets at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles, as follows: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one on each side of the vehicle, which shall be in good working order and in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(2)  Every motorcycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlamps, which shall be in good working order and in compliance with the laws of the state. 
(3)  Every motor vehicle and every vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a trailer vehicle shall be equipped with a rear lamp exhibiting a rear light plainly visible for a distance of 500 feet to the rear. All lamps and lighting equipment originally manufactured on a motor vehicle shall be kept in working condition or shall be replaced with equivalent equipment. 
(Code 2017, § 26-373; Ord. No. 1943, § 19, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-518. - Lights and reflectors on motor trucks and trailers. 
(a)  No lighting device or reflector, when mounted on or near the front of any motor truck or trailer, except school buses, shall display any other color than white, yellow or amber. 
(b)  No lighting device or reflector, when mounted on or near the rear of any motor truck or trailer, shall display any other color than red, except that the stop light may be red, yellow or amber. 
(c)  Clearance lamps shall be mounted on the permanent structure of the vehicle in such manner as to indicate the extreme width of the vehicle or its load. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the use of a lighting device or reflector displaying an amber light when such lighting device or reflector is mounted on a motor truck, trailer, tractor or motor grader owned by the city, while such equipment is being used for snow removal, sanding, maintenance or repair of the public streets or highways. 
(Code 2017, § 26-374; Ord. No. 1943, § 20, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-519. - Backup lamp. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp, either separately or in combination with another lamp; except that no such backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
(Code 2017, § 26-375) 
Sec. 23-520. - Auxiliary driving lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than 12 inches and not more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. Every such auxiliary driving lamp shall meet the requirements and limitations set forth by state law. 
(Code 2017, § 26-376) 
Sec. 23-521. - Spot lamps. 
    Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp. Every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle or more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-377) 
Sec. 23-522. - Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
(a)  Any vehicle operated or parked upon any street of the city upon which the load extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body shall display, at the extreme rear end of such load, from sunset to sunrise or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. Such red light or lantern shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon each vehicle under the laws of the state. At any other time, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square. 
(b)  No vehicle loaded as described in this section shall park other than parallel with the curb upon any of the streets of the city. Where orders provide that the vehicles be parked at an angle, vehicles loaded as described in this section may park parallel to the curb for the purpose of loading and unloading only. 
(Code 2017, § 26-378) 
Sec. 23-523. - Signal lamps and signal devices. 
    Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a signal lamp or signal device which is so constructed and located on the vehicle as to give a signal of intention to stop, which shall be red or yellow in color, which signal shall be plainly visible and understandable in normal sunlight and at night from a distance of 100 feet to the rear but shall not project a glaring or dazzling light. 
(Code 2017, § 26-379) 
Sec. 23-524. - Use of red lights. 
    No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying or reflecting a red light visible from directly in front thereof. This section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, or school buses and vehicles as provided in Iowa Code § 321.423(6). No person shall display any color of light other than red on the rear of any vehicle, except that stop lights and directional signals may be red, yellow or amber. 
(Code 2017, § 26-380) 
Sec. 23-525. - Metal tires and tracks prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or move on any street, alley or highway in the city any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer having any metal tire or metal track in contact with the roadway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-381) 
Sec. 23-526. - Projections on wheels. 
    No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberances of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use: 
(1)  Farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the highway. 
(2)  Tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle, when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid. 
(3)  Pneumatic tires with inserted ice grips or tire studs projecting not more than 1/16 inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire upon any vehicle, from November 1 to April 1 of each year, except that a school bus and fire operations division emergency apparatus may use such tires at any time. 
(Code 2017, § 26-382) 
Sec. 23-527. - Protection of pavement from wheels injurious to street. 
    No person shall move or cause to be moved any traction engine, automobile, truck or heavy vehicle or conveyance or any machinery so constructed that the wheels thereof shall cut, tear or otherwise injure any bridge, street or pavement without first using planks to protect the pavement, bridge or street from any injury whatsoever. 
(Code 2017, § 26-383) 
Sec. 23-528. - Horns and warning devices. 
    Every motor vehicle, when operated upon the streets of the city, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of producing an audible sound under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or high sound or whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-384) 
Sec. 23-529. - Visibility through windshield and windows. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle equipped with a windshield, sidewings or side or rear windows which do not permit clear vision. 
(b)  No person shall operate on the streets and highways of the city a motor vehicle equipped with a front windshield, a side window to the immediate right or left of the driver, or a sidewing forward of and to the left or right of the driver which is excessively dark or reflective so that it is difficult for a person outside the motor vehicle to see into the motor vehicle through the windshield, window or sidewing. The state department of transportation shall adopt rules establishing a minimum measurable standard of transparency, which shall apply to violations of this subsection. 
(Code 2017, § 26-385; Ord. No. 1943, § 21, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-530. - Windshield wipers. 
    The windshield of every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for clearing rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-386) 
Sec. 23-531. - Mirrors. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Any motor vehicle so loaded, or towing another vehicle in such manner, as to obstruct the view in a rearview mirror located in the driver's compartment, shall be equipped with a side mirror so located that the view to the rear will not be obstructed; however, when such vehicle is not loaded or towing another vehicle, the side mirrors shall be retracted or removed. All van or van type motor vehicles shall be equipped with outside mirrors of unit magnification, each with not less than 19.5 square inches of reflective surface, installed with stable supports on both sides of the vehicle, located so as to provide the driver a view to the rear along both sides of the vehicle, and adjustable in both the horizontal and vertical directions to view the rearward scene. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Iowa Code ch. 321 or 321E, a combination of vehicles coupled together which is used exclusively for the transportation of passenger vehicles, light delivery trucks, panel delivery trucks, pickups, boats and recreational chassis may permanently attach a convex type mirror on either or both of the vertical supports, forward of the steering axle of the power unit, provided that the mirror shall not extend beyond the limit of any other rearview mirror on the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-387; Ord. No. 1943, § 22, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-532. - Mufflers. 
    Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle upon a street or highway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-388) 
Sec. 23-533. - Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required. 
(a)  Except for motorcycles or motorized bicycles, 1966 model year or newer motor vehicles subject to registration in the state shall be equipped with safety belts and safety harnesses of a type and installed in a manner approved by rules adopted by the state department of transportation pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 17A and Iowa Code § 321.445, and installed in a manner approved by rules adopted by the state department of transportation pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 17A and Iowa Code § 321.446. 
(b)  The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor vehicle which is subject to registration in the state, except a motorcycle or a motorized bicycle, shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt or safety harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or highway in this state, except that a child under 18 years of age shall be secured as required under section 23-534. This subsection does not apply to: 
(1)  The driver or front seat occupants of a motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety belts or safety harnesses under rules adopted by the state department of public safety. 
(2)  The driver and front seat occupants of a motor vehicle who are actively engaged in work which requires them to alight from and reenter the vehicle at frequent intervals, provided the speed of the vehicle does not exceed 25 miles per hour between stops. 
(3)  The driver of a motor vehicle while performing duties as a rural letter carrier for the United States postal service. This exemption applies only between the first delivery point after leaving the post office and the last delivery point before returning to the post office. 
(4)  Passengers on a bus. 
(5)  A person possessing a written certification from a physician on a form provided by the state department of public safety that the person is unable to wear a safety belt or safety harness due to physical or medical reasons. The certification shall specify the time period for which the exemption applies. 
(6)  Front seat occupants of an authorized emergency vehicle while they are being transported in an emergency. However, this exemption does not apply to the driver of the authorized emergency vehicle. 
(7)  Front seats and front seat passengers of motor vehicles owned, leased, rented or primarily used by the physically handicapped persons who use collapsible wheelchairs, as provided for under rules adopted by the state department of public safety pursuant to Iowa Code ch. 17A and Iowa Code § 321.445. 
(c)  The driver and front seat passengers may be each charged separately for improperly used or nonused equipment under subsection (b) of this section. However, the driver shall not be charged for a violation committed by a passenger who is 14 years of age or older unless the passenger is unable to properly fasten a seatbelt due to a temporary or permanent disability. The owner of the motor vehicle may be charged for equipment violations under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2017, § 26-389; Ord. No. 2725, § 4, 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 23-534. - Child restraint devices. 
(a)  A child under one year of age and weighing less than 20 pounds who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration, except a school bus or motorcycle, shall be secured during transit in a rear-facing child restraint system that is used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  A child under six years of age who does not meet the description in subsection (a) of this section and who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration, except a school bus or motorcycle, shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system that is used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  A child at least six years of age but under 18 years of age who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration, except a school bus or motorcycle, shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system that is used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or by a safety belt or safety harness of a type approved under Iowa Code § 321.445. 
(d)  This section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Peace officers acting on official duty. 
(2)  The transportation of children in 1965 model year or older vehicles, authorized emergency vehicles, buses, or motor homes, except when a child is transported in a motor home's passenger seat situated directly to the driver's right. 
(3)  The transportation of a child who has been certified by a physician licensed under Iowa Code ch. 148 as having a medical, physical, or mental condition that prevents or makes inadvisable securing the child in a child restraint system, safety belt, or safety harness. 
(4)  A back seat occupant of a motor vehicle for whom no safety belt is available because all safety belts are being used by other occupants or cannot be used due to the use of a child restraint system in the seating position for which a belt is provided. 
A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code § 805.8A(14)c. 
(e)  Violations shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  An operator who transports a passenger under 14 years of age in violation of subsections (a) through (c) of this section may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(2)  If a passenger 14 years of age or older is unable to properly fasten a seatbelt due to a temporary or permanent disability, an operator who transports such a person in violation of subsection (c) of this section may be charged with a violation of this section. Otherwise, a passenger 14 years of age or older who violates subsection (c) of this section shall be charged in lieu of the operator. 
(3)  If a child under 14 years of age, or a child 14 years of age or older who is unable to fasten a seatbelt due to a temporary or permanent disability, is being transported in a taxicab in a manner that is not in compliance with subsections (a) through (c) of this section, the parent, legal guardian, or other responsible adult traveling with the child shall be served with a citation for a violation of this section in lieu of the taxicab operator. Otherwise, if a passenger being transported in the taxicab is 14 years of age or older, the citation shall be served on the passenger in lieu of the taxicab operator. 
(f)  A person who is first charged for a violation of subsection (a) of this section and who has not purchased or otherwise acquired a child restraint system shall not be convicted if the person produces in court, within a reasonable time, proof that the person has purchased or otherwise acquired a child restraint system which meets federal motor vehicle safety standards. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, the term "child restraint system" means a specially designed seating system, including a belt-positioning seat or a booster seat, that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards set forth in 49 CFR § 571.213. 
(Code 2017, § 26-390; Ord. No. 2725, § 5, 1-24-2011) 
Secs. 23-535-23-561. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES 

Sec. 23-562. - Applicability of motor vehicle laws in general. 
    The motor vehicle laws apply to the operators of motorcycles and motorized bicycles to the extent practically applicable. 
(Code 2017, § 26-411; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-563. - Riders of motorized bicycles. 
    A person operating a motorized bicycle on the highways shall not carry any other person on the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-412; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-564. - Riders of motorcycles. 
    A person shall not operate or ride a motorcycle on the streets or highways of the city with another person on the motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person. The additional passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear of the operator. The motorcycle shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger unless the passenger is riding in a sidecar or enclosed cab. The motorcycle operator shall not carry any person nor shall any other person ride in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Code 2017, § 26-413; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-565. - Sitting position. 
    A person operating a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall ride only upon the vehicle's permanent and regular attached seat. Every person riding upon the vehicle shall be sitting astride the seat, facing forward with one leg on either side of the vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-414; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-566. - Use of traffic lanes. 
    Persons shall not operate motorcycles or motorized bicycles more than two abreast in a single lane. Except for persons operating such vehicles two abreast, a motor vehicle shall not be operated in a manner depriving a motorcycle or motorized bicycle operator of the full use of a lane. A motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall not be operated between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. The operator of a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken unless the vehicle being overtaken is a motorcycle or motorized bicycle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-415; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-567. - Headlights on. 
    A person shall not operate a 1977 or later model year motorcycle or any model year motorized bicycle upon the streets or highways of the city without displaying at least one lighted headlamp of the type described in Iowa Code § 321.409. However, this subsection is subject to the exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 26-416; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-568. - Packages. 
    The operator of a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall not carry any package, bundle, or other article which prevents the operator from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
(Code 2017, § 26-417; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-569. - Parades. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to motorcycles or motorized bicycles when used in a parade authorized by proper permit from the city council of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-418; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-570. - Bicycle safety flags required on motorized bicycles. 
    When operated on a street or highway of the city, a motorized bicycle shall have a bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet above the ground attached to the rear of the motorized bicycle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30 square inches, and be Day-Glo in color. 
(Code 2017, § 26-419; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-571. - Height of handlebars. 
    No person shall operate any motorcycle or motorized bicycle on a street or highway of the city with handlebars more than 15 inches in height above that portion of the seat occupied by the operator. 
(Code 2017, § 26-420; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 23-572. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    If a violation of any of the provisions of this article is a scheduled violation under state law, the penalty for such violation shall be the scheduled fine for such violation under state law. If a violation of a provision of this article is not a scheduled violation under state law, the penalty for such violation shall be a fine of $30.00. 
(Code 2017, § 26-421; Ord. No. 2551, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Secs. 23-573-23-592. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 23-593. - Applicability of article; obedience to traffic control signals. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to the traffic control signals described in this article, but at all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to those restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 26-446) 
Sec. 23-594. - Driver's duty to pedestrians crossing in absence of traffic control signals. 
    Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 26-447) 
Sec. 23-595. - Use of crosswalks. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. 
(c)  Where traffic control signals are in operation at any place not an intersection, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 2017, § 26-448) 
Sec. 23-596. - Use of right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 2017, § 26-449) 
Sec. 23-597. - Route when crossing roadway. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 2017, § 26-450) 
Sec. 23-598. - Yield to vehicles required when crossing at certain locations. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-451) 
Sec. 23-599. - Use of sidewalks. 
    Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(Code 2017, § 26-452) 
Sec. 23-600. - Walking on highway. 
    Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 2017, § 26-453) 
Sec. 23-601. - Solicitation of rides. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(b)  Nothing in this section or this article shall be construed so as to prevent any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway not ordinarily used for vehicular traffic for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-454) 
Sec. 23-602. - Use of white canes restricted to blind persons. 
    For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person except persons wholly or partially blind to carry or use on the streets and public places of the city any white canes or walking sticks which are white in color or white tipped with red. 
(Code 2017, § 26-455) 
Sec. 23-603. - Duties of drivers approaching blind persons. 
    Any driver of a vehicle or operator of a motor-driven vehicle who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly or partially blind carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on either side of or slightly in front of such blind person, shall immediately come to a complete stop, and take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to such person. 
(Code 2017, § 26-456) 
Sec. 23-604. - Penalty for violating provisions concerning the blind. 
    Any person who shall carry a cane or walking stick such as prescribed in section 23-602 contrary to the provisions thereof, or who shall fail to heed the approach of a person lawfully carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog, or who shall fail to immediately come to a complete stop and take such precautions against accident or injury to such person, shall be fined not less than $1.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Code 2017, § 26-457) 
Sec. 23-605. - Pedestrian use of street or highway to solicit charitable contributions, donations or business. 
    No person shall stand in any portion of a street or highway located in the city, anywhere between the curb lines (i.e., from back of curb to back of curb) or, if there are no curbs, anywhere between the lateral lines of the roadway, including medians, curbs, traffic islands, shoulders and cross-walks, for the purpose of soliciting a charitable contribution, donation or any other thing of value, or soliciting any business, from the driver or occupant of any vehicle. A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in section 1-9(a). 
(Code 2017, § 26-458; Ord. No. 2396, § 1, 10-14-2002) 
Secs. 23-606-23-628. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BICYCLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-629. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 15 inches in diameter. 
(Code 2017, § 26-481) 
Sec. 23-630. - Authority of council. 
    The council may by ordinance limit or entirely prohibit the riding or operating of bicycles upon any sidewalk within the city, and the riding or operating of a bicycle upon any sidewalk so designated shall constitute a violation of this article. The council may also prescribe by ordinance such further regulations for the use and operation of bicycles within the city as may be deemed proper from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 26-482) 
Sec. 23-631. - Report of sales by dealers. 
(a)  All dealers or persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles in the city shall file with the police operations division, on the first day of every month, a written report of all bicycles sold or transferred during the preceding month to residents of the city. 
(b)  The report required in subsection (a) of this section shall give a list of all sales made for the period, the name and address of each person to whom a bicycle was sold or transferred, and a description of the bicycle, the manufacturer's serial number, the number of the registration number plate attached thereto, if any, and the serial number of the police operations division found thereon, if any. 
(Code 2017, § 26-483) 
Sec. 23-632. - Rental of bicycles. 
(a)  No bicycle rental agency shall offer any bicycle for rent unless such bicycle has been previously registered as required by this article. 
(b)  All bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with safety equipment as required by this article and shall be kept in good and safe working order. 
(Code 2017, § 26-484) 
Secs. 23-633-23-652. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION AND LICENSES 

Sec. 23-653. - Registration required. 
    Every person living within the city who owns a bicycle shall cause such bicycle to be registered at the office of the police operations division upon blanks furnished by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-496) 
Sec. 23-654. - Issuance of registration tag. 
    The police operations division shall issue a bicycle registration certificate, tag or plate to persons applying for registration, upon payment of a fee in an amount to be established annually by resolution by the city council. Such tag or plate shall be firmly attached to such bicycle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-497; Ord. No. 2067, § 31, 10-10-1994) 
Sec. 23-655. - Display of registration tag. 
    No bicycle owned by a resident of the city shall be operated upon the streets or sidewalks of the city unless there is attached to and displayed on such bicycle a registration certificate, tag or plate as required by this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-498) 
Sec. 23-656. - Duration of registration. 
    Every bicycle registration certificate, including a license tag or plate, shall be permanent registration and shall be valid for the life of such bicycle. 
(Code 2017, § 26-499) 
Sec. 23-657. - Duplicate registration tag. 
    If a bicycle owner loses his registration tag or plate, or the tag or plate is destroyed or stolen, he shall report the loss immediately to the police operations division, which shall make the necessary record and shall thereupon issue to such owner a new registration tag or plate upon the payment by the owner of a fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 26-500) 
Sec. 23-658. - Sale or transfer of bicycle. 
(a)  If a registered bicycle is sold or transferred, the registration tag or plate shall pass to the new owner or transferee. 
(b)  The sale or transfer of such bicycle shall be reported to the police operations division by the former owner within five days after the sale or transfer, and the police operations division shall make a record of such sale or transfer showing the name of the new owner or transferee and such other information as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 2017, § 26-501) 
Sec. 23-659. - Suspension or revocation of registration. 
    The municipal court is hereby authorized to revoke or suspend, for a period not to exceed one year, any registration issued by virtue of this division, after a hearing before such court, for any violation of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-502) 
Sec. 23-660. - Removal or alteration of registration tag or serial number. 
    No person shall alter, counterfeit or take from the owner of a bicycle, without his permission, his registration plate or serial number issued in conformity with this division, or remove such registration plate or serial number from any registered bicycle, except under the direction of the police operations division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-503) 
Sec. 23-661. - Records. 
    The police operations division shall keep a record of all fees collected for the issuance of bicycle registration certificates, the date of issuance thereof, to whom issued, the number thereof, a description of the bicycle and the manufacturer's serial number on the bicycle frame. The police operations division shall also keep full and complete records of all registrations or renewals thereof issued. 
(Code 2017, § 26-504) 
Secs. 23-662-23-680. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 23-681. - Applicability of traffic regulations to persons riding bicycles. 
    A person, including a peace officer, riding a bicycle on the highway is subject to the provisions of this division and has all the rights and duties under this division applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this division which by their nature can have no application or those provisions for which specific exceptions have been set forth regarding police bicycles. 
(Code 2017, § 26-516) 
Sec. 23-682. - Pedestrians' right-of-way on sidewalks. 
(a)  Pedestrians upon sidewalks shall have the right-of-way at all times over persons using or operating bicycles upon those sidewalks whereon the operation of bicycles is not prohibited. 
(b)  Any person using or operating a bicycle upon any sidewalk shall turn off such sidewalk at all times when meeting or passing pedestrians, and shall pass such pedestrians with extreme caution and on the street side where possible. 
(Code 2017, § 26-517) 
Sec. 23-683. - Reckless operation. 
    No bicycle shall be operated on the streets, sidewalks or parkways in the city in a reckless, careless or negligent manner, or in such a manner as to endanger or interfere with lawful traffic or the use of the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-518) 
Sec. 23-684. - Riding abreast; position when riding on street. 
    Persons using or operating bicycles upon the streets of the city shall not ride more than two abreast, and upon any sidewalk or alley bicyclists shall ride only in single file. Bicyclists shall also operate and travel with their bicycles as near to the right-hand curb as possible upon any street in the city, and, if riding two abreast, they shall, upon the sound of an automobile horn from a vehicle to their rear, go into single file until the vehicle has passed them. 
(Code 2017, § 26-519) 
Sec. 23-685. - Driver to use seat; carrying passengers. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle on the street or highway shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle. 
(b)  A person shall not use a bicycle on the highway to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for which the bicycle is designed and equipped. 
(Code 2017, § 26-520) 
Sec. 23-686. - Following fire trucks. 
    No person using or operating a bicycle within the city shall follow fire trucks or other fire equipment at any time. 
(Code 2017, § 26-521) 
Sec. 23-687. - Towing. 
    No person using or operating a bicycle shall tow or be towed by any other vehicle operating upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-522) 
Sec. 23-688. - Carrying packages. 
    No person operating a bicycle within the city limits shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars. 
(Code 2017, § 26-523) 
Sec. 23-689. - Riding on sidewalks near schools. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall use or operate any bicycle upon the sidewalks located upon or adjoining any school premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-524) 
Sec. 23-690. - Riding on sidewalk prohibited in specified locations. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to use or operate any bicycle upon the sidewalks located on the following streets in the city: 
(1)  Second Street from Clay Street to State Street. 
(2)  Third Street from Clay Street to State Street. 
(3)  Fourth Street from Washington Street to State Street. 
(4)  Fifth Street from Washington Street to State Street. 
(5)  23rd Street from College Street to Hudson Road. 
(6)  College Street from 20th Street to University Avenue. 
(7)  Main Street from Seventh Street to the south side of West First Street. 
(8)  State Street from Sixth Street to First Street. 
(9)  Washington Street from Sixth Street to First Street. 
(Code 2017, § 26-525) 
Sec. 23-691. - Parking on sidewalk. 
    No bicycle shall be parked or placed upon any sidewalk or street within the city except in such places as have been set off as parking spaces under authority of the police operations division or in racks placed under the authority of the police operations division. 
(Code 2017, § 26-526) 
Secs. 23-692-23-710. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 23-711. - Lights and reflectors. 
(a)  All bicycles used within the city limits shall be equipped with a stationary lamp on the front. Such lamp shall emit a white light and shall be used during the period from one-half hour after sundown to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when it is not sufficiently light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead when operated on the streets, sidewalks or parkways within the city. Such light shall be visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to the front. 
(b)  All bicycles shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear; except that a red reflector meeting the requirements of the laws of the state may be used in lieu of a rear light. Such reflector shall not be less than 11/2 inches in diameter. 
(Code 2017, § 26-536) 
Sec. 23-712. - Brakes. 
    All bicycles operated within the city limits shall be equipped with brakes adequate to stop such bicycle within reasonable limits. 
(Code 2017, § 26-537) 
Sec. 23-713. - Sirens and whistles. 
    No bicycle within the city shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon such bicycle any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden by peace officers in the line of duty. 
(Code 2017, § 26-538) 
Secs. 23-714-23-739. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES 

Sec. 23-740. - Obedience required. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 26-561) 
Sec. 23-741. - Conformance with state standards. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the department of transportation. 
(Code 2017, § 26-562) 
Sec. 23-742. - Uniformity. 
    All signs and signals required by this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. 
(Code 2017, § 26-563) 
Sec. 23-743. - Prerequisites for enforcement of provisions requiring signs. 
    No provision of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Code 2017, § 26-564) 
Sec. 23-744. - Display of unauthorized signs and devices. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official parking sign, curb or other marking, traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the traffic operations division is hereby empowered to remove such sign, signal or marking or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 2017, § 26-565; Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-745. - Interference with devices. 
    A person who willfully and intentionally, without lawful authority, attempts to or in fact alters, defaces, injures, knocks down or removes an official traffic control device, an authorized warning sign or signal or barricade, whether temporary or permanent, a railroad sign or signal, or an inscription, shield or insignia on any such device, sign, signal or barricade, or any other part thereof, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a serious misdemeanor and shall be required to make restitution to the affected jurisdiction. 
(Code 2017, § 26-566; Ord. No. 1943, § 3, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 23-746. - Unlawful possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any official traffic control device, except by legal right or authority. 
(Code 2017, § 26-567) 
Sec. 23-747. - Traffic control signal legend. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "stop at the official traffic control signal" means stopping at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection. 
(b)  Official traffic control signals consisting of colored lights or colored lighted arrows shall regulate vehicle and pedestrian traffic in the following manner: 
(1)  A "steady circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop. Vehicular traffic shall remain standing until a signal to proceed is shown or vehicular traffic, unless prohibited by a sign, may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn from the right lane of traffic or another lane designated for right turns, or a left turn from a one-way street to a one-way street from the left lane of traffic or another lane designated for left turns. Turns made under this subsection shall be made in a manner that does not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection. Pedestrian traffic facing a steady circular red light shall not enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can safely cross the roadway without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(2)  A "steady circular yellow" or "steady yellow arrow" light means vehicular traffic is warned that the related green movement is being terminated and vehicular traffic shall no longer proceed into the intersection and shall stop. If the stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. Pedestrian traffic is warned that there is insufficient time to cross the intersection and any pedestrian starting to cross the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  A "steady circular green" light means vehicular traffic may proceed straight, turn right or turn left through the intersection unless otherwise specifically prohibited. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicular and pedestrian traffic lawfully within the intersection. 
(4)  A "steady green arrow" light shown alone or with another official traffic control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection and proceed in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection. 
(5)  A "flashing circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop and after stopping may proceed cautiously through the intersection yielding to all vehicles not required to stop or yield which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard, but then may proceed. 
(6)  A "flashing yellow" light means vehicular traffic shall proceed through the intersection or past such signal with caution. 
(7)  A "flashing yellow arrow" light shown alone or with another official traffic control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection and proceed only in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection and any vehicle on the opposing approach which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving within the intersection. 
(8)  A "don't walk" or "steady upraised hand" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal, and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a safety zone. 
(9)  A "flashing upraised hand" or "upraised hand with countdown" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal, and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a safety zone. The "upraised hand with countdown" light is a pedestrian signal that also provides the time remaining for the pedestrian to complete the crossing. 
(10)  A "walk" or "walking person" light is a pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal may proceed to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal and shall be given the right-of-way by drivers of all vehicles. 
(Code 2017, § 26-568) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Authority to order connection with underground utilities. 
(a)  Authority of council. The council may, by resolution adopted by majority vote of the council, direct and order all owners of adjacent property fronting upon any street or other portion of the right-of-way whereon are located underground gas, water, heating, sewer or electrical connections to make the connections from such facilities to the curb line in front of the adjacent property, and cause such connections to be made before the commencement of the permanent improvement of the street whereon such pipes or conduits are located, and the resolution therefor shall state the time in which the connections shall be made. 
(b)  Publication of resolution. Resolutions adopted as authorized in subsection (a) of this section shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of the city. The time fixed for the making of any such connections shall commence to run from the date of the first publication. 
(c)  Duty to install gas connection on request of property owner. It shall be the duty of the city utilities, to whom application is made by the property owner for a connection with a gas main immediately preceding the improvement of a street, to install the connection as soon as practicable. 
(d)  Duty to install electrical connection on request of property owner. It shall be the duty of the city, to whom application is made through the director of utilities by the property owner for a connection with an electric conduit immediately preceding the improvement of a street, to install the connection as soon as practicable. 
(e)  Connection by city. Whenever connections are ordered and the person owning the real estate fails to make the connections within the time fixed by the council, the council shall cause such connections to be made, and shall assess against the property in front of which such connections are made the cost and expense thereof. 
(f)  Report of costs when connection made by city. Whenever the council shall cause a connection to be made, the person having charge of the making of the connection shall make a return of the actual cost and expense thereof to the council at its first regular meeting thereafter, giving a detailed statement and the description of the various pieces of property and the names of the owners of the property, and the amount of cost and expense for making the connections. 
(g)  Assessment of costs when connection made by city. 
(1)  Upon the making of the return required in subsection (f) of this section, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to give notice to all whom it may concern, by publication in the official newspapers of the city, that the cost and expense will be assessed against the property in front of which such connections have been made by the city, and that the matter will be acted upon at the first regular meeting of the council thereafter, and that any objections thereto will be heard at the council meeting. 
(2)  After hearing objections, if there be any made, and making such alteration in the assessment as the council may deem just, the council shall make the assessment. It shall be the duty of the person owning the property so assessed to pay the assessment within 30 days after levy of the assessment. At the expiration of the 30 days, the city clerk shall report those having failed to pay, and shall certify the assessment, if there are any delinquent thereon, to the county auditor, to be collected and paid over to the county treasurer in the same manner as other taxes. 
(Code 2017, § 27-1; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable operator shall be as defined in Iowa Code § 477A.1(2). 
    Cable service shall be as defined in Iowa Code § 477A.1(3). 
    Public right-of-way shall be as defined in Iowa Code § 480A.2(3). 
    Public utility shall be as defined in Iowa Code § 480A.2(4). 
    Video service shall be as defined in Iowa Code § 477A.1(16). 
(Code 2017, § 27-2; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-3. - Right to control use of public right-of-way. 
    The city hereby declares its right to control use of the public right-of-way in the city, and to exclude private use of such public right-of-way in the city by persons or entities that are not public utilities as defined in Iowa Code ch. 480A, or by persons or entities that are not cable operators or video service providers as defined in Iowa Code ch. 477A. 
(Code 2017, § 27-3; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-4. - Right to charge public utilities, cable operators and video service providers for use of public right-of-way. 
    The city hereby reserves the right granted to the city under Iowa Code § 480A.1 to charge public utilities for the location and operation of public utility facilities within the public right-of-way in the city. The city further reserves the right granted to the city under Iowa Code ch. 477A to charge cable operators and video service providers for the location and operation of their facilities within the public right-of-way on an open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. 
(Code 2017, § 27-4; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-5. - Installation of underground electrical, telephonic and other telecommunications systems, including cable systems, video systems, internet or other communications systems. 
(a)  Any public utility company, cable operator or video service provider that furnishes or provides telephone, cable service, video service, internet, or any other telecommunications services to the general public in the city, and that installs or seeks to install underground pipes, conduits, cables or other underground lines for the carrying of such services anywhere in the public right-of-way in the city, shall bury such pipes, conduits, cables or other underground lines to a minimum depth of 18 inches below grade level within the public right-of-way. Nothing contained in this section shall override any provision of article III of chapter 7, electrical regulations, requiring underground electrical lines and conduits to be buried to a depth in excess of 18 inches within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  If any underground pipes, conduits, cables or other underground lines carrying public utilities services or other services described in subsection (a) of this section are not buried to a minimum depth of 18 inches below grade level within the public right-of-way in the city, and such lines are severed, damaged or otherwise disturbed by the city or the city utilities or their respective employees, agents or contractors, while such persons are doing excavation or other work to a depth of less than 18 inches below grade within the public right-of-way in the city, then neither the city, the city utilities, nor their respective employees, agents or contractors shall have any liability to the public utility company, telecommunications, cable service operator or video service provider for any such damage. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall grant any private person, firm or entity the right to install natural gas, water, electricity, telephone, cable service, video service, internet, or any other telecommunications facilities, or any other facilities of any kind within the public right-of-way in the city for private purposes, all such private use of the public right-of-way in the city being strictly prohibited, unless otherwise specifically authorized by state law. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a municipal infraction punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2017, § 27-5; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-6. - Relocation of utility facilities underground. 
(a)  Assessment of utilities. 
(1)  Upon adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and periodically thereafter, but at intervals of not more than four years, the director of public works of the city, in consultation with the general manager of the city utilities, shall assess the condition of aboveground electric, telephone, cable or video systems, internet or other telecommunications utilities facilities, including poles, guy wires, lines, and other aboveground infrastructure within the city. 
(2)  At intervals of not more than four years from and after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the general manager of the city utilities shall submit a proposed long-range, underground and aboveground master plan or plans of the city utilities infrastructure to the director of public works of the city. Such plan or plans shall designate the locations within the city where then-existing and future planned city utilities infrastructure should be placed underground, or should remain or be placed overhead. Such plan or plans shall be based upon factors such as the age, size, type and condition of the then-existing and future planned utilities infrastructure; city and/or city utilities plans to reconstruct streets, sidewalks, sanitary and storm sewer facilities, and other public infrastructure along city streets; the age, size and condition of trees along the public right-of-way; whether the public right-of-way lies within the 500-year flood level; the available width of public right-of-way for installation and maintenance of city utilities lines and service boxes; appropriateness of placement, installation and maintenance of high-voltage and/or high-amperage electric lines and related facilities; the availability of federal or state disaster-related grants or funds to replace aboveground utilities infrastructure that may be conditioned upon such replacement infrastructure being placed either aboveground or underground; and other relevant factors, including, without limitation, matters relating to public safety, health, welfare, convenience, aesthetics, economy, energy conservation, and availability of services. 
(3)  After submission of such plan, consultation with the general manager of the city utilities regarding such plan, and such investigation as shall be determined appropriate by the director of public works of the city, said long-range plan or plans may be approved by the director of public works of the city, in whole or in part, or may be modified in whole or in part, as deemed appropriate by such directors. After such long-range plan or plans have been reviewed, approved, and/or modified, in whole or in part, such plan or plans shall serve as the guide for installation of city utility facilities and infrastructure either aboveground, or underground, as the case may be, within the city, for the subsequent four-year period. 
(b)  When the director of public works of the city reasonably determine that the aboveground utilities facilities in a particular block or blocks of the city should be relocated underground, by reason of the age and condition of the aboveground utilities infrastructure, city and/or city utility plans to reconstruct streets, sanitary and storm sewer facilities and other public infrastructure along streets, the age, size and condition of trees along the public right-of-way, or other relevant factors, including without limitation public safety, health, welfare, convenience, aesthetics, economy, energy conservation, and availability of services, the director of public works shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified mail to each public utility whose services make use of any of the aboveground utilities infrastructure in that particular block or blocks of the city. Such notice shall be given at least 180 days prior to the date work installing such utilities facilities underground shall commence. The notice shall include an order that the identified facilities shall be removed from poles and placed underground as provided in this chapter. The notice shall provide a date certain by which time the facilities must be placed underground. The director of public works shall coordinate a meeting among all affected public utilities, to plan for the work necessary to install all such utilities facilities underground. To the maximum extent practicable, the city shall endeavor to cause all of such utilities providers to install their utilities facilities underground in a common trench, and at the same time, in order to minimize disruption in the public right-of-way, and to cause said utilities facilities to be installed underground in the most economically feasible manner for both the city and for all such public utility providers. Any facility not placed underground in a common trench must nonetheless be placed underground in a location consistent with city allocation of uses of the right-of-way as approved by the director of public works. In directing placement of facilities underground, the director may exempt facilities or portions of facilities that cannot be undergrounded safely or without adversely affecting the reliability or functionality of such facilities or portions of such facilities. 
(c)  The city director shall ensure that the decision to relocate the utility facilities underground in such area and any exemptions granted, are made in an open, comparable, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral basis among the public utility providers. 
(d)  If any utility provider objects to the determination of the city to cause said utilities' facilities to be installed underground, such utility provider shall file a written notice of appeal with the city council, by filing the notice of appeal with the city clerk, within 90 days of the date the notice to install the facilities underground is mailed to such utility provider. The city council, or the administration committee of the city council, as the case may be, shall hold a hearing on the petitioner's appeal within 60 days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The petitioner may present written and oral evidence at the hearing in support of its appeal, and may be represented by counsel at its own expense. The city director of public works along with any other appropriate witnesses shall appear at the hearing, and shall present written and oral evidence in support of the notice to require the utilities' facilities to be installed underground, and shall be represented by the city attorney. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council, or the administration committee of the city council, as the case may be, shall close the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 20 days of the date of closing of the hearing on the appeal. 
(e)  In considering the appeal, the city council or administration committee, as the case may be, shall determine whether the decision of the director of public works complies with the purposes stated in this chapter, and if there is a reasonable factual basis for the determination of said official that the public utilities facilities in the area in question should, in the interests of public safety, health, welfare, convenience, aesthetics, economy, energy conservation, reliability of services and other relevant factors, be relocated underground; and whether the decision of said official regarding the relocation of the utilities facilities underground has been exercised in an open, comparable, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral basis among all such public utility providers. 
(Code 2017, § 27-6; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010; Ord. No. 2791, § 1, 4-22-2013; Ord. No. 2941, § 8, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 24-7. - Cooperation and coordination. 
    To the maximum practicable extent, the relocation of aboveground public utilities facilities underground shall be accomplished through cooperative efforts between the city and all public utility providers, and shall be coordinated between the city and the various utilities providers in a manner that limits the cost and expense of relocation of the public utilities facilities to the city and the public utility providers. 
(Code 2017, § 27-7; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-8. - Effect of franchises. 
    If any utility provider has a written franchise from the city, the rights and privileges granted under such franchise are governed by and subject to this chapter. 
(Code 2017, § 27-8; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-9. - Implementation of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be implemented in a manner which ensures that all public utility providers who are providing utilities services in the area of the city in which utilities facilities are to be located underground, shall be treated in a fair, competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner, and in compliance with federal law, including, but not limited to, section 253 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and state law, including, but not limited to, Iowa Code § 364.2 and Iowa Code chs. 477, 477A, 478, and 480A. 
(Code 2017, § 27-9; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-13-2010) 
Secs. 24-10-24-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contributor means any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
    Sewage disposal plant means any and all units of the municipal disposal plant owned and operated by the city, including any and all intercepting and outlet sewers delivering or discharging sewage to or from the plant. 
    Sewer rental means any and all rates, charges, fees or rentals levied against and payable by contributors. 
    Water reclamation manager means the person delegated with the responsibility of the management and operation of the sewage disposal plant subject to such rules and regulations as the council may from time to time by resolution prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-26, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-38. - Water reclamation division. 
    The water reclamation division of the department of public works is hereby created. The water reclamation division shall be under the control of the water reclamation manager, who shall be appointed by and be directly responsible to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-27, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 2943, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 24-39. - Supervision of sewage disposal plant. 
    The water reclamation manager shall have complete charge of the operation of the sewage disposal plant. The water reclamation manager shall employ and have direct charge of all employees of the sewage disposal plant. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-28, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-40. - Sewage rental fund. 
    All moneys received by the controller/city treasurer from any source on account of the sewage disposal plant shall be kept in a separate and distinct fund, to be known as the "Sewer Rental Fund," and shall be paid out by him. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-29, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-41. - General rental fees. 
(a)  Monthly rental fee: determination. 
(1)  Subject to the exceptions hereinafter provided, each metered dwelling which uses city water, shall pay to the city a monthly sewer rental fee, the same to be determined by the amount of city water used, as follows: For up to and including the first 200 cubic feet of water used, hereinafter referred to as the "base rate," the monthly sewer rental fee shall be as shown in the column of the chart set forth below, entitled, "Base Rate," commencing on the date set forth in the corresponding row of the column entitled, "Date of Rate Change." 
(2)  For water uses over 200 cubic feet, hereinafter referred to as the "incremental rate," the monthly sewer rental fee shall be as shown in the column of the chart set forth below, entitled, "Incremental Rate," commencing on the date set forth in the corresponding row of the column entitled, "Date of Rate Change." 
CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
SEWER RENTAL FEE SCHEDULE 
Date of 
Rate 
Change Base Rate Incremental 
Rate July 1, 2018 $18.52 per 200 cubic feet of water used $3.32 per 100 cubic feet of water used July 1, 2019 $19.45 per 200 cubic feet of water used $3.49 per 100 cubic feet of water used July 1, 2020 $20.42 per 200 cubic feet of water used $3.66 per 100 cubic feet of water used July 1, 2021 $21.44 per 200 cubic feet of water used $3.84 per 100 cubic feet of water used  
(b)  Maximum fees for residential use. Residential sewer rental fees during the months of May through November shall not exceed the average amount charged for usage during the previous January through March period. 
(c)  Reduction for low-income households. Each payer of the monthly sewer rental fee who meets the low-income requirement, as set by the U.S. Government, contained in the Section 8 Housing Assistance Program of the city, may apply annually to the director of public works for, and be granted, a $3.00 per month reduction in the monthly sewer rental fee for the first 200 cubic feet of water used. 
(d)  Users without city water service. Each user of city sanitary sewer which does not have water provided and metered by the city utilities shall be charged a monthly sewer rental fee which is two times the base rate which is provided for in subsection (a) of this section. That user may, however, through certified metering of well water for residential use or provision of receipts from a recognized adjoining public water jurisdiction, provide to the director of community development documentation of actual water usage. If water usage can be verified, that user will be charged the monthly sewer rental fee as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(e)  Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks utilizing a central water metering system shall be charged the same monthly sewer rental fees for each dwelling unit connected to the public sewage disposal system as are provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Determination of multiple dwelling rental fees. Multiple dwellings using a single water meter shall pay at the same rates listed in subsection (a) of this section, with the usage for each individual dwelling unit determined by dividing the amount of water metered by the number of dwelling units, regardless of occupancy of said units. 
(g)  Determination of commercial, industrial rental fees. Commercial and industrial sewer rental fees shall be based on actual water usage, metered or unmetered, including water added to the sewage disposal system by the commercial or industrial users, at the same rates described in subsection (a) of this section. However, the director of community development may establish reduced sewer rental fees, to be reviewed on an annual basis, for commercial and industrial users which have unique discharges requiring very little actual treatment, such as the discharge of cooling water or boiler blowdown. 
(h)  Residential monthly fee for certain commercial, industrial users. Commercial and industrial users that use higher volumes of water in the months May through November each year exclusively for purposes such as watering lawns, and can demonstrate to the director of public works that said water does not enter the sanitary sewer system may have their sewer bills adjusted such that sewer user fees billed for usage May through November each year will not exceed the average bills for usage in the months December through April each year. 
(i)  Industrial surcharge. An industrial user, as defined in article II, division 2 of this chapter, shall be surcharged at the rate of $0.10 for each pound of both biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids, as defined in article II, division 2 of this chapter, for all discharges to the sanitary sewer system which exceed a concentration of 300 milligrams per liter. 
(j)  Inclusion of state sales tax. State sales tax is computed and included in the rates included in this section. 
(k)  Billing adjustments. Billing adjustments may be made for any residential, commercial or industrial users that can demonstrate to the director of public works that water used does not enter the sanitary sewer system. 
(l)  Payment. All fees required to be paid by this section shall be paid at the same time the payment for city water service is made or on the first day of the month for those users of sewer service who do not use city water service. All required payments are to be made at the office of the municipal utilities. 
(m)  Sanitary sewer surcharge for discharge of stormwater to city sanitary sewer system. The owner of any property in the city who fails to comply with the provisions of section 7-201 or 7-202, relating to discharge of stormwater or groundwater into the city sanitary sewer system, shall be assessed a surcharge fee, to be added to the property owner's city sewer bill, in the amount of $100.00 per month, as provided in section 7-203. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-30, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 2943, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 24-42. - Failure to pay rental fees; authority to terminate service. 
(a)  Where a consumer is a contributor of city water, or is a user of city sanitary sewer service who does not use city water service, the sewer rentals, rates or charges shall be subject to the following rules of delinquency and suspension of service: 
(1)  Whenever any of the rules and regulations of this article are violated, the sewer service shall be cut off and shall not be turned on again except by order of the council and water reclamation manager and upon payment of the expense of shutting it off and turning it on, and on such other terms as the council may determine upon and a satisfactory understanding with the account holder that no further complaint shall arise. Such sewer service shall not be discontinued unless prior written notice is sent to the account holder by ordinary mail, informing the account holder of the nature of the delinquency and affording the account holder the opportunity for a hearing prior to discontinuance of service. If the account holder is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. 
(2)  In case of violation of this article, the council shall have the right to declare any payment made for the sewer service by the person committing such violation to be forfeited, and the service shall thereupon be forfeited. 
(b)  Liens. 
(1)  In addition to the rules of delinquency and suspension of service mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall have a lien upon the property served by such sanitary utility for all delinquent rate or rental payments 
(2)  A lien shall not be placed upon a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home served by any of the services described in this article if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is owned by a tenant of and is located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the account holder. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(2) of this section, except for mobile home parks or manufactured home communities where the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is responsible for paying the rates or charges for services described in this article, a lien shall not be filed against the land if the premises receiving any of the services described in this article are located on leased land. If the premises are located on leased land, a lien may be filed against the premises only. For the purposes of this article, the term "premises" includes a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home as defined in Iowa Code § 435.1. 
(4)  Prior to written notice of intent to certify, a lien shall be given to the account holder of the delinquent account at least 30 days prior to certification. If the account holder is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to the certification of the lien to the county treasurer. After compliance with the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall certify for taxation purposes and the establishing of the property lien to the county treasurer all delinquent rent, rate or rental payments, together with an administrative expense of $5.00. The lien shall not be certified to the county treasurer for a delinquent charge of less than $5.00. For the purpose of the certification and for no other purpose whatsoever, rent, rate or rental payments shall be designated as delinquent when the payments are shown and appear on the books carrying rent, rate or rental payments to have been unpaid for a period of six months following their due date. 
(c)  Where the contributor is an operator of a private water supply, failure to pay rentals shall be subject to similar rules as to delinquency and suspension of service, property lien, certification of delinquency and definition of delinquency as set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 27-31, 6-4-2018) 
Secs. 24-43-24-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HARMFUL WASTES 

Sec. 24-73. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or if so designated by EPA, the state department of natural resources. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user. A person is a duly authorized representative only if: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation. The responsible corporate officer could be: 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation. 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to ensure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanisms requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
c.  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship. The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(2)  The written authorization is submitted to the superintendent. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    City means the city of Cedar Falls, Iowa or the city council of Cedar Falls, Iowa. 
    Composite sample means a combination of individual samples obtained at regular intervals over a specified time period. The volume of each individual sample may be either proportional to the flow rate during the sampling period (flow proportional composite) or constant and collected at equal time intervals during the composite period (time composite). 
    Control authority means the city of Cedar Falls, Iowa or the superintendent of the POTW acting in an official capacity for the city. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum means the maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived from all the measurements taken that day. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Iowa. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Grab sample means a representative sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants to the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c), (d)). 
    Industrial user or user means a source of indirect discharge. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Monthly average means the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected over a period of 30 consecutive days. 
    National pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard or standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which applies to industrial users. The term "national pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard" or "standard" includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. (Note section 22-81). 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b)) and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(c)) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
    Pass through means an industrial user discharge that exits the POTW to the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, causes a violation of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration or activity in moles per liter. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by section 24-86. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this division, the term "POTW" also includes any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system that: 
(1)  Is subject to a categorical standard, unless exempted as provided by 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) and meeting conditions of 40 CFR 403.8(f) and 403.12(e), (g), (i), (q); 
(2)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater per day to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(3)  Contributes a process wastewater that makes up five percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
(4)  Is designated as such by the superintendent on the basis that it has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's operation or to violate a pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance means a violation of applicable pretreatment standards by an industrial user that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1). 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
    State means the State of Iowa, or Iowa's Environmental Regulatory Agency. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the individual designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division, or his duly city authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
    User means any source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(Code 2017, § 27-51; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-74. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  CFR-Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD-Chemical Oxygen demand. 
(4)  EPA-Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  IDNR-Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or the state environmental regulatory agency. 
(6)  l-Liter. 
(7)  mg-Milligrams. 
(8)  mg/L-Milligrams per liter. 
(9)  NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(10)  POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works. 
(11)  SIC-Standard Industrial Classification. 
(12)  SWDA-Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(13)  USC-United States Code. 
(14)  TSS-Total suspended solids. 
(Code 2017, § 27-52; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-75. - Criminal and civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both for each offense. This is in addition to any civil fines assessed. 
(b)  Any industrial user found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, pretreatment standard or requirement shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both for each offense. This is in addition to civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 per day which may be assessed. 
(c)  Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations and agreements issued hereunder. 
(Code 2017, § 27-53; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-76. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's POTW contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the court of this county. 
(Code 2017, § 27-54; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-77. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the city finds that any person has violated or is violating this division, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. The person shall promptly take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct any adverse impact the violation had or continues to have on the POTW and if the violation has not been corrected within 15 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the superintendent by the user within 30 days of the initial violation. 
(b)  Industrial users shall notify the superintendent in advance of any imminent and foreseeable occurrences that may cause an industrial waste discharge permit to be violated. 
(c)  The city shall annually publish in the largest local newspaper a list of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For purposes of this provision, a violation is considered to be an act of significant noncompliance if it meets any of the criteria as defined in section 24-73 or 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A), (B), (C). 
(Code 2017, § 27-55; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-78. - Authority to suspend treatment service or wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the superintendent, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that: 
(1)  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment; or 
(2)  Causes or threatens to cause interference to the POTW; or 
(3)  Causes or threatens to cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. 
(1)  In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any persons. 
(2)  The superintendent shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
(c)  A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the superintendent within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 2017, § 27-56; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-79. - Supervision of treatment works. 
    The POTW of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the city, and the city council shall employ a full-time superintendent of the water reclamation plant, and such other employees as may be necessary and proper for the operation of the POTW and for the conduct of the business incident to the operation thereof. 
(Code 2017, § 27-57; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-80. - Prerequisites for new sewer connections. 
    Before a permit for a new cross or lateral sewer connection to a main sewer shall be granted, the applicant shall have complied with the terms and conditions of this division. Such terms and conditions may include, but not be limited to, a determination by the superintendent whether or not the applicant's proposed wastes will be compatible with the POTW. Additional terms and conditions may include, engineering design, construction standards, requirements for inspection of construction of the applicant's sewer, and the setting of equitable fees to be paid for the right to connect to the city's main sewer and all sewerage facilities to which the sewer will be contributory. 
(Code 2017, § 27-58; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-81. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or cause interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. Persons may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reasons of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. In no case pollutants with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or pollutants which cause any explosimeter readings in exceedance of ten percent of the lower explosive limit at any point within the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, hydrides, and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, or higher than 10.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317(a)). 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity or cause interference in the POTW, but in no case wastewater with heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 27 degrees Celsius (80 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. That the industry shall coordinate with the POTW for the discharge of any slug load which may have the potential to cause interference with the POTW. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any waste motor oils, hydraulic fluids or other petroleum based waste products. 
(13)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(b)  When the superintendent determines that a person is contributing to the POTW any of the substances enumerated above in this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Advise the person of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such person to correct the interference with the POTW. 
All violations of these prohibitions will subject the person to an enforcement action and the decision of the superintendent not to exercise this discretionary option shall not limit the city's authority to undertake enforcement. 
(Code 2017, § 27-59; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-82. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The federal categorical pretreatment standards located in 40 CFR 405-471 are hereby incorporated into this division. The federal categorical pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Code 2017, § 27-60; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-83. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. The term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of pollutant making it less toxic, or alteration of the nature of the pollutant to a harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2), "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Code 2017, § 27-61; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-84. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  The total wastewater discharge of all industrial users, in combination with domestic users, shall not contain pollutants in such mass and/or concentration which shall cause the POTW to be in violation of the intent of the pretreatment program. Such limits shall be established by the superintendent and allocated to various dischargers through the permit process. 
(b)  State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 27-62; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-85. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary. 
(Code 2017, § 27-63; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-86. - Dilution of discharge. 
    Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 2017, § 27-64; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-87. - Accidental and slug discharges. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or slug discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental or slug discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or industrial user's own cost and expense. For purposes of this subsection, the term "slug discharge" means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge. 
(b)  A detailed spill and/or slug prevention and control plan showing facilities and/or operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted, if required by the superintendent, before construction of the facility or implementation of the operating procedures. The superintendent may require this plan to contain, a description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; a description of stored chemicals; notification procedures; employee training requirements; and anything else deemed appropriate by the superintendent. 
(c)  The superintendent shall be notified immediately of an accidental or slug discharge to the POTW. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the telephone number to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer from such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(Code 2017, § 27-65; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-88. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. Interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, and shall be in continuous efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 2017, § 27-66; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-89. - Determination of sewage volume. 
    The amount of sewage discharged into a city sewer by any user shall be determined by and held to be the amount of water used by it as shown by the meter readings of the water works of the city or the meter readings for the water from a private water supply. If a user shall use water which, in whole or in part comes from a private water supply, the user shall meter the water coming from a private water supply at his own expense when required by the superintendent of the POTW and shall pay the same fees and charges as allowed in section 24-90. 
(Code 2017, § 27-67; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-90. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city shall charge a fee to industrial users discharging certain restricted wastes. These fees shall be separate from the sewer use fees established in section 24-41. 
(1)  The city shall periodically revise these fees and may add or delete certain components on the list of restricted wastes. The schedule of annual fees for the restricted wastes is as follows: 
TABLE 1 
Component Cost/Pound Charge Arsenic $1,200.00 $30.00 Zinc $1,200.00 $30.00 Cadmium $12,000.00 $60.00 Chromium $1,200.00 $30.00 Mercury $12,000.00 $60.00 Silver $1,200.00 $30.00 Copper $1,200.00 $30.00 Lead $1,200.00 $30.00 Nickel $1,200.00 $30.00 Cyanide $1,200.00 $30.00  
(2)  The industrial user shall request permission from the city, as required by section 24-92, to discharge any of the wastes listed in table 1. The city shall then determine, based on the estimated maximum quantity of discharge, the monthly cost to the industrial user associated with the discharge of said waste. The wastewater discharge permit shall include the quantity and types of pollutants which may be discharged. 
a.  The superintendent has the right and authority to allocate a quantity of all restricted waste components to industrial users in a manner which is in the best interests of the city. It is the intent of the city to allocate the restricted wastes in a manner which will provide a reserve for future industries and expansion of existing industries. 
b.  No single industrial user shall be allocated any more than two times their present need (at the time of permit application) or any more than 50 percent of the allotment currently available for that pollutant, whichever is less. 
(3)  The monthly charge shall be fixed based upon the industrial user's estimated maximum quantity of discharge; not the industrial user's actual quantity of discharge. 
(4)  The industrial user shall agree to a maximum quantity of discharge for any and all restricted wastes which will be discharged. Any discharge in excess of the industrial user's allotment is not acceptable and the industrial user shall take immediate steps to eliminate future violations. In no case shall the industrial user exceed federal categorical pretreatment standards. See section 24-82. 
(b)  A surveillance monitoring fee of $350.00 per installation of equipment shall be assessed against each industrial user for which the city (rather than the user) installs surveillance monitoring equipment for the purpose of conducting wastewater sampling. 
(c)  Fees for investigating accidental discharges and permit violations may be imposed and shall be based on the time expended at $30.00 per hour. 
(d)  A wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be assessed each request for a wastewater discharge permit in the amount of $400.00. Wastewater discharge permit applications for permit renewals shall be assessed for each request in the amount of $400.00. An additional fee shall be assessed in the amount of $100.00 for past due applications as required by this division. 
(e)  The city and the user will enter into an agreement (wastewater discharge permit) as described hereinafter. The industrial user may be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day for failure to meet the discharge requirements stated in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(f)  A decision of the superintendent in regard to a determination that a violation of this division has occurred and is subject to a civil penalty, may be appealed to the city council, in writing, upon payment of a filing fee of $100.00 which shall become the property of the city. The city council shall, after a public hearing on the matter, have the authority to uphold, revise, or overrule the superintendent's decision. Appeals must be made in writing within 60 days of notification of the final decision of the superintendent. 
(Code 2017, § 27-68; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-91. - Regulation of wastewater discharges. 
    No direct or indirect nondomestic contributor shall discharge or convey, or permit or allow to be discharged or conveyed, any wastewater to the POTW without a city wastewater discharge permit except as authorized under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2017, § 27-69; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-92. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Notification. Upon request by the superintendent, industrial users shall provide information deemed necessary by the superintendent to determine if an industrial wastewater discharge permit is required. The superintendent shall be given notice prior to making any changes in an industrial user's operations that may change its wastewater discharge characteristics. 
(b)  General permits. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Each individual building sewer of a significant industrial user must have a wastewater discharge permit. Proposed new industrial users must obtain such permit prior to connecting or contributing to the POTW. 
(c)  Permit application. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the superintendent an application, in the form prescribed by the superintendent, and accompanied by the appropriate fee. Proposed new industrial users shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and term appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location (if different from the address), and the authorized representative; 
(2)  Primary SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classifications Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  a.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this division 2 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
b.  Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the EPA; 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily and estimated peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
(6)  Show all sewers, sewer connections, testing places and provide site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans when available. 
(7)  General description of activities which may be discharged to POTW; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal or categorical pretreatment standards, and a statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule for categorical pretreatment standards shall not be later than the compliance date established for applicable pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); 
b.  The schedule shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval; 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent or his designee in cluding, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increments of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than six months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent or his designee; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, and amount; 
(11)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(12)  Any other information as may be deemed by the superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(d)  Permit issuance. The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(e)  Permit modifications relative to categorical standards. As soon as possible, preferably within 90 days, after the promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of the industrial users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where an industrial user, subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection (c) of this section, the industrial user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard. 
(f)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, industrial user charges, and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following as determined by the superintendent: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (See section 24-94.); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the superintendent of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of accidental discharges as per section 24-87; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this division. 
(g)  Permit duration. Permits shall be renewable as directed by the superintendent for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. Permits may be issued to expire on a specific date. The industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's permit. In the event that an application for permit reissuance was submitted and a new permit has not been issued at the time the existing permit expires, the existing permit expiration date will automatically extend until a new permit is issued. 
(h)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(i)  Permit modification or revocation. Permits may be modified, revoked and reissued, or terminated for good causes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  Material or substantial alterations or additions to the user's operation are made which are not covered in the effective permit; 
(3)  Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(4)  A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(5)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
(6)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  It is found that the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit was obtained by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; 
(8)  Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(9)  Upon request of the permittee (industrial user), provided such request does not create a violation of any existing policy, applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. The filing of a request by a permittee (industrial user) for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
The industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(j)  Permit violations. If sampling performed by the industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The control authority performs sampling of the industrial user's discharge at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  The control authority performs sampling of the industrial user's discharge between the time when the user performed its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of the initial sampling. 
(3)  The violation was the result of an infrequent batch discharge that occurs less frequently than once every 30 days and a repeat sampling would be of no value in confirming the nature or degree of the original violation. 
(Code 2017, § 27-70; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-93. - Holding tank waste haulers. 
(a)  Users discharging septic tank waste or any type of liquid waste from tank trucks or liquid haulers may be subject to the conditions of this division. 
(b)  Industrial process wastes or any other wastes that may be classified as hazardous wastes as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (40 CFR 261) are prohibited. Such wastes shall not be delivered or sent to the POTW by truck, rail or dedicated pipe. 
(c)  These users shall be permitted to discharge waste to the POTW only if they have received permission to do so from the superintendent. Permission will be granted after these users have provided sufficient information to the superintendent which may include the following: 
(1)  The total volume of waste to be discharged on a weekly or monthly basis; 
(2)  The original sources of the waste; 
(3)  The components and quantities thereof of the various wastes which will be discharged including, but not limited to: BOD, COD, TSS, pH, oil and grease, toxic substances, and the restricted wastes listed in section 24-90, table 1; 
(4)  Their normal hours of operation. 
(d)  The superintendent will determine the hours that the user may discharge into the POTW. The superintendent will also determine the fee which the user will pay. The fee will be fair compensation to the city for the cost of treating the waste. This fee shall be in addition to any fees or civil penalties which may be charged as per section 24-90. 
(e)  The superintendent will prohibit the user from discharging certain wastes which may interfere with the operation or maintenance of the POTW. 
(f)  The superintendent shall have the right to inspect and sample wastes discharged from tank trucks or liquid haulers. The superintendent may require that these wastes not be discharged to the POTW if an inspection indicates that the waste may contain substances prohibited by this division. 
(g)  The introduction of any trucked or hauled wastes into the POTW except at discharge points designated by the superintendent is prohibited. 
(Code 2017, § 27-71; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-94. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the superintendent a report conforming to the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, shall be required to submit to the superintendent a report conforming to the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12. 
(b)  90-day compliance reports. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the industrial user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. Reports must comply with requirements of 40 CFR 403.12. The report shall include a statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(c)  Periodic reports. Any industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent that are limited by that standard. The report shall also include a record of all daily flows that exceed the daily flow reported by the user on its wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent has the right to require as many reports as he deems necessary but reports must be submitted at least twice annually on dates determined by the superintendent. If a user is subject to mass limitations, the report shall also indicate the mass of regulated pollutants in the user's effluent. Reports must comply with requirements of 40 CFR 403.12. 
(d)  Notice of potential problems, including slug loading. All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, as defined by this division section 24-81. 
(e)  Discharges of hazardous wastes notification. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(p), all industrial users must notify, in writing, the POTW, the state and EPA of any discharge to the POTW that would be considered a hazardous waste if disposed of in a different manner. 
(1)  Industrial users are exempt from this requirement during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms or 33 pounds of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
(2)  Discharge of more than 33 pounds of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
(f)  Other reports. The superintendent may require other reports from industrial users as necessary, including, but not limited to, the reports required by 40 CFR 403.12. Reporting requirements will be made conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(g)  Report retention. Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years the reports themselves and any records or supporting documents used in the compilation of those reports, and shall make such records or supporting documents available for inspection and copying by the superintendent. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the POTW or when requested by the superintendent. 
(h)  Signatory requirements. The reports required by subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall include the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a responsible corporate officer means a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
(2)  By the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to ensure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(3)  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports required by subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section is a partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively. 
(4)  By the administrator, chairman, director, or principal executive responsible for operations at the facility if the industrial user submitting the reports is a government entity. 
(5)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in the preceding subsection (h)(1), (2) or (3) of this section if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (h)(1), (2), or (3) of this section: 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the control authority. 
(6)  If an authorization under this subsection (h)(6) is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this subsection (h)(6) must be submitted to the control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative. 
(i)  Collection and analysis techniques. Collection and analysis of samples required by permit shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. 
(j)  Reports. If an SIU monitors any pollutant more frequently than is required by their permit using procedures prescribed by 40 CFR 136, the results of this monitoring also shall be included in any required reports. 
(Code 2017, § 27-72; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-95. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city may require to be provided and operated at the industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the industrial user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 27-73; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-96. - Inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, random sampling, records examination and copying, or in the performance of any of their duties. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where an industrial user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The city has the right to randomly sample industry without notification of the sample taking. 
(Code 2017, § 27-74; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-97. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. The superintendent may require the development of a compliance schedule by an industrial user for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. This schedule may include milestone dates and regular progress reports. 
(b)  Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the superintendent shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the superintendent under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation, which affects quality or quantity of discharge, shall be reported to and be acceptable to the superintendent prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. 
(Code 2017, § 27-75; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-98. - Confidentiality of information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Data on wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment program; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(Code 2017, § 27-76; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 24-99. - Falsifying information; tampering with monitoring device. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, records, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days in jail. 
(b)  Industrial users may also be assessed civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 per day. 
(Code 2017, § 27-77; Ord. No. 2702, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
Secs. 24-100-24-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTION CHARGES 

Sec. 24-127. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Interceptor or intercepting sewer means a main sewer. 
    Lateral sewer means a sewer which contributes sewage from a local area to a main sewer or outlet. 
    Main sewer means a sewer which serves as an outlet for two or more lateral sewers, and which is commonly referred to as an "intercepting sewer" or "interceptor," "outfall sewer" or "trunk sewer." 
    Sewer means structures designed, constructed and used for the purpose of controlling or carrying off waste or sanitary sewage. 
    Sewer systems are composed of the main sewers, sewage pumping stations, treatment and disposal plants, lateral sewers and sewer connections in easements, public streets or other rights-of-way for private property. 
    Total cost or cost of a sewer system includes the cost of engineering, preliminary reports, property valuations, estimates, plans, specifications, notices, legal services, acquisition of land, consequential damages or costs, easements, rights of way, construction, repair, supervision, inspection, testing, notices and publication, interest during construction and for not more than six months thereafter, and printing and sale of bonds. 
(Code 2017, § 27-96; Ord. No. 2269, § 1, 7-12-1999) 
Sec. 24-128. - Assessment. 
    All sanitary sewer systems constructed by the city, or constructed by a property owner or property developer for which the city incurs any costs, the total cost of which has not been assessed against the benefited properties by the levying of special assessments, shall be paid for by the owners of benefited properties before the sanitary sewer systems, or any part of parts thereof, are tapped or used, the connection charge to be determined as provided in this division. 
(Code 2017, § 27-97; Ord. No. 2269, § 2, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 2322, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-2001) 
Sec. 24-129. - Report of costs; determination of charges. 
(a)  When a sanitary sewer line, consisting of one or more lateral sewers, main sewers, or interceptor sewers, is or has been constructed as described in section 24-128, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to report the total cost thereof to the city council. The city council shall then divide or prorate the total cost thereof among the properties benefited thereby and shall adopt an ordinance setting forth charges against respective properties which connect into the sanitary sewer line. Such ordinance shall only be adopted after 20 days' notice published in accordance with the requirements of state law, and only after a public hearing thereon. 
(b)  The tapping, use or connection charges shall be paid prior to or at the time of minor or preliminary plat approval by the city, the charges to be equal in value to the total cost, including the construction costs, incurred by the city made by the advance installation of the sewer line required for the development of the property. The property owner or the property developer will be responsible at a minimum for the cost of an eight-inch sewer line installation, or for a greater charge if the property's future development necessitates a larger size sewer line. When sewer lines are installed to serve an entire subbasin, the total cost thereof shall be prorated among the benefited properties, regardless of the sewer line sizing. 
(Code 2017, § 27-98; Ord. No. 2269, § 3, 7-12-1999) 
Secs. 24-130-24-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CHERRYWOOD INTERCEPTOR SEWER DISTRICT 

Sec. 24-157. - Establishment of district; definition. 
    There is hereby established the Cherrywood Interceptor Sewer District, which shall be referred to in this division as the district. The district consists of all property served and benefited by the Cherrywood Interceptor Sewer, which property is legally described in section 24-158. 
(Code 2017, § 27-99; Ord. No. 2276, § 1, 9-13-1999) 
Sec. 24-158. - Description of benefited properties. 
    The property served and benefited by the district consists of 688.27 acres of property legally described as follows: 
(1)  Southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(2)  The northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M., except that part thereof conveyed to the city for street purposes in Book 551 of Land Deeds at page 763, and also except that part thereof lying north of a line extending from a point on the west line of said section 9 which is 239.02 feet south of the northwest corner of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 9, to a point on the west right-of-way line of Union Road which is 238.99 feet south of the north line of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 9. 
(3)  The west 985 feet of the south 465 feet of the southwest 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of section 10, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(4)  Northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 16, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(5)  East 1/2 of the southeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 16, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(6)  Northwest 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(7)  The north 660 feet of the northwest 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(8)  That part of the southeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 lying northeasterly of the line from the northwest corner to the southeast corner thereof, in section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(9)  North 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(10)  Northwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(11)  That part of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 lying northeasterly of the line from the northwest corner to the southeast corner thereof, in section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(12)  Southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4, except the southwest 1/4 thereof, in section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(13)  Northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(14)  South 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(15)  Northwest 1/4 of the northeast 1/4, except the northeast 1/4 thereof, in section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(16)  That part of the south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 lying southwesterly of the line from the northwest corner to the southeast corner thereof, in section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(17)  That part of the northeast 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 lying southwesterly of the line from the northwest corner to the southeast corner thereof of section 15, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(18)  West 1/2 of the southwest 1/4 of section 14, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(19)  That part of the southwest 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 lying southwesterly of the line from the northwest corner to the southeast corner thereof, in section 14, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M. 
(Code 2017, § 27-100; Ord. No. 2276, § 1, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 2389, § 1, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 24-159. - Description of excluded properties. 
    Certain property lying within the district was either previously assessed a portion of the costs of the Cherrywood Interceptor Sewer, or is appropriately exempted from such assessment by reason of its owner having made certain stormwater detention improvements which are of public benefit, at a cost greater than the amount of such assessment. These properties, which are referred to as the excluded properties, consist of 55.15 acres, and are exempt from the sewer connection charge imposed by this division. The excluded properties are legally described as follows: 
(1)  Lots 1 through 56, inclusive, in Cherrywood Acres in Black Hawk County, Iowa (now in the city of Cedar Falls, Iowa). 
(2)  That part of the south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 except the north 260 feet of the south 1802.40 feet of the east 837.69 feet of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M., described as follows: Commencing at a point on the east line of said section which is 1542.40 feet north of the southeast corner of said section, thence west 263 feet; thence south at right angles 216.25 feet; thence east at right angles 263 feet; thence north along the east line of said section 216.25 feet to the point of beginning, except street right-of-way. 
(3)  That part of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M., described as follows: Commencing at a point on the east line of said section which is 1542.40 feet north of the southeast corner of said section; thence west at right angles 263 feet; thence north at right angles 260 feet; thence east at right angles 263 feet to the east line of said section; thence south along the east line of said section 260 feet to the point of beginning, except street right-of-way. 
(4)  Beginning at a point 232.4 feet east of the northwest corner of the northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 16, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M.; thence east 260.0 feet along the north line of said section; thence south 400.0 feet; thence west 260.0 feet; thence north 400.0 feet to the point of beginning, except street right-of-way. 
(5)  The west 232.4 feet of the north 400 feet of the northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of Section 16, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M., in the City of Cedar Falls, Iowa, except street right-of-way. 
(6)  The south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th Principal Meridian in the city of Cedar Falls, Black Hawk County, Iowa, except that part thereof described as follows: Commencing at a point on the east line of said section which is 1542.40 feet north of the southeast corner of said section, thence west 263 feet; thence south at right angles 216.25 feet; thence east at right angles 263 feet; thence north along the east line of said section 216.25 feet to the point of beginning, except street right-of-way; and also except that part thereof described as follows: Commencing at a point on the east line of said section which is 1542.40 feet north of the southeast corner of said section; thence west at right angles 263 feet; thence north at right angles 260 feet; thence east at right angles 263 feet to the east line of said section; thence south along the east line of said section 260 feet to the point of beginning, except street right-of-way. 
(Code 2017, § 27-101; Ord. No. 2276, § 1, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 2389, § 2, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 24-160. - Imposition of sewer connection charge. 
    There is hereby imposed on each property lying within the district which is not an excluded property a sewer connection charge of $294.63 per acre, based upon the area or size of each property. The sewer connection charge shall be payable in cash, and shall be in addition to all other fees or charges imposed by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 27-102; Ord. No. 2276, § 1, 9-13-1999) 
Sec. 24-161. - Timing of payment of sewer connection charge. 
    The owner of every property for which a sewer connection charge is imposed by this division shall pay the sewer connection charge as follows: 
(1)  Charges for existing residential property. Residential property located within the district which is not an excluded property and which is currently serviced by a septic tank shall pay a sewer connection charge to the city at the time that the septic tank serving the residential property falis, or a sanitary sewer connection is requested by the subject property owner, or is ordered by the city, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Charges for residential plats. Each owner or developer of property which lies within the district and which is not an excluded property, and who files a minor plat or a preliminary plat shall pay a sewer connection charge to the city prior to or at the time of minor plat or preliminary plat approval by the city. This subsection shall be applicable to all minor plats and preliminary plats of any property lying within the district filed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(3)  Other property owners. Any owner of any other property lying within the district which is not an excluded property shall pay a sewer connection charge to the city at such time as the owner connects the property to the city sewer system. 
(Code 2017, § 27-103; Ord. No. 2276, § 1, 9-13-1999) 
Secs. 24-162-24-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION 

Sec. 24-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Detached single-unit means a dwelling unit which is not attached to any other unit. 
    District includes all property served and benefited by the northwest sanitary sewer extension, and is described as follows: 
(1)  E. 300 feet N. 724 feet NW NE section 10 T89N R14W; 
(2)  NW NE sec. 10 T89N R14W Exc. W 660 feet, also Exc. E 300 feet N 724 feet; 
(3)  W 660 feet NW NE section 10 T89N R14W; 
(4)  SW NE and SE NW section 10 T89N R14W; 
(5)  Part N 15 acres NW SE section 10 T89N R14W; 
(6)  Part NE NW section 10 T89N R14W Desc. as fol.: E 190 feet S 690 feet and E 10 feet Exc. S 690 feet and W 30 feet E 40 feet N 64 feet Exc. Hwy. and Ease.; 
(7)  Part of the NE NW section to T89N R14W desc. as fol.: the E 380 feet of the S 700 feet Exc. the E 190 feet of the S 690 feet; and the W 10 feet of the E 20 feet Exc. the S 690 feet and also the N 64 feet; and the N 68 feet of the E 80 feet Exc. the E 40 feet of the N 64 feet; 
(8)  Part of the NE NW of section 10 T89N R14W described as fol: the E 570 feet of the S 710 feet Exc. the E 380 feet of the S 700 feet also Exc. the E 20 feet of the N 10 feet of the S 710 feet; and the E 120 feet of the N 72 feet Exc. the E 80 feet of the N 68 feet, also Exc. the E 20 feet of the S 4 feet of the N 72 feet; and the W 10 feet of the E 30 feet Exc. the N 72 feet also Exc. the S 710 feet; 
(9)  NE NW section 10 T89N R14W Exc. W 404 feet, also Exc. N 72 feet E 120 feet, also Exc. S 710 feet E 570 feet, also Exc. E 30 feet; 
(10)  Unplatted Cedar Falls part NE NW sec. part of the NE NW section 10 T89N R14W, described as fol: E 202 feet W 404 feet Exc. W 200 feet N 660 feet and W 38 feet E 40 feet W 404 feet N 34 feet Exc. Hwy.; 
(11)  Part of the NE NW of section T89N R14W Described as fol: E 202 feet W 404 feet N 660 feet Exc. E 2 feet, also Exc. W 38 feet E 40 feet N 34 feet, also Exc. Hwy.; 
(12)  Unplatted Cedar Falls part NE NW sec. 10 T89 R14 Desc. as fol.: W 202 feet N 660 feet Exc. W 2 feet and Exc. E 38 feet W 40 feet N 34 feet and exc. Hwy. and Ease.; 
(13)  Unplatted Cedar Falls part NE NW sec. 10 T 89 R Desc. as fol.: W 202 feet Exc. N 660 feet and W 2 feet N 660 feet and E 38 feet W 40 feet N 34 feet Exc. Hwy and Ease; 
(14)  S 180 feet W 150 feet E 350 feet SW NW section 10 T89N R14W; 
(15)  E 200 feet S 654 feet SW NW section 10 T89N R14W; 
(16)  W 300 feet E 500 feet S 872 feet SW NW section 10 T89N R14W, Exc. E 200 feet also Exc. S 180 feet W 150 feet E 350 feet; 
(17)  W 1/2 NW section 10 T89N R14W, Exc. W 358 feet N 600 feet, also Exc. E 200 feet S 654 feet also Exc. W 300 feet E 500 feet S 872 feet; 
(18)  W 358 feet N 600 feet NW NW section 10 T89N R14W; 
(19)  Part of Lot 22 Indian Hills Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(20)  Unplatted Cedar Falls part SW sec. 3 T89 R14 Com. at a Pt. in W line of E 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 3 T89 R14 that is 499 feet N of S line sec. 3 Th. N along W line E 1/2 SW sec. 3 a Dist. of 460 ft Th E along a line that is Par with S line of sec. 3 Dist. of 515 feet Th S along a line that is Par With W line of E 1/2 of SW 1/4 sec. 3 a Dist of 460 feet Th W along a line that is Par to the N line of Star View a Dist. of 515 feet to the Pt. of Beg.; 
(21)  Part of SE SW sec. 3 T89 R14 W Beg. at NW Cor Lot 5 Star View Th. E Along N Line Star View to a Pt. 453.6 feet W of NE Cor Lot 21 Th. N 66 feet Th. W to W line SE SW Th. S to Pt. of Beg. and Ease; 
(22)  Parcel of land in SE SW sec. 3 T89 R14 Desc. as follows: Beg. at NE Cor. Lot 21 in Star View Th. W along N line said Star View 453.6 feet to the pt. of beg. Th. N on a line Par with W line said SE 1/4 66 feet Th. E on a line Par with S line said sec. 13.7 feet Th. S to N line Star View Th. W along N line Star View to Pt. of Beg.; 
(23)  Parcel of real estate in SW 1/4 sec. 3 T89 R14 Desc. as Com. at NE Cor. Lot 21 Star View Th. W along N said Star View Add. 439.9 feet Th. N Par W Line E half said SW 1/4 297.1 feet Th. E Par N line Star View 439.9 feet Th. S Par W line E Half SW 1/4 297.1 feet to Beg. and Ease.; 
(24)  Lot 1 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(25)  Lot 2 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(26)  Lot 3 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(27)  Lot 4 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(28)  Lot 5 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(29)  Lot 6 and Lot 7 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(30)  Lot 8 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(31)  Lot 9 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(32)  Lot 10 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(33)  W 75 feet Lot 11 Star View, W 75 feet Lot 12 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(34)  E 75 feet Lot 11 Star View, E 75 feet Lot 12 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(35)  Lot 13 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(36)  Lot 14 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(37)  Lot 15 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(38)  Lot 16 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(39)  Lot 17 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(40)  Lot 18 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(41)  Lot 19 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(42)  Lot 20 Star View, Cedar Falls, Iowa; 
(43)  NE NE Sec. 9 T89 R14 Exc. E 732.51 feet N 237.90 feet and Exc. Beg. 732.51 feet W of NE Cor. for Pt. of Beg. Th. W 307.50 feet S; 
(44)  SE NE Exc. Street B 552 P 57 sec. 9 T89 R14; 
(45)  The northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 9, Township 89 north, Range 14 west of the 5th P.M., except that part thereof conveyed to the city for street purposes in Book 551 of Land Deeds at page 763, and also except that part thereof lying south of a line extending from a point on the west line of said section 9 which is 239.02 feet south of the northwest corner of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 9, to a point on the west right-of-way line of Union Road which is 238.99 feet south of the north line of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 9. 
    Dwelling unit means any building, room or group of adjoining rooms providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Residential means any building which is or contains an attached or detached dwelling unit. 
(Code 2017, § 27-111; Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 24-192. - Charges for existing residential property. 
(a)  Generally. Residential property located within the district currently serviced by a septic tank shall pay a sewer capital charge to the city at the earliest time as the septic tank serving that property fails or a sanitary hook-up is requested by the subject property owner or ordered by the city. 
(b)  Charges for residential plats. Each owner of property which lies within the corporate limits of the city and within the district who shall file a final plat shall pay a sewer capital charge to the city prior to the release of the plat for recording at the county recorder's office. This section shall be applicable to all final plats within the district filed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. This section shall also be applicable to all final plats within the district filed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  Other subject property owners. Any other benefited property owner within the district shall pay a sewer capital charge to the city at such time as such owner connects to the sewer system. 
(d)  Rate of capital charge. For each lot within the district, including all land used with respect to a residential unit, the sewer capital charge shall be in proportion to area at the rate of $689.76 per acre, payable in cash. Such charge shall be in addition to all other fees or charges imposed by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 27-112; Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 11-11-1991) 
Secs. 24-193-24-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 24-223. - Acronyms. 
    The following acronyms when used in this article shall have the following designated meanings: 
BMP Best Management Practice CFR Code of Federal Regulations CWA Clean Water Act FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency HHW Household hazardous waste IDNR Iowa Department of Natural Resources IDOT Iowa Department of Transportation MS4 Municipal separate storm sewer system NOI Notice of intent NOT Notice of termination NOV Notice of violation NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NPS Non-point source NRCS National Resource Conservation Service RCRA Resource Conservation Recovery Act of 1976 SMCRA Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 SWPPP Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan TMDL Total maximum daily load USDA United States Department of Agriculture US EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency USGS United States Geodetic Survey  
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-113, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-224. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adverse impacts means any negative impact on plant, soil, air or water resources affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, quality, and quantity. 
    Allowable non-stormwater discharges means discharge from firefighting activities that are necessary due to an immediate danger to life or property; fire hydrant flushing; potable water sources; water line flushing; uncontaminated groundwater; uncontaminated pumped ground water; crawl space pump water; natural springs; natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation); air conditioning condensation; exterior building wash water when no detergents or other surfactants are used; pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents or other surfactants are used (unless all spilled material has been removed); diverted stream flows; storm sewer system cleaning water; residential or non-commercial washing of vehicles; de-chlorinated swimming pool discharge less than one part per million (PPM) chlorine; residual street wash water; de-chlorinated water from reservoir discharges; foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); discharges specified in writing by the city engineer, or designated representative, as being necessary to protect public health and safety of citizens; dye-testing procedures (requires a verbal notification to the city engineer, or designated representative, prior to the time of the test); and any other water source not containing pollutants, as approved by the city engineer, or designated representative. 
    Applicant means any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit. In gaining official approval, the person, firm or governmental agency intends to carry out construction of a new development or re-development. 
    Base flood elevation is the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event. The base flood event shall be considered to be the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood elevation. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Building official means city official or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the city building codes. 
    Building permit means permit issued for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building and the related ground and surface preparation prior to and after completion of construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
    By-pass flow means stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary to a property's drainage system but not under its control. 
    Calendar quarter means each of the following periods: December through February, March through May, June through August, and September through November. 
    Certify or certification means formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests were performed, and that such inspections and tests comply with the applicable requirements of this article. 
    Channel means any defined river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, on-stream lake or impoundment, abandoned mine, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainage way, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
    Channel modification means the alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. The term "channel modification" includes, but is not limited to, damming, placement of riprap (or other armoring), filling, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation. The term "channel modification" does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash. 
    City engineer means the professional engineer registered in the state who is designated as city engineer by the city council. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. (Formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.) 
    Clearing means any activity which removes vegetative ground cover. 
    Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit. 
    Compensatory storage means an artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. 
    Conduit means any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed. 
    Construction site means any location where clearing, grading, filling, paving, construction, or other activity occurs related to a change or improvement of property. 
    Contaminated means containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
    Contractor means any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor. The term "contractor" also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material suppliers delivering materials to the site. 
    Department means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) or an authorized representative. 
    Detention basin means a facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm. 
    Detention time means the amount of time stormwater is held within a detention basin. 
    Developed property means land that is altered from a natural state by grading and/or construction activity for the purpose of constructing residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional facilities such that the hydrology of the property is affected. 
    Development or redevelopment means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
    Discharge means the release of water, and any elements, compounds and particles contained within or upon released water, from property owned or controlled by any person. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks. 
    Drainage plan means a plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and environmental features, including grading, as well as proposed alterations or changes to the drainage system and environment of a property. Also see Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). 
    Dry basin means a detention basin designed to drain after temporary storage of stormwater flows and to normally be dry over much of its bottom area. 
    Earthwork means the disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing, grading, or excavation activities. 
    Erosion means the general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall, flowing water, wind or wave action. 
    Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, re-located or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting from such actions. 
    Excess stormwater runoff means the volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged from a new development or re-development, which is or will be in excess of that volume and rate which existed before development or re-development. 
    Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
    Facility means an entity which discharges stormwater. 
    Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Final grade means the vertical location of the ground surface after grading work is completed in accordance with the plans. 
    Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or test fire equipment. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. Also, refuse and other unwanted and useless material. 
    Grading means any act of excavation or fill of land surface to a desired slope or elevation, or any combination thereof, and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. 
    Groundwater means any water residing below the surface of the ground or percolating into or out of the ground. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that the appropriate official determines will cause an adverse impact to storm drainage system or will contribute to the failure of the jurisdiction to meet the water quality based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261. 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single-unit and multi-unit residences) that would be classified as hazardous by the IDNR or US EPA or by any rule or regulation promulgated by either agency. 
    Hydrograph means a graph showing, for a given location on a stream or conduit, the flow rate with respect to time. 
    Hydrograph method means a method that estimates runoff volume and runoff hydrographs for a point of interest by generating hydrographs for individual sub areas, combining them, and routing them through stream lengths and reservoir structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution, runoff curve number, time of concentration, and travel time are included. 
    Illegal discharge. See Illicit discharge. 
    Illicit connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allow an illicit discharge to enter the MS4. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the MS4 that is prohibited under this article. 
    Impervious surface means a hard-surfaced area that prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil. An impervious surface may cause water to runoff the surface in greater quantities, or at an increased rate of flow, than was present under natural conditions. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, asphalt or concrete streets, sidewalks, driveway paving, parking lots, walkways, patio areas, storage areas, gravel, bituminous substances or other surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration, or runoff patterns, of real property in the natural state with existing ground cover. 
    Industrial waste (commercial waste) means any wastes produced as a by-product of any industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than domestic sewage. 
    Infiltration means the passage or movement of water into the ground. 
    Land disturbing activity means the process of disturbing existing groundcover, excavation of existing site material, or the placement of fill material on a site, related to a manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
    Loessal soil means sediment, commonly non-stratified and unconsolidated, composed predominately of silt-sized particles with accessory clay and sand. 
    Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area to provide such yards and other open space as are herein required. No portion of an established floodway area lying within a lot or any access drive through a property shall be used in computing the number of dwelling units to be constructed. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street or private street and may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
Provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this article. 
    Major drainage system means that portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system. 
    May signifies an act that is discretionary. 
    Mechanical fluid means any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of machinery, vehicles and any other equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum products, oil and fuel. 
    Minor drainage system means portion of a drainage system designed for the convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels and swales. 
    Mitigation means activity necessary when the prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional measures are required to offset the development, including those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which stormwater drainage and development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. 
    Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning (or mobile washing) means power washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a commercial activity. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the conveyance or system of conveyances, including storm sewers, roadways, roads with drainage systems, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels and storm drains, owned or operated by the city. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Permit means a permit issued by the US EPA or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Natural means conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without intervention by man. 
    Natural drainage means channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge that to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Notice of violation means a written notice detailing any violations of this article and any action expected of the violators. 
    NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
    One hundred-year event or 100-year event means a rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Twenty-four-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted. 
    One-year event means a rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a 100 percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Twenty-four-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted. 
    Outfall means the point at which water or any other material leaves or may leave the MS4 and also means the point at which water or any other material leaves or may leave an enclosed conveyance that is part of the MS4 and enters an open conveyance that is also part of the MS4. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land. 
    Parcel means a contiguous lot or tract of land under one ownership; a lot or tract of land is land intended as a unit for the purpose of use, development or transfer of ownership. 
    Peak flow means the maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit. 
    Permittee means the city. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or migrate any pest. 
    Pet waste or animal waste means excrement and other waste from domestic animals. 
    Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol-blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. 
    Point source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
    Pollutant means any item that may alter stormwater from a natural state. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents, oil, automotive fluids, solid wastes, yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, discarded or abandoned objects, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, sewage, fecal coliform, heavy metals, animal wastes, sediment from construction sites, and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Positive drainage means provision for overland paths for all areas of a property including depression areas that may also be drained by storm sewer. 
    Potable water means water that has been treated to drinking water standards and is safe for human consumption. 
    Private drainage system means all privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey stormwater, including, but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catchbasins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any ground surface. 
    Public improvement plans means engineering drawings subject to approval by the city engineer for the construction of public improvements. 
    Qualified person means a person who possesses the required certification, license, or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity. 
    Re-developed property means developed property that is altered or expanded by grading and/or construction activity at a time period following initial construction. 
    Release means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system. 
    Retention facility means facility designed to hold stormwater for a sufficient length of time to provide for the stormwater to be consumed by evaporation into the air and/or infiltration into the immediate soil. 
    Rubbish means solid waste, including ashes that consist of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and/or 
(2)  Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Sanitary sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Sediment means soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported naturally by water, wind, gravity, or equipment tracking (tires, vehicles). 
    Sedimentation means the process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage systems. 
    Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks. 
    Shall signifies an act that is mandatory. 
    Significant materials means and includes, but is not limited to, raw materials; fuels; materials such as solvents, detergents, and plastic pellets; finished materials such as metallic products; raw materials used in food processing or production; hazardous substances designated under section 101(14) of Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA); any chemical the facility is required to report pursuant to section 313 of Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA); fertilizers; pesticides; and waste products such as ashes, slag and sludge that have the potential to be released with stormwater discharges. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Slope disturbance line means the line which delineates relatively level building areas from areas where slopes exceed seven percent and where special precautions must be taken. 
    Small quantity generator waste means any hazardous waste generated by a small quantity generator as defined by the EPA. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional activities. 
    Storm sewer means a closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means the discharge from any conveyance that is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and that is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant. The term "stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity" does not include discharges from facilities or activities excluded from the NPDES program. For the categories of industries identified in subsections (1) through (10) of this definition, the term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste material, or by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites; sites used for the application or disposal of process waste waters (as defined at 40 CFR 401); sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for residual treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms) for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products; and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. For the categories of industries identified in subsection (11) of this definition, the term "stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity" includes only stormwater discharges from all areas (except access roads and rail lines) listed in the previous sentence where material handling equipment or activities, raw materials, intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products, or industrial machinery are exposed to stormwater. For the purposes of this subsection, material handling activities include the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product. The term "stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity" excludes areas located on plant lands separate from the plant's industrial activities, such as office buildings and accompanying parking lots, as long as the drainage from the excluded areas is not mixed with stormwater drained from the above-described areas. Industrial facilities (including industrial facilities that are federally, state, or municipally-owned or operated that meet the description of the facilities listed in subsections (1) to (11) of this definition) include those facilities designated under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v). The following categories of facilities are considered to be engaging in "industrial activity" for purposes of this definition: 
(1)  Facilities subject to stormwater effluent limitations guidelines, new source performance standards, or toxic pollutant effluent standards under 40 CFR subchapter N (except facilities with toxic pollutant effluent standards that are exempted under category (11) of this definition); 
(2)  Facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 24 (except 2434), 26 (except 265 and 267), 28 (except 283 and 285), 29, 311, 32 (except 323), 33, 3441, or 373; 
(3)  Facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 10 through 14 (mineral industry) including active or inactive mining operations (except for areas of coal mining operations no longer meeting the definition of a reclamation area under 40 CFR 434.11(l)) because the performance bond issued to the facility by the appropriate SMCRA authority has been released, or except for areas of non-coal mining operations that have been released from applicable state or federal reclamation requirements after December 17, 1990) and oil and gas exploration, production, processing, or treatment operations, or transmission facilities that discharge stormwater contaminated by contact with, or that has come into contact with, any overburden, raw material, intermediate products, finished products, by-products or waste products located on the site of such operations; inactive mining operations are mining sites that are not being actively mined, but that have an identifiable owner/operator; 
(4)  Hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facilities, including those that are operating under interim status or a permit under subtitle C of RCRA; 
(5)  Landfills, land application sites, and open dumps that have received any industrial wastes (waste that is received from any of the facilities described under this subsection) including those that are subject to regulation under subtitle D of RCRA; 
(6)  Facilities involved in the recycling of materials, including metal scrap yards, battery reclaimers, salvage yards, and automobile junkyards, including, but limited to, those classified as standard industrial classification 5015 or 5093; 
(7)  Steam electric power generating facilities, including coal handling sites; 
(8)  Transportation facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 40, 41, 42 (except 4221-4225), 43, 44, 45 or 5171 that have vehicle maintenance shops, equipment cleaning operations, or airport deicing operations. Only those portions of the facility that are either involved in vehicle maintenance (including vehicle rehabilitation, mechanical repairs, painting, fueling, and lubrication), equipment cleaning operations, airport deicing operations, or that are otherwise identified under subsections (1) to (7) or (9) to (11) of this subsection are associated with industrial activity; 
(9)  Treatment works treating domestic sewage or any other sewage sludge or wastewater treatment device or system, used in the storage treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal or domestic sewage, including land dedicated to the disposal of sewage sludge that are located within the confines of the facility, with a design flow of 1.0 mgd or more, or required to have an approved pretreatment program under 40 CFR 403. Not included are farm lands, domestic gardens or lands used for sludge management where sludge is beneficially reused and that are not physically located in the confines of the facility, or areas that are in compliance with 40 CFR 503; 
(10)  Construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation activities that result in the disturbance of one acre or more of total land area or which result in the disturbance of less than one acre but are part of a larger common plan of development or sale of one acre or more; 
(11)  Facilities under standard industrial classifications 20, 21, 22, 23, 2434, 25, 265, 267, 27, 283, 285, 30, 31 (except 311), 323, 34 (except 3441), 35, 36, 37 (except 373), 38, 39, or 4221-4225 (and that are not otherwise included within subsections (1) to (10) of this section). 
    Stormwater drainage system means any publicly or privately owned or operated surface, system, facility, structure, improvement, development, equipment, property or interest therein, or other structural or nonstructural element made, constructed, used or acquired, for the purpose of collecting, containing, storing, conveying and controlling stormwater, including, but not limited to, storm sewers, curbs, street drains, conduits, lakes, rivers, creeks, other natural or manmade channels, pipes, culverts and detention ponds. 
    Stormwater management fee means fee levied within the boundaries of the stormwater drainage system district for use in the development and daily maintenance of the city's stormwater management program and the city's storm sewer system. 
    Stormwater management program means overall strategy and plan for the management of stormwater drainage within the city as outlined originally in the city's notice of intent dated March 2003. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a document that describes the best management practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of rainfall that drains into the storm sewer drainage system. 
    Stream means any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade drainage way which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including trees, by spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil. 
    Subdivision development means includes activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into two or more lots and includes all construction activity taking place thereon. 
    Surface water means waterbodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams, puddles, channelized flow and runoff. 
    Ten-year event means a runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Twenty-four-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted. 
    Time of concentration means the elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest in that watershed. 
    Tributary watershed means all of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a given point. 
    Two-year event means a runoff, rainfall, or flood event having two percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Twenty-four-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
    Used motor oil or used oil means any oil that as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties. 
    Utility agency means private utility companies, city departments, or contractors working for private utility companies or city departments, engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication services. 
    Vacant means land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the State for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by state or federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect those uses. 
    Waters of the state means any river, stream, lake, pond, marsh, watercourse, waterway, well, spring, reservoir, aquifer, irrigation system, drainage system and any other body or accumulation of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof, but not including any waters of the United States. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Watershed means all land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same channel, lake, marsh, stormwater facility, groundwater or area of depression. 
    Wet basin means a detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. For general, but not inclusive locations of designated wetlands, refer to mapping prepared jointly by the U.S. Department of Interior and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-114, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 2929, § 3, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-225. - Purpose, intent and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose of this article and other ordinances adopted under this article is to address mandates of the federal government, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II permit regulations regarding the desired reduction of pollution in stormwater runoff. 
(b)  The intent of this article and other ordinances adopted under this article is to establish policies to comprehensively manage and reduce the potential for stormwater runoff pollution in a safe and economical manner within the city, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the population, and for the protection of property. This article is also intended to provide for the study of, design, operation, construction, equipping, and maintenance of the stormwater drainage system within the city limits. 
(c)  Following are objectives of the stormwater management program: 
(1)  Maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm drainage system of the city; 
(2)  Maintain emergency vehicle movement during storm or flood events; 
(3)  Protect, maintain and enhance the environment of the city, and the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(4)  Reduce pollutant discharge to the city's storm sewer system from construction sites, as well as the discharge of pollutants from industrial, commercial and residential areas of the city; 
(5)  Preserve the value of existing buildings and other assets by developing infrastructure that will assist in the reduction of storm event related losses; 
(6)  Ensure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase flood or drainage potential or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion; 
(7)  Facilitate compliance of construction site permits with regard to state and federal standards; 
(8)  Preserve the city's watercourses in good condition; 
(9)  Address and minimize obstruction of the city's watercourses; 
(10)  Enhance urban water resource management techniques, including both the reduction of pollution, and the enhancement of the urban environment, required by the NPDES permit and such other regulations of the city, state and federal government; 
(11)  Maintain temporary and permanent public stormwater storage facilities within the city in good operational condition; 
(12)  Promote public awareness of the impact of improper discharge of garbage, hazardous substances and sediment to the stormwater drainage system; 
(13)  Encourage the recycling and proper disposal of household hazardous wastes; and 
(14)  Maintain and improve the quality of the community water into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, the lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, sinkholes, and groundwater of the city, waters of the state and waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-115, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-226. - Duties and authority of the city engineer in general. 
(a)  The city engineer, or designated representative, shall exercise all lawful powers necessary and appropriate to administer the stormwater management program. The duties and authority herein described are in addition to other applicable legal duties and authority. The duties and authority of the city engineer, or designated representative, shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Administration of the regulations contained in the NPDES permit and in this article; 
(2)  Development and administration of all phases of a comprehensive stormwater management program, including, establishing, studying, planning, designing, developing, acquiring land for, constructing, administering, operating, improving, maintaining, and reconstructing the city's storm sewer system as necessary; 
(3)  Administration of the accounting, budgeting, recordkeeping and support personnel necessary for the efficient operation of the stormwater management program; 
(4)  Development of educational materials to increase public awareness that would improve the public's knowledge and reduce the introduction of pollution to the stormwater drainage system by the general public; 
(5)  Coordinate enforcement of the regulations contained in this article and other ordinances adopted under this chapter with other city departments; 
(6)  Seek the cooperation of counties and municipalities in communities adjacent to the city with the goal of reducing stormwater drainage system flooding; 
(7)  Cooperate with other affected political jurisdictions in preparing and implementing master drainage plans; 
(8)  Provide an exchange of information between the public and city employees on flooding areas and stormwater drainage problems within the city; 
(9)  Perform studies and evaluation required to establish, maintain and/or modify the stormwater management program; 
(10)  Require the preservation and enhancement of certain natural environmental features; 
(11)  Require submittal of appropriate federal, state and local permitting to perform work within the city limits; 
(12)  Review the installation of drainage improvements in new developments and in redevelopments; 
(13)  Administration of a program to periodically review erosion control features placed within new construction sites; 
(14)  Administration of a program to periodically review erosion control features placed during initial construction to ensure that they remain in good condition and are not removed without proper authorization; 
(15)  Recommend to the city council the establishment, and periodic adjustment of, stormwater management fees; 
(16)  Review and recommend modification to the collection procedure for stormwater management fees; 
(17)  Hear and consider challenges to the application of this article, the application of other ordinances adopted under this chapter, and the calculation of stormwater management fees; and 
(18)  Recommend to the mayor and the city council policies for establishing additional stormwater drainage services, preserving or expanding existing services and making changes in service for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-116, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-227. - City council discretion to provide for, and approve improvements to, the stormwater drainage system. 
(a)  Determination of stormwater services to be provided by the city, and construction of stormwater facilities and improvements to the stormwater drainage system, shall be made at the sole discretion of the city council. 
(b)  The city engineer, or designated representative, shall recommend stormwater services to be provided by the city, and construction of the stormwater facilities and improvements to the stormwater drainage system, to the city council based upon engineering analysis, taking into consideration frequency of flooding events, potential loss of life, potential property damage, effect upon the general public and other factors affecting the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-117, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-228. - Stormwater management authority. 
(a)  All areas within the city limits of the city are hereby declared and designated as a stormwater drainage system district within the meaning and intent of, and for the purposes authorized by Iowa Code § 384.84. Said district shall be governed by a stormwater management authority. 
(b)  In furtherance of the purposes for which a stormwater drainage system district is authorized, and to protect and promote the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the city and its citizens, charges shall be levied upon and collected from the owners of all real estate that discharges stormwater, directly or indirectly, to the stormwater drainage system. The proceeds of such charges shall be deposited in a stormwater management enterprise fund and used for purposes authorized by this article. 
(c)  The city council shall be the governing body of the stormwater management authority, and the authority shall be under the direction, management and control of the city engineer. The city engineer shall oversee the daily operation of the stormwater management authority, shall enforce the provisions of this article and all other ordinances adopted under this article, and shall carry out the policy directives of the city council acting in its role as governing body of the stormwater management authority. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-118, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-229. - Stormwater management enterprise fund. 
(a)  A stormwater management enterprise fund shall be established and maintained for the purpose of identifying, receiving and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to the city's stormwater management program, and to meet applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, but not limited to, the city's NPDES permit requirements. Stormwater charges, loans, grants or funds received for the administration, operation, construction and improvement of the city stormwater drainage system and facilities and the city's stormwater management program shall be deposited in such fund. 
(b)  The following expenditures shall be acceptable uses of stormwater management enterprise funds: 
(1)  PDES permit fees; 
(2)  Development of public outreach and education materials; 
(3)  Costs associated with public involvement and participation related to the stormwater management program; 
(4)  Stormwater policy development assistance; 
(5)  Illicit discharge detection and elimination procedures, equipment, testing, and investigation; 
(6)  Water collection and sampling fees and related equipment, 
(7)  Planning, design, engineering, construction, maintenance, operation, and improvement of drainage services, facilities and structures, which shall include, but are not limited to, conduits, drains, manholes, stormwater detention devices, flow impediments, ponds, ditches, sloughs, streams, filter strips, rip-raps, and erosion control devices; 
(8)  Construction site and post-construction site inspection costs; 
(9)  Staff time related to the stormwater management program; 
(10)  Employee training; and 
(11)  Consulting fees related to the stormwater management program and construction of stormwater related projects. 
(c)  Additional expenditures and disbursements from the stormwater management enterprise fund shall be at the direction and discretion of the city engineer, or designated representative, with approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-119, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-230. - Establishment of stormwater management fee. 
(a)  Monthly fee. Subject to the exemptions provided for in section 24-231, each owner or tenant of property within the city shall pay to the city a monthly stormwater management fee, as follows: 
(1)  Residential property. 
a.  Each single-unit residential dwelling shall be assessed a fee in accordance with the following table: 
Effective Date 
of Rate Rate July 1, 2006 $3.00 per month July 1, 2018 $3.15 per month July 1, 2019 $3.31 per month July 1, 2020 $3.48 per month July 1, 2021 $3.65 per month  
b.  For every two-unit and multi-unit residential property, a fee in accordance with the following table shall be assessed to each individual dwelling unit located on said property: 
Effective Date 
of Rate Rate July 1, 2006 $3.00 per month July 1, 2018 $3.15 per month July 1, 2019 $3.31 per month July 1, 2020 $3.48 per month July 1, 2021 $3.65 per month  
(2)  Commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential property. Each commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential property shall be assessed a base fee in accordance with the following table, plus an additional fee in accordance with the following table for the first 10,000 square feet, or any part thereof, of impervious surface (as such term is defined in section 24-224), and a fee in accordance with the following table for each additional 10,000 square feet, or any part thereof, of impervious surface, located on the property: 
Effective Date of Rate Base Rate 1st 10,000 square feet 
of impervious area Each additional 10,000 square feet 
of impervious area July 1, 2006 $3.00 per month $5.00 per month $5.00 per month July 1, 2018 $3.15 per month $5.25 per month $5.25 per month July 1, 2019 $3.31 per month $5.51 per month $5.51 per month July 1, 2020 $3.48 per month $5.79 per month $5.79 per month July 1, 2021 $3.65 per month $6.08 per month $6.08 per month  
(3)  Mixed uses. For each property which has mixed residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential uses located on the same property, the residential portions shall be assessed the residential rate, and the commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential portions shall be assessed the commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential rate, as set forth in this subsection (a). 
(b)  Effective date. Stormwater management fees shall be assessed beginning on July 1, 2006, and shall be billed and paid on a monthly basis. 
(c)  Inclusion of state sales tax. State sales tax is computed and included in the rates set forth in this section. 
(d)  Billing adjustments. Billing adjustments may be made for any residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential user that can demonstrate to the city engineer that stormwater from that owner's property does not directly or indirectly enter the MS4 of the city. 
(e)  Payment. All stormwater management fees required to be paid by this section shall be paid at the same time the payment for city water service is made, or on the first day of the month for those users of sewer service who do not use city water service, or for those property owners whose property is served by neither city water nor city sewer service. All required payments are to be made at the office of the municipal utilities. Amounts collected shall be deposited in the stormwater management enterprise fund for use as authorized by this article. 
(f)  Periodic review. The stormwater management fees provided for in this section shall be reviewed by the city council at least annually, and shall be revised as necessary to ensure that such fees generate sufficient revenues to pay all costs and expenses of operation and maintenance of the city's stormwater management program created under this article, including capital improvements, debt service and including, but not limited to, those expenditures described in section 24-229(b), and to ensure that such costs are properly apportioned among the users and classes of users identified in this section. 
(g)  Reduction for low-income households. The owner or occupant of every household unit which meets the low-income requirement, as set by the U.S. Government, contained in the Section 8 Housing Assistance Program of the city, may apply annually to the director of community development for, and be granted, a 50 percent reduction in the monthly stormwater management fee. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-229, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-231. - Stormwater management fee exemptions. 
    Stormwater management fees shall not be imposed on the following types of property: 
(1)  City, county, state and federal roads, bridges, highways, streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, pathways, parks and open spaces. 
(2)  Agricultural use property, and any undeveloped property that has no impervious surface located within the boundaries of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-121, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-232. - Collection of stormwater management fees. 
(a)  The office of the municipal utilities is hereby authorized and directed to render and collect stormwater management fees in accordance with the fees established in this article. Stormwater management fees shall be collected with the property owner's regular municipal utilities bill, and shall be shown as a separate item on the bill. 
(b)  The city shall have a lien upon the property served by the city stormwater utility established by this article, for all delinquent fees, in accordance with Iowa Code § 384.84. Prior to written notice of intent to certify, a lien shall be given to the account holder of the delinquent account at least 30 days prior to certification. If the account holder is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to the certification of the lien to the county treasurer. After compliance with the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall certify for taxation purposes and for the purpose of establishing the property lien to the county treasurer all delinquent stormwater management fees, together with an administrative expense of $5.00. The lien shall not be certified to the county treasurer for a delinquent charge of less than $5.00. For the purpose of the certification and for no other purpose whatsoever, stormwater management fees shall be designated as delinquent when the payments are shown and appear on the books carrying such fee payments to have been unpaid for a period of six months following their due date. 
(c)  In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall tender as payment of water, sewer, refuse and stormwater management fees an amount insufficient to pay in full all of the charges so billed, payment shall be credited proportionately among all charges. 
(d)  The provision for collection of fees provided herein shall be in addition to any rights or remedies that the city may have under the laws of the state or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-122, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 24-233. - Appeal or adjustment of stormwater management fee. 
(a)  Any user who considers stormwater management fees to be inaccurate or erroneous may request a review thereof by the city engineer, or designated representative. 
(b)  The determination of the city engineer, or designated representative, shall be in writing and may be appealed to the city council by written notice of appeal stating the reason and basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the city engineer, or designated representative, and the city clerk within 30 days of the date of notice of the determination of the city engineer, or designated representative. Hearing on the appeal before the city council, or a designated committee of the city council, shall take place within 30 days from the date of the notice of appeal was filed with the city clerk. The decision of the city council or its designated committee, shall be considered final. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 27-123, 6-4-2018) 
Secs. 24-234-24-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION 

Sec. 24-262. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), to the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II permit and the Federal Clean Water Act. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Establish legal authority to conduct inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; 
(2)  Investigate and eliminate, to the maximum extent practicable, the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges introduced by system users; and 
(3)  Prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the MS4. 
(Code 2017, § 27-201; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-263. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms or acronyms used in this article shall, unless defined in this article, have the meaning given to them in section 24-224. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "city engineer" includes any other representative of the city engineer's office that is designated by the city engineer to act in the place and with the authority of the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-202; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-264. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4, generated on developed property or undeveloped property, unless explicitly exempted by the NPDES permit, federal and state regulations and the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 27-203; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-265. - Stormwater management program; authority of city engineer with regard to illicit discharge. 
(a)  The city engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  With respect to the city's compliance with the NPDES Phase II permit regulations, the city engineer may do the following in relation to illicit discharge detection and elimination: 
(1)  Carry out all inspections, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to determine compliance with this article; 
(2)  Administer the city's compliance with the NPDES MS4 permit to discharge stormwater; 
(3)  Create, promote, and distribute to citizens educational program materials related to stormwater pollution prevention; 
(4)  Investigate potential stormwater pollution violations that are within the city limits on residential, commercial, industrial and city-owned properties for the presence of illicit discharges as defined by this article that may contaminate stormwater runoff; 
(5)  Review and enforce remediation programs as required for properties where illicit discharges to the storm sewer system are found to exist; 
(6)  Develop programs to control the discharge of pollutants, and the dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater into the MS4; 
(7)  Acquire and authorize testing of water samples through field-testing programs; 
(8)  Audit city use of herbicides, fertilizers and pesticides to determine compliance with federal and state regulations and recommend alternative solutions where practicable for the reduction of the use of these items through education and out-reach programs; and 
(9)  Audit city department procedures to confirm that the city is in compliance with federal and state NPDES regulations and determine if the city has obtained, and is in compliance with, permits required by federal and state environmental laws. 
(Code 2017, § 27-204; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-266. - Exempted non-stormwater discharges. 
    The following non-stormwater discharges are allowable non-stormwater discharges, and are exempt from the discharge prohibitions of this article, unless a particular discharge has been determined to be a substantial contributor of pollutants to the MS4 and the discharge continues more than ten days after delivery of written notice of such determination to the discharger: 
(1)  Discharge from firefighting activities that are necessary due to an immediate danger to life or property; 
(2)  Fire hydrant flushing; 
(3)  Potable water sources; 
(4)  Water line flushing; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater; 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Crawl space pump water; 
(8)  Natural springs; 
(9)  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
(10)  Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation); 
(11)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(12)  Exterior building wash water when no detergents or other surfactants are used; 
(13)  Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents or other surfactants are used (unless all spilled material has been removed); 
(14)  Diverted stream flows; 
(15)  Storm sewer system cleaning water; 
(16)  Residential or non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
(17)  De-chlorinated swimming pool discharge less than one PPM chlorine; 
(18)  Residual street wash water; 
(19)  De-chlorinated water from reservoir discharges; 
(20)  Foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); 
(21)  Discharges specified in writing by the city engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety of citizens; 
(22)  Dye-testing procedures (requires a verbal notification to the city engineer prior to the time of the test); and 
(23)  Any other water source not containing pollutants, as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-205; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-267. - Illicit discharges and illicit connections prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants, or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(c)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(d)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying a pollutant to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under this article, an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the US EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of this article, the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4. 
(Code 2017, § 27-206; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-268. - Illicit discharge items. 
    The following direct or indirect discharges into community waters, waters of the state or waters of the United States are, without limitation, examples of illicit discharges: 
(1)  Sewage dumping or dumping of sewage sludge; 
(2)  Chlorinated swimming pool discharge with chlorine concentrations greater that one PPM; 
(3)  Discharge of any polluted household wastewater, such as, but not limited to, laundry wash water and dishwater, except to a sanitary sewer or septic system; 
(4)  Leaking sanitary sewers and connections, which have remained uncorrected for a period of time as indicated in the NPDES permit issued to the city by the department; 
(5)  Commercial, industrial or non-exempt public vehicle wash or power wash discharge; 
(6)  Dead animals or animal fecal waste; 
(7)  Non-stormwater discharges, except those allowed pursuant to a permit issued by IDNR; 
(8)  Concrete truck wash water; 
(9)  Dredged material from waterways; 
(10)  Spoil material such as sediment runoff from construction sites; 
(11)  Chemical waste; 
(12)  Hazardous waste; 
(13)  Runoff from discarded vehicles or equipment; 
(14)  Garbage; 
(15)  Rubbish; 
(16)  Yard waste; 
(17)  Floatable materials; and 
(18)  Any other item deemed a pollutant as designated by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-207; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-269. - Stormwater monitoring sites. 
    The city engineer shall monitor the concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from locations as designated in the city stormwater management program, or as otherwise determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-208; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-270. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property in the city through which a watercourse passes, or other responsible person, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse that is within such person's property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or other responsible person shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures shall not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Code 2017, § 27-209; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-271. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by use of best management practices (BMPs). 
(a)  The city engineer may adopt requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or non-industrial facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater runoff in the MS4. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a commercial or non-industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. 
(c)  Any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with non-industrial activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Code 2017, § 27-210; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-272. - Suspension of discharge rights due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. 
(a)  The city engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge rights to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the environment, health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city engineer may take such steps as are, in the discretion of the city engineer, deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  A person violates this article if the person reinstates MS4 discharge to a premises terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior written approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-211; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-273. - Suspension of action due to the detection of illicit discharge in non-emergency situations. 
(a)  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have such person's MS4 discharge rights terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city engineer shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of such violator's MS4 discharge rights no less than 30 days before the date of proposed termination. The violator may petition the city engineer for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(b)  A person violates this article if the person reinstates MS4 discharge to a premises terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior written approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-212; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-274. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  The city inspection services manager and/or city engineer, bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect properties within the city if there is reasonable cause to believe that an illicit discharge to the MS4 is occurring. These inspections may include investigations, monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling, and testing, to determine if a suspected discharge is in fact illicit. 
(b)  The city inspection services manager or city engineer shall duly notify the owner of said property, or the representative of the owner or other responsible person on site, of the inspection at least 24 hours in advance of the inspection, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The inspection shall be conducted at reasonable times during the course of the business day, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In the event the city inspection services manager or city engineer reasonably believes that discharges from the property into the MS4 may cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may take place without notice to the owner of the property or a representative on site. The inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable request by the owner or the owner's representative when contacted. 
(d)  Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to enter a site or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas to which no objection is raised. The inspector shall immediately report the refusal, and the grounds of the refusal, to the inspection services manager or city engineer. The city inspection services manager or city engineer may seek appropriate compulsory process in accordance with law. 
(e)  The city inspection services manager and/or city engineer shall have the right to place such devices on the property as are reasonably necessary, in the discretion of the inspection services manager or city engineer, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges. 
(Code 2017, § 27-213; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2943, § 6, 6-3-2019) 
Sec. 24-275. - Notice of violation; delivery; failure to act subject to deadline. 
(a)  When the city engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city engineer shall notify the property owner or other responsible person in writing. This written notice may be delivered by ordinary mail to the property owner or other responsible person at such person's last known address. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  The name of the property owner; 
(2)  The date and the location of the violation; 
(3)  The description of the violation; 
(4)  Actions that must be taken by the property owner to remedy the violation, including, but not limited to, the elimination of illicit discharges and illicit connections, the performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting, and the implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; 
(5)  The deadline by which the required actions must be completed; 
(6)  Notice date; 
(7)  Restoration measures to be taken with respect to the property, if any; and 
(8)  Amount of administrative and remediation fines, fees, or costs, if any. 
(b)  The notice shall also advise that, if the violator fails to take required remedial action within the stated deadline, the work may be done by a designated governmental agency or a private contractor, in either case at the sole expense of the violator. 
(Code 2017, § 27-214; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-276. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city engineer. The notice of appeal must be received within 14 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city council, or its designated committee, shall take place within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, unless extended for good cause. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 2017, § 27-215; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-277. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 14 days of the decision of the city council upholding the decision of the city engineer, the city engineer shall enter upon the subject property and take such measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property to a condition that is in compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the city, or the city's designated contractor, to enter upon any premises in the city for the purposes of investigating, correcting or abating violations, or otherwise enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-216; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-278. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    After abatement of the violation, the owner of the property shall be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may, within 30 days following notice of abatement costs, file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the city engineer, the assessment shall constitute a lien on the property pursuant to Iowa Code § 384.84. Any abatement costs not paid in full within 30 days of final determination shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest provided by law, until paid in full. Prior written notice of intent to certify a lien shall be given to the property owner at least 30 days prior to certification. The notice shall be sent to the property owner by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to the certification of the lien to the county treasurer. After compliance with the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall certify for taxation purposes and for purposes of the establishing of the property lien to the county treasurer all delinquent abatement costs, together with an administrative expense of determined by the city and based upon the abatement costs. The lien shall not be certified to the county treasurer for a delinquent cost of less than the amount determined by the city and based upon the abatement costs. For the purpose of the certification and for no other purpose whatsoever, assessment costs shall be designated as delinquent when the payments are shown and appear on the books of the city to have been unpaid for a period of six months following their due date. 
(Code 2017, § 27-217; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-279. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any of the provisions of this article. If a person has violated, or continues to violate, the provisions of this article, the city engineer may petition a court for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from any violation of the provisions of this article, or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of any such violations. 
(Code 2017, § 27-218; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-280. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the city engineer may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions. These actions may include, but are not limited to, storm drain labeling, attendance at stormwater pollution prevention compliance workshops, the cleanup of local waterways or creeks, or any other activity as determined appropriate by the city engineer. The failure of any person to complete any such alternative compensatory actions imposed by the city engineer shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-219; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-281. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be considered a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is hereby declared and deemed to be a nuisance. Any such nuisance may be summarily abated at the violator's expense, or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be undertaken as authorized by law. 
(Code 2017, § 27-220; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-282. - Municipal infraction. 
(a)  Any violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
(1)  First offense: $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense: $750.00; 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, abatement or injunctive relief. 
(b)  In addition to any fine or penalty, the city may recover all legal fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including necessary sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Code 2017, § 27-221; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-283. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article shall not be exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. It is within the discretion of the city engineer to seek any other remedies deemed necessary by the city engineer to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-222; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-284. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction are in conflict, whichever regulation imposes the greater restriction shall be deemed applicable and shall be enforced. 
(Code 2017, § 27-223; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 24-285. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore the provisions of this article are not intended to and do not imply that compliance with the provisions of this article by any person shall ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the MS4, waters of the state, or waters of the United States. 
(Code 2017, § 27-225; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Secs. 24-286-24-303. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 24-304. - Findings. 
(a)  The U.S. EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program ("program") administered by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) requires certain persons engaged in construction activities to submit an application to the IDNR for a state NPDES General Permit No. 2. Notwithstanding any provision of this article, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with the applicant's state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and any other requirement of state or federal law or administrative rule. 
(b)  As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the program by adopting a construction site erosion and sediment control ordinance. In furtherance of this objective: 
(1)  Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, state agency or political subdivision (each an "applicant") required by law or administrative rule to apply to the IDNR for a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 shall apply to the IDNR for such permit and shall apply to the city engineer for approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as defined in section 24-224; and 
(2)  Each applicant having a site with more than five acres of disturbed area shall hire either a licensed professional engineer or registered architect as the applicant's engineer. Each applicant having a site with five acres or less of disturbed area shall hire either a licensed professional engineer, a registered architect (including a registered landscape architect), or a professional in erosion and sediment control, as the applicant's engineer. Each such applicant's engineer shall be credentialed in a manner acceptable to the city, and shall be referred to in this article as the "applicant's engineer." 
(3)  The applicant's engineer for the applicant shall have primary responsibility for design, inspection, monitoring and enforcement procedures to ensure applicant's compliance with the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and the SWPPP. 
(c)  No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city in administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, each applicant seeking city approval of a SWPPP shall pay a non-refundable fee to the city in such amount as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 27-301; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-305. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means and includes any person to whom a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 has been issued. 
    City engineer means and includes any other representative of the city engineer's office that is designated by the city engineer to act in the place and with the authority of the city engineer. The term "city engineer" is also referred to in this article as the "enforcement officer." 
(Code 2017, § 27-302; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-306. - Submission and approval of stormwater pollution prevention plan and other documents. 
(a)  No person shall begin work on any site that is the subject of a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 until compliance with this section 24-306 and approval of a SWPPP. 
(b)  An applicant in possession of a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 issued by the IDNR shall submit to the city complete, certified copies of the materials described below, together with all supporting calculations: 
(1)  Applicant's plans, specifications and supporting materials previously submitted to the IDNR in support of applicant's application for the state NPDES General Permit No. 2; 
(2)  Applicant's authorizations issued pursuant to applicant's state NPDES General Permit No. 2; 
(3)  An SWPPP prepared in accordance with this chapter. Every SWPPP submitted to the city: 
a.  Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for SWPPPs promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of a state NPDES General Permit No. 2, as set out in the IDNR publication entitled, "Iowa Department of Natural Resources NPDES General Permit No. 2, Stormwater Discharge Associated With Industrial Activity For Construction Activities, Effective Date-October 1, 2002, to October 1, 2007," including, but not limited to, "Part IV. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans," and as said minimum mandatory requirements are modified from time to time hereafter; 
b.  Shall, if the applicant is required by law to file a joint application form entitled, "Protecting State Waters," the state department of natural resources and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, comply with all mandatory minimum requirements pertaining to such a joint application; 
c.  Shall comply with all other applicable state or federal permit requirements in existence at the time of application; 
d.  Shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer; and 
e.  Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by the applicant's engineer that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  In addition to the SWPPP requirements stated in subsection (b) of this section, which constitute minimum mandatory requirements imposed by the program, every SWPPP submitted to the city shall comply with Statewide Urban Design and Specifications (SUDAS) standard design criteria and the Iowa Construction Site Erosion Control Manual, as such manual and SUDAS may be revised or amended from time to time, including, but not limited to, design, location, and phased implementation of effective, practicable stormwater pollution prevention measures, and shall also: 
(1)  Identify the nature of the construction activity and the potential for sediment and other pollutant discharges from the site; 
(2)  Ensure that stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to erosion by wind or water are covered, vegetated, or otherwise effectively protected from erosion and sedimentation in accordance with the amount of time the material will be on site and the manner of its proposed use; with no stockpiling being allowed in the street; 
(3)  Ensure that, until work on the site has been completed, all construction waste materials shall be disposed of in a dumpster of appropriate size and shall not be permitted to be stockpiled on the site unless in a covered and enclosed structure or trailer; 
(4)  Identify measures and procedures including, but not limited to, best management practices, to reasonably minimize site soil compaction and provide soil quality restoration as specified; 
(5)  Ensure that all temporary erosion and sediment controls shall not be removed until the city has determined that the site has been permanently stabilized with 70 percent perennial cover; 
(6)  Identify methods to prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and sensitive environmental areas such as water bodies, plant communities, rare, threatened and/or endangered species habitat, wildlife corridors, greenways, and the like; 
(7)  Provide for design and construction methods to stabilize steep or long continuous slopes; 
(8)  Include measures to control the quantity and quality of stormwater leaving a site before, during and after construction; 
(9)  Provide for stabilization of all waterways and outlets; 
(10)  Protect storm sewer infrastructure from sediment loading and/or plugging; 
(11)  Specify precautions to be taken to contain sediment when working in or crossing waters of the state; 
(12)  Ensure stabilization of disturbed areas, including utility construction areas, within five calendar days after the area is no longer actively being worked; 
(13)  Protect outlying roads from sediment and mud from construction site activities, including preventing tracking; 
(14)  Provide for disposal of collected sediment and floating debris; and 
(15)  Ensure that when working near waters of the state, as defined in section 24-224, the specific practices itemized immediately below are utilized: 
a.  During construction: 
1.  All exposed soil areas with a slope of 3:1 or steeper, and that have a continuous positive slope to waters of the state, shall have temporary erosion protection or permanent cover within three days after the area is no longer actively being worked; all other slopes that have a continuous positive slope to the waters of the state shall have temporary erosion protection or permanent cover within seven days after the area is no longer actively being worked; and 
2.  Temporary sediment basin requirements shall be used for common drainage locations that serve an area that has five or more acres of soil disturbed at one time; and 
b.  Buffer zone. Provide for the maintenance at all times of an undisturbed buffer zone consisting of not less than 100 linear feet from the waters of the state(including tributaries); exceptions from this requirement for areas, such as water crossings or limited water access, are allowed if the applicant fully documents in the SWPPP the circumstances and reasons that the buffer encroachment is necessary; provided, however, that all potential water quality, scenic and other environmental impacts of these exceptions shall be minimized and documented in the SWPPP for the project. 
(d)  The applicant shall post security for compliance with all requirements imposed by the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 as well as necessary remedial work resulting from violation of any provision of this article in an amount of $100.00 per gross acre for building sites, subdivisions or other developments of five acres or more. This amount shall apply to the maximum acreage of soil that will be simultaneously exposed during the project's construction. Acceptable forms of performance security include the following: 
(1)  Performance bonds in form and content acceptable to the city; or 
(2)  Cash escrow agreement in form and content acceptable to the city. 
(e)  The applicant shall also submit a signed written statement to the city which states as follows: 
    "In addition to the performance security posted with this application, the undersigned applicant hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims, damages or suits arising directly or indirectly out of any act of commission or omission by the applicant, or any employee, agent, assignee, contractor or subcontractor of the applicant, in connection with applicant's state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and/or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan." 
(f)  The city shall send written notification to the applicant of the approval of the applicant's SWPPP within a reasonable time following the applicant's completed submission of all documents and information required under this section and posting of the required security, unless the city has provided to the applicant a written bill of particulars identifying non-complying elements of the application. The city shall not issue approval of the applicant's SWPPP until such non-complying elements of the application have been corrected, and until the application complies with the applicant's state NPDES General Permit No. 2, the requirements of this article, and all other applicable laws and regulations, federal, state and local. 
(g)  For so long as a construction site is subject to a state NPDES General Permit No. 2, the applicant shall promptly provide the city with current information as follows: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's engineer and any other person on site designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and the SWPPP; and 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the contractor and/or subcontractors that will implement each erosion and sediment control measure identified in the SWPPP. 
The applicant's failure to provide current information shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-303; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-307. - Transfer and termination of state NPDES general permits and stormwater pollution prevention plan obligations. 
(a)  The owner of real property that is the subject of a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 may transfer responsibility under the owner's SWPPP to one or more transferees of all or part of such property in the same manner that responsibility for compliance with an NPDES General Permit No. 2 can be transferred pursuant to 567 Iowa Admin. Code 64.6(6), or any similar successor provision. Each transferee must agree to the transfer in writing and must agree to fulfill all obligations of the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and the SWPPP, including submission of a statement signed by the transferee as provided for in section 24-306(e). The property owner shall file with the office of the city engineer a copy of all documents filed with IDNR in connection with transfer of responsibility under the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 to each such transferee, and a copy of each such transferee's agreement to fulfill all obligations of the SWPPP. Absent such written confirmation of transfer of obligations, such property owner remains responsible for compliance with the SWPPP on any property that has been sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred. 
(b)  All documents and information required by the IDNR to be filed to terminate the NPDES General Permit No. 2 must also be filed with the office of the city engineer. Upon submission of said materials to the city, the city shall have 30 days in which to request additional information, before the SWPPP shall be deemed terminated. 
(Code 2017, § 27-304; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-308. - Inspection procedures. 
(a)  All inspections undertaken by the city under this article shall be conducted by the enforcement officer. 
(b)  The applicant's engineer shall notify the city when all measures required by applicant's SWPPP have been accomplished on site. The enforcement officer may inspect the property to determine compliance. If the enforcement officer determines that compliance has not been achieved, the enforcement officer shall provide to the applicant a written bill of particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of receiving the enforcement officer's bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the enforcement officer may extend the deadline for taking corrective action for a reasonable period of time. Failure of the applicant to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Construction shall not occur on the site at any time while conditions of non-compliance that have been identified by the enforcement officer continue to exist. 
(d)  Construction activities undertaken by an applicant prior to resolution of all discrepancies specified in the bill of particulars shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(e)  The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to third parties for non-compliant conditions that were undetected by inspection or that were undetected because the city, in operating its program of random inspections, did not inspect the property. 
(f)  Applicant's engineer shall inspect the site no less than once every seven calendar days and shall retain on site a written report about site conditions that is readily available to the enforcement officer. 
(Code 2017, § 27-305; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-309. - Monitoring procedures. 
(a)  Upon issuance of a state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and SWPPP approval, an applicant shall have an absolute, affirmative duty to monitor site conditions and to report to the enforcement officer any change of circumstances or site conditions which the applicant knows or should know pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner inconsistent with applicant's SWPPP or state NPDES General Permit No. 2. Rainfall in an amount over one-half inch within a 24-hour period, as measured by an on-site standard rain gauge, shall be deemed a change of circumstances or site conditions requiring notification under this section. 
(1)  Such report shall be made available by the applicant to the enforcement officer immediately, but in any event within 24 hours of the change of circumstances or site conditions. 
(2)  Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Any third party may also report to the city site conditions which the third party reasonably believes pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner inconsistent with applicant's SWPPP or state NPDES General Permit No. 2. 
(c)  Upon receiving a report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the enforcement officer may conduct an inspection and thereafter shall provide the applicant with a written bill of particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of receiving the bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the enforcement officer may extend the deadline for completing corrective action for a reasonable period of time. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in section 24-310. 
(d)  Upon receiving a report from a third party pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the enforcement officer may conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide the applicant with a written bill of particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of receiving the bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the enforcement officer may extend the deadline for completing corrective action for a reasonable period of time. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in section 24-310. 
(e)  The enforcement officer may conduct one or more unannounced inspections at any time during the course of construction to monitor compliance with the state NPDES General Permit No. 2 and the SWPPP. If the inspection discloses any non-compliance, the enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a written bill of particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of receiving the bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the enforcement officer may extend the deadline for completing corrective action for a reasonable period of time. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in section 24-310. 
(f)  The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to third parties for non-compliant conditions that were undetected by inspection or that were undetected because the city, in operating its program of random inspections, did not inspect the property. 
(Code 2017, § 27-306; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-310. - General enforcement. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this article may be enforced by issuance of a stop work order by the enforcement officer or by civil action, administrative or judicial, including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief. A stop work order shall specify the violation and shall remain in effect until the deficient condition has been remedied. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this article constitutes a municipal infraction under this Code, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
(1)  First offense: $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense: $750.00; 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, abatement or injunctive relief. 
(c)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be considered a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed to be a nuisance. This nuisance may be summarily abated or corrected at the violator's expense. 
(d)  In addition to any fine or penalty, the city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including necessary monitoring expenses. 
(e)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. It is within the discretion of the enforcement officer to seek cumulative remedies if necessary. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the city attorney. 
(Code 2017, § 27-307; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-311. - Appeal. 
(a)  Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the city council pursuant to the following rules: 
(1)  The appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within five business days of the decision or enforcement action. 
(2)  The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from, the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall, at the hearing, or at any time before the hearing, specify in writing the reasons for the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and copies of all documents enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing. 
(4)  The city clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Iowa Code ch. 21 of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting of the city council, or its designated committee, at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Iowa Code ch. 17A. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant's expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the city attorney or by an attorney designated by the city council at city expense. 
(b)  The decision of the city council, or its designated committee, shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the state district court as provided by Iowa law. 
(Code 2017, § 27-308; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-312. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the written bill of particulars, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days of the decision of the city council or its designated committee upholding the decision of the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer may enter upon the subject property and take such measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property to a condition that is in compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the city, or the city's designated contractor, to enter upon any premises in the city for the purposes of investigating, correcting or abating violations, or otherwise enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-309; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-313. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    After abatement of the violation, the applicant shall be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The applicant may, within 30 days following notice of abatement costs, file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the enforcement officer, the assessment shall constitute a lien on the property pursuant to Iowa Code § 384.84. Any abatement costs not paid in full within 30 days of final determination shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest provided by law, until paid in full. Prior written notice of intent to certify a lien shall be given to the applicant at least 30 days prior to certification. The notice shall be sent to the applicant by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to the certification of the lien to the county treasurer. After compliance with the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall certify for taxation purposes and for purposes of the establishing of the property lien to the county treasurer all delinquent abatement costs, together with an administrative expense determined by the city and based upon the abatement costs, including any filing fees. 
(Code 2017, § 27-310; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-314. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any of the provisions of this article. If a person has violated, or continues to violate, the provisions of this article, the enforcement officer may petition a court for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from any violation of the provisions of this article, or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of any such violations. 
(Code 2017, § 27-311; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 24-315. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of or in addition to enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the enforcement officer may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions. These actions may include, but are not limited to, storm drain labeling, attendance at stormwater pollution prevention compliance workshops, the cleanup of local waterways or creeks, or any other activity as determined appropriate by the enforcement officer. The failure of any person to complete any such alternative compensatory actions imposed by the enforcement officer shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-312; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Secs. 24-316-24-333. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL 

Sec. 24-334. - Findings. 
(a)  The U.S. EPA's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program ("program") administered by the state department of natural resources (IDNR) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) (the "MS4 permit"). The city ("city") is subject to the program and is required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 Permit. The city's MS4 permit is on file at the office of the city clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(b)  As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obligated to implement and enforce a post-construction stormwater control ordinance. 
(c)  No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city in administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city shall fund its operations under this article entirely by charges imposed on the owners or developers of properties that are made subject to the program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance. 
(d)  Land development and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; this stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; and stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution may be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
(e)  Therefore, the city establishes this set of city stormwater standards applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff, is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(f)  The Iowa Stormwater Management Manual published collaboratively by the state department of natural resources and The Center for Transportation Research and Education at Iowa State University establishes guidelines consisting of unified sizing criteria, stormwater management designs and specifications and best management practices (BMPs). The city hereby finds and declares that the guidelines provided for in the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual should be and are hereby adopted as stormwater guidelines for the city. 
(Code 2017, § 27-401; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-335. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to set the city's standards as the guidelines established in the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual (city's stormwater requirements or standards) in order to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose by: 
(1)  Minimizing increases in stormwater runoff from developments within the city limits in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion; 
(2)  Minimizing increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from developments that would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimizing the annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from a developed site by not exceeding the pre-development hydrologic regime; and 
(4)  Reducing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and soil erosion, through establishment of appropriate minimum stormwater management standards and BMPs and ensuring that stormwater management facilities are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(b)  Compatibility with other permit and article requirements. 
(1)  It is intended that this article be construed to be consistent with article III (stormwater management program), article IV (illicit discharge detection and elimination) and article V (construction site erosion and sediment control) of this chapter. 
(2)  The requirements of this article shall be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard of protection for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 2017, § 27-402; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-336. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications meeting the minimum requirements of a development or redevelopment, as provided in subsection (b)(1) through (4) of this section, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city under section 24-342. City stormwater requirements must be met in order for a development or redevelopment to be approved, and shall apply to any development or redevelopment, as provided in subsection (b)(1) through (4) of this section, but the following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any logging or agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or an approved timber management plan. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-unit structures. 
(b)  When a development plan is submitted to the city that qualifies as a development or redevelopment, the procedures and requirements of section 24-338 shall be followed. Final authorization of all development and redevelopment projects shall be determined after a review by the city. Plans that must comply with section 24-338 are: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity exceeding 43,560 square feet in area on land previously vacant of buildings or largely free of previous land disturbing activity other than traditional agricultural activities; 
(2)  Land disturbing activity creating 5,000 square feet in area or more of impervious cover; 
(3)  Land disturbing activities that are smaller than the minimum square feet applicability criteria set forth in this subsection, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that may or may not take place at the same time; or 
(4)  Land disturbing activity exceeding 25,000 square feet in area where the existing land is being redeveloped. 
(Code 2017, § 27-403; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-337. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms or acronyms used in this article shall, unless defined in this article, have the meanings given to them in section 24-224, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) are policies, practices, procedures, or structures implemented to mitigate the adverse environmental effects on surface water quality resulting from development. BMPs are categorized as structural or non-structural. 
    City engineer includes any other representative of the city engineer's office that is designated by the city engineer to act in the place and with the authority of the city engineer. The city engineer is also referred to in this article as the "enforcement officer." The city engineer shall have responsibility for administration and enforcement of this article. 
    City stormwater requirements are set forth in section 24-339(c)(2) and are based upon the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual. 
    Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbing activities. 
    Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
    Iowa Stormwater Management Manual means the manual collaboratively developed by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) and the Center for Transportation Research and Education (CTRE) at Iowa State University that contains the sizing criteria, design and specification guidelines and BMPs that address stormwater quality and quantity management. This manual can be found on the web at the following address: http://www.ctre.iastate.edu/pubs/stormwater/index.cfm. 
    Maintenance and repair agreement means an agreement between the city and property owner that shall be filed at the county recorder's office by which the property owners of all lots or land benefiting from the stormwater management facility grant access for maintenance and repair by means of an easement. 
    Regional stormwater management facility means a facility collecting two or more square miles of a drainage area or a facility having a retention or detention basin with a storage depth of ten feet or more and which stores ten acre-feet or more of water. The facility is required to be on public right-of-way, accessible by street right-of-way, is required to have a perimeter of at least 25 feet, be located within the city limits, and the discharge from which flows through the city limits. 
    Stormwater management means the use of BMPs that are designed in accordance with city stormwater requirements to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
(Code 2017, § 27-404; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-338. - Submittal process. 
(a)  Requirements. No land owner or developer shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbing activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Required submittals. A complete stormwater management plan requires the following submissions to the city engineering department: 
(1)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) permit application and fee; 
(2)  A stormwater management plan (see section 24-339); and 
(3)  A maintenance and repair agreement (see section 24-341). 
(c)  Submittal review process. Once the city receives a complete stormwater management plan, the city shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the permit application for the SWPPP, stormwater management plan, and maintenance and repair agreement are approved or disapproved after the receipt of a complete stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If the SWPPP application, stormwater management plan, or maintenance and repair agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the permit application, the stormwater management plan, and/or the maintenance and repair agreement. If additional information is submitted, the city shall notify the applicant that the stormwater management plan and maintenance and repair agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(3)  If the SWPPP application, stormwater management plan, and maintenance and repair agreement are approved, the SWPPP permit shall be issued by the city. 
(Code 2017, § 27-405; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-339. - Requirements for approval of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan. No application for a development shall be accepted unless it includes a plan detailing the stormwater management facility, and the control and management of the runoff and water quality impacts resulting from the development. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall: 
(1)  Be prepared by either a licensed professional engineer or registered architect if a site is more than five acres of disturbed area. A site with five acres or less of disturbed area shall be prepared by either a licensed professional engineer, a registered architect (including a registered landscape architect), or a professional in erosion and sediment control, as the applicant's engineer. The applicant's engineer shall be credentialed in a manner acceptable to the city, and shall be referred to in this article as the "applicant's engineer." 
(2)  Indicate whether stormwater will be managed on site or off site, and applicable provisions of the general location and type of BMPs, with clear citations to the Iowa Stormwater Management Manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  A map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management facility and sediment and erosion BMPs. The map shall also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; and the limits of clearing and grading. 
(2)  Sufficient engineering analysis to show compliance with the city stormwater requirements, including the following: 
a.  Rainfall events, up to and including 1.25 inches of rain, shall be released at a continuous rate over 24 hours or provide an adequate maintenance and repair agreement to manage this level of rainfall event off site. 
b.  All rainfall events greater than 1.25 inches of rain and up to the 100-year rainfall event shall be released at the rate of the two-year frequency rainfall event on the site as it existed in its natural, undeveloped state. 
c.  If there are reasons why subsection (c)(2)a or b of this section cannot be achieved, an applicant may apply for a waiver as provided in section 24-342. 
(3)  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources present at the site and extending a minimum of 500 feet beyond the limits of the site of the proposed development. A description of the watershed for the project shall include soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. 
(4)  The city may also require that the applicant file a conceptual plan to analyze the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning regulations, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
(5)  For developments occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include existing stormwater runoff discharges. 
(6)  Contact information, including the name and address of the owner of the property, and a list of the owner and addresses of adjacent properties. 
(7)  Topographic base map, consisting of a scalable topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 500 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and which indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land uses, including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features. 
(8)  Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the two-, ten-, and 100-year rainfall events. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration; 
b.  Time of concentration; 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients; 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.  Culvert capacities; 
g.  Flow velocities; 
h.  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff; and 
i.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(9)  If a stormwater management facility depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pit profiles shall be determined based on what is necessary to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the facility. 
(10)  Landscaping and vegetative stabilization shall comply with the city's stormwater requirements and shall prevent impairment of BMPs. 
(11)  A maintenance and repair agreement for all stormwater management facilities (see section 24-341). In the event the applicant and the city agree that the regional stormwater management facility installed by the applicant is to be dedicated to the city, the city shall prepare a dedication agreement on such terms and conditions as the city determines are appropriate, which may include requirements that the applicant pay all installation costs and fees. 
(12)  Proof of the recorded maintenance and repair agreement shall be given to the city. The agreement shall require the following: 
a.  The agreement shall require all benefiting properties to participate in the maintenance and repair of the stormwater management facility; 
b.  Said applicant has accepted such responsibility in a written document and has recorded the document in the county recorder's office under state law; and 
c.  Said applicant understands that this easement shall grant the city the right to correct any maintenance or repair issues not corrected by the applicant with said facility and assess the cost of maintenance and repairs to all benefiting properties as liens to be collected in the same manner as property taxes. 
(13)  Performance bond. The cost of the stormwater management facility shall be included in the amount of the cash escrow or payment and performance bond required under chapter 20. 
(14)  Maintenance bond. The cost of the stormwater management facility shall be included in the amount of the subdivision maintenance bond required to be posted by the developer under chapter 20. 
(d)  The stormwater management plan shall be referred for comments to all other interested agencies including, but not limited to, Iowa Department of Natural Resourses (IDNR), Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT), and the Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS), and consideration shall be given to all comments received from such agencies in determining whether the stormwater management plan meets the requirements of this article. 
(e)  No building, land use, or SWPPP permits shall be issued until a stormwater management plan or waiver has been approved by the city. 
(f)  Multiple submissions of the stormwater management plans shall include a summary of the differences in the new stormwater management plan from the stormwater management plan previously submitted. 
(Code 2017, § 27-406; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-340. - Requirements for construction inspection and closing out of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Notice of construction commencement. The applicant shall notify the city of the commencement of construction. The city or the city's designated representative shall conduct regular inspections of the construction of the stormwater management facility. 
(b)  The applicant shall be notified by the city in writing of the nature of any violations and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until all violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city. 
(c)  After construction is completed, the applicant shall submit "as built" drawings satisfactory to the city for each stormwater management facility. The drawings shall show the final design specifications for the facility and shall be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city shall be conducted prior to any release of the cash escrow or payment and performance bond required under chapter 20. Each applicant shall provide the city a copy of the notice of discontinuation for General Permit No. 2 required under article V, construction site erosion and sediment control, of this chapter if applicable to the property. 
(Code 2017, § 27-407; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-341. - Requirements for the maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  Responsibilities. The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining complete and accurate as-built drawings for the stormwater management facility for the life of the improvements. 
(b)  Maintenance and repair agreement. Maintenance of and repairs to a stormwater management facility shall be ensured through the granting of a formal maintenance and repair agreement that shall be subject to the approval of the city and which shall be recorded prior to the stormwater management plan approval and the issuance of a SWPPP permit for any development. As part of the agreement, a schedule shall be developed for maintenance that shall ensure the proper functioning of the facility. The agreement shall also include plans for inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. In lieu of a maintenance and repair agreement, the city may accept dedication of any existing or future regional stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access of a sufficient area for inspection and regular maintenance by the city. The applicant shall execute a maintenance and repair agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility and the land it serves for inspection by the city or the city's designee through the granting of an easement. 
(c)  Requirements for maintenance and repair agreement. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at a minimum, an annual inspection to document necessary maintenance and repair and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. Any necessary maintenance or repair shall be accomplished by the owner in a timely manner, as determined by city, and the frequency and level of inspection and maintenance may be increased as deemed necessary by the city in order to ensure proper functioning of the facilities. 
(d)  Records of installation, maintenance, and repair activities. The property owner responsible for the operation and maintenance of each stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation, maintenance, and repairs of the facility, and shall retain the records for at least 25 years or until the facility has been reconstructed. These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the facility and shall be submitted to the city at other reasonable times upon request. 
(e)  Failure to maintain stormwater management facilities. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance and repair agreement, or of any provision of this article, the city, after notice, may correct a violation by performing all necessary work to place the stormwater facility in proper working condition. If the stormwater facility is not a danger to public safety or public health, the responsible party shall be provided with reasonable notice to correct the violation. In the event that the stormwater facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the facility in writing that upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have two days to maintain and repair the facility in a manner that meets the requirements of this article. After proper notice, city may assess, jointly and severally, the owner of the facility or the property owners or the parties responsible for maintenance under any applicable written agreement for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the facility, or shall be assessed to all benefiting properties as liens to be collected in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Code 2017, § 27-408; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-342. - Waivers. 
(a)  Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request to the city for a partial waiver of the stormwater management plan is granted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or unless a written request to the city for a general waiver of the stormwater management plan is granted pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Partial waiver. 
(1)  A partial waiver of the stormwater management plan may be granted provided that at least one of the following conditions is established based on evidence satisfactory to the city; if the following conditions cannot be established, the application shall be denied: 
a.  The proposed development will not impair attainment of the objectives of this article; 
b.  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city and that has been fully implemented; or 
c.  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility shall be in place, shall be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be provided by on-site practices and there shall be a responsible party available to monitor the performance of and maintain the efficiency of the stormwater management facility in accordance with a written and recorded maintenance and repair agreement. 
(2)  If the applicant successfully establishes at least one of the conditions for granting a partial waiver specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the applicant must submit further evidence satisfactory to the city that the partial waiver will not result in any one or more of the following impacts to downstream waterways; if a partial waiver will result in any one or more of the following impacts to downstream waterways, the application must be denied: 
a.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
b.  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
c.  Accelerated streambank, streambed erosion, or siltation; or 
d.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, or property. 
(c)  General waivers. If the city finds that a general waiver is appropriate, the applicant shall execute a written agreement to accomplish one or more of the following mitigation measures selected by the city: 
(1)  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reconstruction of native ecosystems of lands strategically located in the watershed consistent with the purposes of this article, of a sufficient quantity to enable the city to achieve the city's stormwater requirements. 
(2)  The creation of one or more stormwater management facilities on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management having a capacity to achieve city stormwater requirements. 
(3)  Monetary contributions to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (to include, but not limited to, regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, monitoring of stormwater facilities, and stream corridor stabilization practices). The monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule established by the city council based on the estimated cost savings to the developer resulting from the waiver and the estimated future costs to the city to achieve city stormwater requirements. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(4)  Dedication of land or granting of an easement by the applicant of a value equivalent to the cost to city of the construction of an off-site regional stormwater management facility sufficient to achieve city stormwater requirements. The applicant and city shall enter into the agreement prior to the approval of any final subdivision plat of the development, or if no approval of a subdivision plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(5)  Payment of an assessment to a regional stormwater management facility constructed by the city, or constructed by a property owner or property developer for which the city incurs any costs, the total cost of which has not been assessed against the benefited properties by the levying of special assessments. The assessment shall be paid for by the owners of benefited properties before the facility, or any part or parts thereof, is or are used. The city engineer shall report the total cost thereof to the city council. The city council shall then prorate the total cost thereof among the properties benefited thereby and shall adopt an ordinance setting forth charges against respective properties which use the regional stormwater management facility. Such ordinance shall only be adopted after notice published in accordance with the requirements of state law, and only after a public hearing thereon. The charges shall be paid prior to or at the time of minor or preliminary plat approval by the city, the charges to be equal in value to the total cost, including the construction costs, incurred by the city in connection with the advance installation of the facility required for the development of the property. 
(Code 2017, § 27-409; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-343. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this article may be enforced by issuance of a stop work order by the enforcement officer or by civil action, administrative or judicial, including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief. A stop work order shall specify the violation and shall remain in effect until all deficient conditions have been remedied. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this article constitutes a municipal infraction under this code, punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: 
(1)  First offense: $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense: $750.00; 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000.00. 
Each day that a municipal infraction occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to abatement or injunctive relief. 
(c)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be considered a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed to be a nuisance. This nuisance may be summarily abated or corrected by the city at the violator's expense. 
(d)  In addition to any fine or penalty, the city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including necessary monitoring expenses. 
(e)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. It is within the discretion of the enforcement officer to seek cumulative remedies if deemed necessary. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the city attorney. 
(Code 2017, § 27-410; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-344. - Appeal. 
(a)  Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the city council pursuant to the following rules: 
(1)  The appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk within five business days of the date of the decision or enforcement action. 
(2)  The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from, the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall, at the hearing, or at any time before the hearing, specify in writing the reasons for the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing. 
(4)  The city clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Iowa Code ch. 21 of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting of the city council, or its designated committee, at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Iowa Code ch. 7A. The applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant's expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the city attorney or by an attorney designated by the city council at city expense. 
(b)  The decision of the city council, or its designated committee, shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the state district court as provided by state law. 
(Code 2017, § 27-411; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-345. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice from the city, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days of the decision of the city council or its designated committee upholding the decision of the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer may enter upon the subject property and take such measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property to a condition that is in compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the city, or the city's designated representative, to enter upon any premises in the city for the purposes of investigating, correcting or abating violations, or otherwise enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-412; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-346. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    After abatement of the violation, the applicant shall be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The applicant may, within 30 days following notice of abatement costs, file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the enforcement officer, the assessment shall constitute a lien on the property pursuant to Iowa Code § 384.84. Any abatement costs not paid in full within 30 days of final determination shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest provided by law, until paid in full. Written notice of intent to certify a lien shall be sent to the applicant by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to the certification of the lien to the county treasurer. After compliance with the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall certify for taxation purposes and for purposes of the establishment of the property lien to the county treasurer all delinquent abatement costs, together with an administrative expense determined by the city and based upon the abatement costs, including filing fees. 
(Code 2017, § 27-413; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-347. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any of the provisions of this article. If a person has violated, or continues to violate, the provisions of this article, the enforcement officer may petition a court for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from any violation of the provisions of this article, or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of any such violations. 
(Code 2017, § 27-414; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-348. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of or in addition to enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the enforcement officer may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions. These actions may include, but are not limited to, storm drain labeling, attendance at stormwater pollution prevention compliance workshops, the cleanup of local waterways or creeks, or any other activity determined appropriate by the enforcement officer. The failure of any person to complete any such alternative compensatory actions imposed by the enforcement officer shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 27-415; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-27-2010) 
Chapter 25 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Transportation network companies. 
    This chapter shall not apply to a transportation network company as defined in Iowa Code § 321N.1(5), a transportation network company driver as defined in Iowa Code § 321N.1(6), or a personal vehicle as defined in Iowa Code § 321N.1(3). A transportation network company, a transportation network company driver, and a personal vehicle, as so defined, shall be exclusively controlled, supervised, and regulated by the state department of transportation pursuant to the applicable provisions of state law, including without limitation Iowa Code ch. 321N. 
(Code 2017, § 28-1; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-1), 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 25-2-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 25-21. - Jurisdiction. 
    This article shall apply to all vehicles for hire whose place of business is in the city or who conducts business in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 28-25; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-25), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City clerk means the city clerk or the clerk's authorized representative. 
    Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to transport 16 or more persons for hire. A commercial motor vehicle shall be regulated under state law and the United States Code, and shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
    Driver's license means the permission granted to a person to drive a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city, as provided in this article. 
    Exception means those motor vehicles owned and operated by hotels, motels and other boarding places for the purpose of transporting patrons between said hotel, motel, or boarding place and another point; ambulances and other emergency vehicles; and buses operated by the metropolitan transit authority or vans operated by the regional transit commission, are excluded from this article. 
    Holder means a person to whom a permit for operating a vehicle for hire business has been issued. 
    Limousine means a motor vehicle being operated for transportation for hire, having a seating capacity of seven or more passengers, but not to exceed 15 passengers, and not operating on a regular route or between specified points. 
    Person means an individual, a corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, a partnership, and any unincorporated association. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle being operated for transportation for hire, having a seating capacity of less than seven passengers, and not operating on a regular route or between specified points. 
    Trip card means a daily record prepared by a vehicle for hire driver of all trips made by the driver showing the time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare for each trip. 
    Vehicle for hire means a taxicab or limousine regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire. 
(Code 2017, § 28-26; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-26), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-23. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or business shall operate or permit a vehicle for hire owned or controlled by that person to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a permit. However, a state department of transportation certified charter carrier may be exempted from all requirements and fees for licensing upon registration of business and submission of proof of a state department of transportation motor carrier certificate and certificate of insurance in compliance with applicable provisions of state law. 
(b)  A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, limited liability company or other entity that operates a taxicab or limousine within the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be required to maintain a physical place of business in the city as a condition of operating such a taxicab or limousine in the city. 
(Code 2017, § 28-27; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-27), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-24. - Contract drivers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 25-23, a permit may also be granted to an applicant therefor or renewed to an existing holder of a permit, who proposes to furnish vehicle for hire service at least in part, through drivers who are duly licensed by the city, who are bound by written agreement with the permit holder to furnish vehicle for hire services of the quality provided for in this article, and who either own or are lessees of licensed vehicles for hire. Such agreement shall incorporate the provisions of this article applicable to such driver. 
(b)  Holders of permits operating under this plan shall be treated as owners in applying sections 25-29 and 25-45. The operator of each vehicle for hire company must ascertain that each driver working for said company obtains a valid driver's license, in addition to a license for said operator of the company. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall change the permit holder's obligation to furnish to the city the insurance coverage provided for in section 25-29 or change the license fees provided for in section 25-30. 
(Code 2017, § 28-28; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-28), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-25. - Business application for company only. 
    An application for permit shall be filed with the city clerk. It shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, current business and residence addresses and telephone numbers. 
(2)  The number of vehicles for hire to be operated under the permit. 
(3)  The color scheme and/or insignia and/or the name of said company used to distinguish the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant from those of other companies. 
(4)  The county health department has inspected and satisfactorily approved that each vehicle of the company is in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Further information as the city council may require. 
(Code 2017, § 28-29; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-29), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-26. - Denial of business permit for company only. 
    An application for permit filed pursuant to section 25-25 may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to satisfy the requirements of insurance as set forth in this article. 
(2)  The applicant and/or any of the applicant's drivers do not have a valid Iowa driver's license as provided in this article. 
(3)  The applicant fails to meet any of the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2017, § 28-30; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-30), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-27. - Council approval. 
    Upon the filing of the application, the city clerk shall present the application at the next scheduled council meeting and the city council shall grant the permit if all of the requirements are met as set out in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 28-31; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-31), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-28. - Issuance of permit. 
    Any person lawfully operating vehicles for hire upon the streets of the city at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived notwithstanding the foregoing, shall be granted a permit. 
(Code 2017, § 28-32; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-32), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-29. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless and until the owner of the vehicle for hire shall have furnished to the city clerk an insurance policy or certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, providing insurance coverage as follows: 
(1)  For taxicabs, primary automobile insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one or more persons and injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(2)  For limousines, primary automobile insurance in the amount of at least $1,500,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one or more persons and injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(b)  The insurance policy or certificate of insurance referred to in this section shall provide that it cannot be canceled or terminated until ten days' notice of such cancellation or termination shall have been given by registered or certified mail to the city clerk. The certificate of insurance must accompany the application required in section 25-25. 
(c)  The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate the permit and all licenses issued for the vehicle for hire business and the vehicles covered by the insurance policy, unless another policy, complying with this section, shall be provided and in effect at the time of the cancellation or termination. The city clerk shall immediately issue written notification of the revocation of the permit and all licenses for the vehicle for hire business and the vehicles covered by insurance which is canceled or terminated. 
(d)  By applying for and accepting a permit from the city for the purposes contained in this article, the holder of a permit shall hold the city harmless from any liability resulting from the operation of the holder's vehicle for hire business. 
(Code 2017, § 28-33; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2347, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-33), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-30. - Licenses and fees. 
    No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless its holder has paid to the city clerk an annual license fee of such amount as is established by the city council from time to time, for the right to engage in the vehicle for hire business, and an annual license fee of such amount as is established by resolution of the city council from time to time, for each vehicle operated under a permit. The license fee shall be for the year starting with April 1 and continuing through March 31 of the following year; shall be the same amount for each annual renewal of these licenses; and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges, established by proper authority and applicable to the holder or the vehicle or vehicles under the holder's operation and control. 
(Code 2017, § 28-34; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2444, § 1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-34), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-31. - Transfer of permit. 
    No permit shall be sold, assigned, mortgaged or transferred without the purchasing party complying with the permit procedure as set out in this article. 
(Code 2017, § 28-35; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-35), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-32. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if the holder thereof violates any of the provisions of this article; discontinues operations for more than ten days unless such discontinuance is the result of a labor dispute; any falsification of any application or any other statement required under this article; or violates any ordinance of the city, or the laws of the United States or of the state. 
(b)  Prior to suspension or revocation as provided in this section, the holder shall be given ten days' written notice by the city clerk of the proposed action to be taken and shall be afforded an opportunity to appear before the city council and be heard. Any action of the city council shall be final, and appeal therefrom shall be to the state district court for the county. 
(Code 2017, § 28-36; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-36), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-33. - Duration of the business license. 
    A license shall be in effect only from April 1 of the year in which it is issued through March 31 of the following year. 
(Code 2017, § 28-37; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-37), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-34. - Driver's license required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city and no person who owns or controls a vehicle for hire shall permit it to be so driven unless the driver shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's license issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A driver's license which is valid for the operation of a motor vehicle used as a taxicab or limousine upon the streets of the city is a driver's license issued by the state department of transportation that is not an instruction permit, special instruction permit, or temporary restricted license. 
(Code 2017, § 28-38; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-38), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-35. - Application for driver's license. 
(a)  An application for a vehicle for hire driver's license shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city. It shall be certified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The experience of the applicant in the driving of an automobile. 
(2)  The applicant shall possess at the time of making said application a valid Iowa driver's license as provided in section 25-34(b). 
(3)  That the applicant is not restricted to operating motor vehicles equipped with an ignition interlock device. 
(4)  That the applicant's driving privileges have not been suspended, revoked, barred, canceled, denied, or disqualified in the prior three-year period. 
(5)  That the applicant has not been convicted of more than three moving violations in the prior three-year period. 
(6)  That the applicant has not been convicted of violating Iowa Code § 321.218, 321.277, 321J.21, or 321A.32(1), in the prior three-year period. 
(7)  That the applicant has not been convicted in the prior seven-year period of a felony, of violating Iowa Code § 321J.2 or 321J.2A, or of any crime involving resisting law enforcement, dishonesty, injury to another person, damage to the property of another person, or operating a vehicle in a manner that endangers another person. 
(8)  That the applicant is not registered on the national sex offender registry. 
(9)  Such further information as the city council may require. 
(b)  At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee of such amount as is established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 2017, § 28-39; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2444, § 2, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-39), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-36. - Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police record. 
    The police operations division shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a vehicle for hire license, and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to said application. 
(Code 2017, § 28-40; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-40), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-37. - Examination of applicant. 
    Before any vehicle for hire driver's license is issued by the city clerk, the applicant must show that he has a valid Iowa driver's license as provided in section 25-34(b). 
(Code 2017, § 28-41; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-41), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-38. - Consideration of application. 
    The city clerk upon receipt of the report of the applicant's police operation division investigation and the recommendation of the chief of police shall consider the same and approve or reject it. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the city council to offer evidence why the application should be considered. 
(Code 2017, § 28-42; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-42), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-39. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon approval of an application for a vehicle for hire driver's license, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant with a license number thereon. This license must, under penalty of revocation of the license, be constantly and conspicuously displayed in the vehicle for hire. Each driver shall also have an identification card conspicuously displayed in the vehicle for hire showing the name and photograph of the driver. Any driver loaning his license or identification card or permitting another person to use the same shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor, and his license shall be revoked. 
(Code 2017, § 28-43; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-43), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-40. - Duration of license. 
    A license shall be in effect only from April 1 of the year in which issued through March 31 of the following year. 
(Code 2017, § 28-44; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-44), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-41. - License fee. 
    A license for every year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of such amount as is established by resolution of the city council from time to time, and upon proper showing of a current Iowa driver's license as provided in section 25-34(b). 
(Code 2017, § 28-45; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2444, § 3, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-45), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-42. - Lost license. 
    Any licensed driver upon losing any license shall present an affidavit as to such loss to the city clerk, who in turn is authorized to issue a replacement license containing a distinct and separate number and identification showing the same to be a replacement, and the city clerk is authorized to make a charge of such amount as is established by the city council from time to time for such replacement license. The city clerk shall keep a separate record of replacement licenses issued showing the date of issuance, to whom issued and the identification contained thereon. 
(Code 2017, § 28-46; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2444, § 4, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-46), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-43. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The city clerk upon order of the chief of police, shall suspend any driver's license issued under this article for a driver's failure or refusal to comply with its provisions, such suspension to last for a period of not more than ten days. 
(b)  The city council may revoke any driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. However, a license may not be revoked unless the driver has received at least ten-day written notice from the city clerk of the proposed action to be taken and has had an opportunity to appear before the city council and be heard. 
(Code 2017, § 28-47; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-47), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-44. - Vehicles kept in clean and sanitary condition. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The county health department shall make an annual inspection to enforce this provision. Following a substantiated complaint, the affected vehicle shall be immediately removed from service and allowed to operate only after satisfactory compliance with the requirements of said health department. 
(Code 2017, § 28-48; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-48), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-45. - Designation of vehicles for hire. 
(a)  As applicable, each vehicle for hire shall bear on the outside of a door on each side the name of the owner in letters at least two inches in height and, in addition, may bear an identifying design. No vehicle covered by the terms of this article shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. In case of such conflict or imitation, the license and certificate covering the vehicles for hire shall be suspended or revoked as provided in this article. Said signage may be removed for the duration of a trip if requested by the contracting passenger. 
(b)  Each vehicle for hire shall bear on the inside of the passenger compartment clearly visible to passengers a sign which denotes the name of the owner and the license number used by the owner to designate the vehicle for hire. 
(Code 2017, § 28-49; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-49), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-46. - Receipt for payment of rates. 
    If requested by the passenger, the driver in charge of a vehicle for hire shall deliver to the person hiring the same at the time of payment a receipt therefor in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner, the vehicle for hire license number or the driver's signature and the total amount paid and the date of payment. 
(Code 2017, § 28-50; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-50), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-47. - Prepayment. 
    Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall have the right to demand payment of the estimated legal fare in advance and may refuse service unless so prepaid. 
(Code 2017, § 28-51; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-51), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-48. - Posting of rates. 
    Every vehicle for hire shall have posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of the vehicle in the passenger's compartment a card no less than three inches by five inches on which shall be printed in plain legible type the rates of fares charged by the vehicle for hire, unless operation of the vehicle for hire is pursuant to a contract. 
(Code 2017, § 28-52; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-52), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-49. - Overcharge. 
    No person shall charge or attempt to charge a passenger a higher rate of fare than shown by the posted rate. 
(Code 2017, § 28-53; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-53), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-50. - Additional passengers. 
    No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in his vehicle for hire unless the person or persons first employing the vehicle for hire shall consent to the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers. Ride sharing is not prohibited but rather shall be encouraged to promote energy savings. 
(Code 2017, § 28-54; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-54), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-51. - Trip card. 
    Each driver of a vehicle for hire shall prepare and maintain a daily trip card of all trips made by the driver, showing the time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare for each trip. 
(Code 2017, § 28-55; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-55), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-52. - Driver prohibitions. 
    No vehicle for hire driver shall solicit business for any hotel, or attempt to divert patronage from one hotel to another. No driver shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors or distributing controlled substances (except prescription deliveries) or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use the vehicle for any purpose other than that provided by this article. No driver shall drink intoxicating liquors or consume controlled substances while on duty as a driver. 
(Code 2017, § 28-56; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-56), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-53. - Preventing ingress and egress. 
    It shall be prohibited for vehicles for hire to prevent convenient ingress and/or egress to the property abutting the street where the vehicle for hire has a stand or is located. 
(Code 2017, § 28-57; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-57), 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 25-54. - Violation of article; penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, and upon a finding by a court that the violation has been proven, shall be subject to imposition of a civil penalty as provided in section 1-9(a)(1), together with a court order for abatement or correction of the violation, in addition to the suspension or revocation of his license, at the discretion of the city clerk or the city council. 
(Code 2017, § 28-58; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, 2-14-1997; Ord. No. 2891, § 1(28-58), 12-19-2016) 
Chapter 26 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the zoning chapter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-1), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(1)  General zoning definitions. 
Access drive means a driveway or easement allowing access to a lot not having frontage upon a street. 
Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Said accessory structures are customarily used for storage or parking purposes. No residential dwelling unit or business or commercial office may be established within an accessory structure. 
Administrator means the federal insurance administrator, to whom the secretary has delegated the administration of the program. 
Alley means a public way, other than a street, 20 feet or less in width, affording a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Apartment hotel means a building containing both dwelling units and rooming units, used primarily for permanent occupancy. 
Assessed value means the assessed value for general property tax purposes of a property as established by the Assessor of Black Hawk County, Iowa. 
Bed and breakfast enterprises is synonymous with lodging house or guest lodging and means any building or portion thereof containing not more than five guest rooms for which compensation is received for short-term overnight lodging. 
Bed and breakfast inn is synonymous with hotel, and means a lodging establishment containing six or more guest rooms. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or other overnight lodging facility where, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided by the building owners or managers for resident boarders with meals for all resident boarders provided in a central kitchen facility within said building. Residents within said boardinghouse facility shall be accommodated with weekly, monthly, or yearly tenant agreements or leases. 
Building means all residential housing, cabins, factories, warehouses, storage sheds and other walled or roofed structures constructed for occupancy by people or animals or for storage of materials. 
Building, height of means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of any roof ridge. 
Building line means a line on a plat of official record indicating the minimum distance of open space that must be maintained between the property line and any structure on the lot. 
Building setback (see Yard) means the minimum required area of unobstructed open space on a lot measured from the property line. 
Carport means a roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides. A carport attached to a principal building shall be considered as part of the principal building and subject to all yard requirements in this chapter. 
Clinic means a building used by physicians or dentists, osteopaths, chiropractors and allied professions for outpatient care of persons requiring such professional service. 
Day nursery or nursery school means any private agency, institution, establishment or place which provides supplemental parental care or educational work, other than lodging overnight, to more than 12 children. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Driveway, commercial means an improved area that is designed and intended to provide vehicular ingress and egress from a public street or public alley to and across a private property. It provides access to facilities on the private property including parking lots, garages, warehouses or business sites. Commercial driveways may cross property lines to access multiple businesses when specifically permitted by the city. 
Driveway, hard surface means a paved area, as defined in article VI, of chapter 19, of this Code. It does not include gravel or granular surface materials. 
Driveway, residential means an improved area that is designed and intended or used to provide vehicular ingress and egress from a public street or public alley to and across a private property. Driveways shall be entirely paved with a hard surface material. Driveways may provide off-street parking for dwellings and access to garages, parking areas and parking lots, when these facilities are specifically permitted. See section 26-222 for additional regulations. 
Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin or travel trailer. 
Dwelling, condominium means a multiple dwelling whereby the fee title to each dwelling unit is held independently of the others. 
Dwelling, multiple means a residence designed for or occupied by three or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
Dwelling, row means any one of three or more attached dwellings in a continuous row, each such dwelling designed and erected as a unit on a separate lot, and separated from one another by an approved wall. 
Dwelling, single-family means a detached residence designed for or occupied by one family only. 
Dwelling, single-family bi-attached means a dwelling designed for or occupied by one family only which is erected on a separate lot and is joined to another such residence on one side only by a wall located on the lot line and which has yards on the remaining sides. 
Dwelling, two-family means a residence designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms which is arranged, designed or used as living quarters for the occupancy of one family, containing bathroom or kitchen facilities. 
Façade means the entire exterior wall of a building along a street, including all stories. 
Factory-built home park means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built housing lots for rent or sale. 
Factory-built housing means any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. Factory-built housing includes mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes park trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
Factory-built structure means any structure which is, wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on a building site. 
Fair market value means the dollar amount a person would be willing but not obligated to accept, and a buyer would be willing but not compelled to pay, for an item of sale. It is an estimate of what is a fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. In appropriate circumstances this may be the assessed value of the property. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that, unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over four persons. 
Family day care home means an occupied residence in which a person provides supplemental parental care or educational work, other than lodging overnight, to more than six but not more than 12 children. 
Floor area ratio means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area on which the buildings are located. 
Garage, private means an enclosed structure intended for the parking of the private motor vehicle of the families resident upon the premises. 
Gasoline filling station means any building or premises used for: 
(1)  The retail sale of liquefied petroleum products for the propulsion of motor vehicles, including sale of such products as kerosene, fuel oil, package naphtha, lubricants, tires, batteries, antifreeze, motor vehicle accessories and other items customarily associated with the sale of such products; 
(2)  The rendering of services and making of adjustments and replacements to motor vehicles, and the washing, waxing and polishing of motor vehicles, as incidental to other services rendered; and 
(3)  The making of repairs to motor vehicles, except those of a major type. Repairs of a major type are defined to be spray painting, body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs, major overhauling of engines requiring the removal of the engine cylinder head or crankcase pan, repairs to radiators requiring the removal thereof, or complete recapping or retreading of tires. 
Group home means a community-based residential home which is licensed as a residential care facility or an intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded under I.C.A. ch. 135C or as a child foster care facility under I.C.A. ch. 237 to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services and supervision in a family environment exclusively for handicapped persons, as defined in section 3602(f) of the Fair Housing Amendments Act, and any necessary support personnel. However, group home does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed under I.C.A. ch. 237. 
Guest room means a room that is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied by no more than three guests, but in which no mechanical provision is made for cooking, heating or cooling of food or beverages. 
Historic structure means a structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic places in states with historic preservation programs which has been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home occupation means a secondary use carried on entirely within the residence where there is no evidence of such occupation being conducted on the premises by virtue of outside storage, displays, noise, odors, electrical disturbances or traffic generation, with no more than one nonresident assistant and where not more than one-half of the floor area of any one floor is devoted to such use. Only one nameplate shall be allowed. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
Junkyard means any area where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled, kept, stored or handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking and used parts yards and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations, and not including contractors' storage yards. 
Kennel means any premises on which four or more dogs or four or more cats, six months old or older, are kept. The term shall not include a veterinary hospital. 
Landscape area means that area of private property maintained as open or "green" space, not subject to vehicular traffic, which consists of living landscape material. 
Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area to provide such yards and other open space as are required in this chapter. No portion of an established floodway area lying within a lot or any access drive through a property shall be used in computing the number of dwelling units to be constructed. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street or private street and may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot, reversed frontage means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the first platted lot to its rear. 

Examples of Lot Types 
Lot width means the width of a lot measured at the building line and at right angles to its depth. 
Main body means that portion of a dwelling encompassed by the exterior walls as originally assembled or built. When a dwelling is irregularly shaped, the main body shall be construed as that portion of the structure occupying the majority of geometric bulk. 
Manufactured home means a factory-built single-family structure, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as a site-built dwelling. Manufactured homes shall be considered the same as any site-built single-family detached dwelling. 
Mini-storage warehouses means a building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual compartmentalized stalls or lockers for the storage of customers' goods or wares. 
Mobile home means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways, and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in the state. A mobile home is factory-built housing built on a chassis. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other form of recreational vehicle. A mobile home shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. However, certain mobile homes may be classified as manufactured homes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as permitting a mobile home in other than an approved mobile home park, unless such mobile home is classified as a manufactured home. 
Mobile home accessory building or structure means any awning, cabana, ramada, storage structure or carport, fence, windbreak or porch established for the use of the occupants of the mobile home on a mobile home space. 
Mobile home space means a designated portion of the mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home and for its accessory buildings or structures for the exclusive use of the occupant. 
Modular home means factory-built housing certified as meeting the Iowa State Building Code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes. 
Nursing or convalescent home means a building or structure having accommodations and where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent or physically disabled or injured persons, not including insane and other mental cases, inebriates or contagious cases. 
Parking area means that portion of a parcel of land that is improved and designated or commonly used for the parking of one or more motor vehicles. 
Parking lot means an area improved and designated or commonly used for the parking of three or more motor vehicles. 
Parking space, also parking stall means an area measuring at least nine feet wide and 19 feet long for all commercial, institutional, or manufacturing uses or eight feet wide and 18 feet long for residential uses only, connected to a public street or alley by a driveway not less than ten feet wide, and so arranged as to permit ingress and egress of motor vehicles without moving any other vehicle parked adjacent to the parking space. 
Permanent storage means the volume of water which is stored upstream from a dam or in an impoundment up to the level of the principal outlet works of the structure, usually expressed in acre-feet. 
Porch, unenclosed means a roofed projection which has no more than 50 percent of each outside wall area enclosed by a building or siding material other than meshed screens. 
Principal use means the main use of land or structures, as distinguished from an accessory use. 
Public sewer system means a municipally owned, operated and maintained sanitary sewer system. 
Public water supply means a municipally owned, operated and maintained water supply. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Roominghouse means an owner-occupied or manager-occupied single dwelling unit wherein individual sleeping rooms are provided to not less than three unrelated resident tenants. Not more than one kitchen facility shall be established within said structure wherein meals may be prepared by resident tenants. Said rooming or boarding facility shall be distinctive from transient lodging facilities such as hotels, beds and breakfasts, other overnight lodging facilities or public eateries. Residents within said roominghouse facility shall be accommodated with weekly, monthly, or yearly tenant agreements or leases. 
Satellite receiving dish means a device whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources, most often comprised of an antenna/dish, a low-noise amplifier, and a coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals to a receiver. 
Site coverage ratio means that proportion of the lot on which buildings and outdoor storage of materials and products may be placed. 
Special exception permit means an authorization by the city board of adjustment to allow building improvements or other development when such project conforms with specified rules, regulations and/or performance standards required for said improvements or development in special areas of the city as identified by the zoning ordinance. 
Storefront means the façade of the ground-level story of a building. The area of the storefront will be calculated using the first 15 vertical feet of the façade, unless otherwise demonstrated by applicant, as evidenced by the storefront cornice height or interior ceiling height. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling or roof next above it. 
Story, half means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four feet above the top floor level. 
Street line means the right-of-way line of a street. 
Street, private means any private way 20 feet or more in width which is approved by the city council after recommendation by the city planning and zoning commission. 
Street, public means any thoroughfare or public way not less than 30 feet in width which has been dedicated to the public or deeded to the city for street purposes, and also any such public way as may be created after enactment of this chapter, provided it is 40 feet or more in width. 
Structural alterations means any replacement or changes in the type of construction or in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built housing, storage tanks and other similar uses. For zoning purposes anything, excluding fences, judged to be permanently affixed to the site and measuring at least 30 inches in height, as measured from natural grade, shall be considered a structure. 
Temporary storage means a volume of water which may be stored upstream from a dam or in an impoundment above the level of the principal outlet works, usually expressed in acre-feet. 
Travel trailer means a towed recreational vehicle ranging from ten to 35 feet in length and a maximum of eight feet in width. 
Wind energy conversion system means a device or assemblage of devices which directly or indirectly converts wind energy to usable thermal, mechanical or electrical energy. 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the zoning ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure, property, property use or other development to be fully compliant with city regulations. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building or structure unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the least distance between the lot line and the nearest permitted building shall be used. 
Yard, front means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard is the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 

Figure 1 
Yard, required means that portion of the front yard, side yard and rear yard as established by the setback requirements of the zoning district or of this chapter. It must be maintained in open, unobstructed space as measured from the property line to the required setback line except for allowable yard encroachments as outlined in section 26-90. If the building structure is located at the required setback line, then the setback distance shall be measured from the property line to the foundation of the structure. Refer to Figure 1. 
Yard, side means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the nearest building. 
(2)  General floodplain definitions. 
Appurtenant structure is a structure which is on the same parcel of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (See 100-year (one percent) flood). This is the regulatory standard also referred to as the "100-year flood." The base flood is the national standard used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and all federal agencies for the purpose of requiring the purchase of flood insurance and regulating new development. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are typically shown on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs). 
Base flood elevation is the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Any basement situated with less than one-half of its height below grade shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. A basement having more than one-half of its height below grade is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height measurement. Also see "Lowest floor." 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse having definite banks and beds with visible evidence of flow or occurrence of water. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevating means raising a structure or property by fill or other means to or above the minimum flood protection level. 
Encroachment limits means a set of lines which delineate the boundaries of the floodway established in the floodplains as the designated width of channel and overbank areas through which the regulatory flood must pass. 
Existing construction is any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. May also be referred to as "existing structure." 
Factory-built home park or subdivision, existing is a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
Factory-built home park or subdivision, expansion of existing is the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Factory-built home park or subdivision, new is a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
Flood means a temporary rise in the channel flow or stage, resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source, that results in water overflowing and inundating normally dry lands adjacent to the channel. 
Flood elevation means the elevation flood-waters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the "100-year flood" or the "100-year (one percent) flood" is that flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (one percent) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The "500-year flood" or the "500-year (0.2 percent) flood" is that flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths of one percent (0.2 percent) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map prepared as part of, but published separately from, the flood insurance study, which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
Floodplain means any land susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood. 
Floodplain buildable area means that portion of the lot remaining after the minimum yard area requirements (i.e., setbacks) of this chapter have been met, and shall not include that portion of the property within the 500-year floodplain. 
Floodplain management is an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations. 
Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to a location along a stream or river. 
Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments incorporated in the design or construction and alteration of individual buildings, structures or properties, including utilities, water treatment and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damages. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwaters or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood, so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood levels and flow velocities. 
Floodway fringe means the land adjacent to a body of water between the floodway and the outer (landward) limits of the special flood hazard area, as defined by the regulatory flood as delineated on the official floodplain zoning map. 
Habitable space for flood protection purposes means any floor or level, including a basement, which is suitable for human habitation. It excludes a garage, a detached accessory structure, or an area for housing electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other utility systems underneath a structure elevated to comply with flood protection requirements. 
Highest adjacent grade is the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Lowest floor means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building, including a basement, except when all the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods, with walls or openings that satisfy the floodway fringe performance standard pertaining to new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage; 
(3)  Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace and electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood level; and 
(4)  The enclosed area is not a basement. 
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies the criteria of subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy such criteria. 
New construction (new buildings, new mobile home parks) means those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after February 1, 1985. 
Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse or floodplain area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry material or structure downstream to the damage of other properties. 
Official floodplain zoning map means the maps on file with the city that indicate those portions of land known as the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain, which are subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
One hundred year flood means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100 years. 
Program means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Public damages shall consist of but not necessarily be limited to the following: 
(1)  Physical flood damage to: 
a.  Streets. 
b.  Sewers. 
c.  Water mains. 
d.  Other public utilities. 
e.  Public buildings. 
f.  Bridges. 
g.  Recreational trails. 
(2)  Expenditures for: 
a.  Emergency flood protection. 
b.  Evacuation and relief. 
c.  Rehabilitation and cleanup. 
(3)  Losses due to: 
a.  Interruption of utilities and transportation routes. 
b.  Interruption of commerce and employment. 
Public sewer system means a municipally owned, operated and maintained sanitary sewer system. 
Reach is a hydraulic engineering term used to describe longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach will generally include the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are primarily controlled by manmade or natural obstructions or constrictions. In an urban area, an example of a reach would be the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings. 
Regulatory flood means a flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths (0.2 percent) of one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Regulatory flood is also referred to in this chapter as the "500-year flood" and the "500-year (0.2 percent) flood." 
Repetitive loss includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Special exception permit means an authorization by the city board of adjustment to allow building improvements or other development when such project conforms with specified rules, regulations and/or performance standards required for said improvements or development in special areas of the city as identified by the zoning ordinance. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) is the land within a community subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community's flood insurance rate map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, A99, X Shaded and X Unshaded. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and new construction, means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. 
The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built housing, storage tanks and other similar uses. For zoning purposes anything, excluding fences, judged to be permanently affixed to the site and measuring at least 30 inches in height, as measured from natural grade, shall be considered a structure. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration to an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(2)  Any addition which increases the original floor area of a structure by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after February 1, 1985, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project or improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration which will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Temporary storage means a volume of water which may be stored upstream from a dam or in an impoundment above the level of the principal outlet works, usually expressed in acre-feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-2), 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2929, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 26-3. - Interpretation of chapter. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-3), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-4. - Amendments to chapter. 
(a)  The city council may, from time to time, on its own action or on petition, after public notice and hearings as provided by law, and after reports by the city planning and zoning commission, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations established in this chapter or subsequently established. Such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a majority of all the members of the city council. 
(b)  Prior to and in addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, whenever any person desires that any amendment or change be made in this chapter as to any property in the city, there shall be presented to the city planning and zoning commission a petition requesting such change or amendment signed by the owners of at least 50 percent of the area of all the real estate included within the boundaries of the tract as described in the petition. The petition shall contain a legal description of the real estate for which rezoning is requested, the existing zoning classification and the requested zoning classification. The petition shall also have attached to it a plat which identifies the real estate for which rezoning is requested and which also shows all public streets and highways within a distance of 300 feet; the platted addition, if any, or the government section number and quarters in which the real estate is located; the existing zoning classification; and the requested zoning classification. Such plats shall be of a scale of not less than 300 feet to one inch. Within 30 days after the filing of such petition, the city planning and zoning commission, acting as a commission or acting through its chairperson, vice-chairperson or other authorized agent, shall fix a time, date and place of hearing on the petition, which date shall be no more than 60 days after the filing of such petition. The petitioner for such change or amendment shall thereafter cause a notice of hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city, at least seven but not more than 14 days before the date fixed for such hearing. Such notice shall contain the time, date and place of the hearing, the existing zoning classification, the requested zoning classification and a reproduction of the plat attached to the petition, and shall be signed by the petitioners. The city planning and zoning commission may, upon the unanimous approval of the members present at a meeting, act upon a petition for rezoning or initiate a zoning change or amendment without the necessity of such a plat, notice or hearing. 
(c)  In case the proposed amendment, supplement or change is disapproved by the city planning and zoning commission, such amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least two-thirds of all the members of the city council. In case a written protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change is filed with the city clerk duly signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the property which is located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the amendment, supplement or change is proposed, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the city council. Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement or change of the zoning or regulations contained in this chapter or subsequently established shall have been denied by the city council, then no new petition covering the same property or the same property and additional property shall be filed with or considered by the city council until six months shall have elapsed from the date of the filing of the first petition. 
(d)  Unless any lot, tract or parcel of land hereafter zoned to a less restrictive classification than as provided in this chapter has been used or developed for such less restrictive classification within two years from such rezoning, or unless there exists an unexpired building permit for the development thereof at the end of such two years, the city planning and zoning commission may, prior to the bona fide commencement of the use or development of the land in its less restrictive classification, after seven days' notice, in writing, to the then record owner of the land providing a reasonable opportunity to be heard, initiate and recommend to the city council that the land be rezoned to its zoning classification as established at the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(e)  Before any action has been taken as provided in this section, the party proposing or recommending a change in district regulations or district boundaries shall deposit with the city clerk such sum as established by the council from time to time to cover the costs of this procedure. The fee will be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-4), 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 26-5-26-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-27. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-31), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-28. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The department of community development is hereby designated and ordered to enforce this chapter. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, moved, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the department, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city to prevent such unlawful erection, moving, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-32), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-29. - Occupancy permit. 
(a)  No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate is issued by the department of community development stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this chapter. No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof erected or structurally altered without an occupancy permit being issued therefor by the department. No occupancy permit shall be issued to make a change unless the changes are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and a certificate issued as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use as authorized in this chapter, unless a discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or property. 
(c)  Certificates for occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the department, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
(d)  No permit for excavation for or the erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made for certificate of compliance and application has been made for certificate of occupancy, and no building or premises shall be occupied until that occupancy certificate and permit are issued. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses. Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed within 12 months from the effective date of this Ordinance No. 1633, accompanied by affidavits of proof that such nonconforming use was not established in violation of Ordinance No. 855 or amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-33), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-30. - Floodplain development permit. 
(a)  A floodplain development permit issued by the zoning administrator shall be secured prior to initiation of any floodplain development. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms supplied by the zoning administrator and shall include the following information: 
(1)  A description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made. 
(2)  A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done, i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description that will readily identify and locate the work to be done. 
(3)  An indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  The elevations of the 100-year (one percent) and 500-year (0.2 percent) flood. 
(5)  The elevation, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD), of the lowest floor, including basement, of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed. 
(6)  For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and fair market value of the building prior to the improvements. 
(7)  Such other information as the administrator deems reasonably necessary for the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the state, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the use or occupancy of any structure. 
(c)  All uses or structures in the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain districts requiring special exception permits shall be allowed only upon application to the zoning administrator with issuance of the special exception permit by the board of adjustment. Petitioners shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications, as well as any additional information deemed necessary by the board of adjustment. Where required, approval of the state department of natural resources shall precede issuance of the special exception permit by the board of adjustment. 
(d)  The zoning administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development meets the applicable provisions and standards of this chapter, and shall approve or disapprove the application. In case of disapproval, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of a specific reason therefor. The zoning administrator shall not issue permits for special exception permits or variances except as directed by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-34), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-31. - Variances and special exception permits. 
(a)  The board of adjustment may authorize, upon request, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards: 
(1)  No variance shall be granted for any development within the floodway district which would result in any increase in floods during the occurrence of the 500-year flood. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. 
(2)  Variances shall only be granted upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, or cause fraud on or victimization of the public. 
(3)  Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the zoning administrator that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction increases risk to life and property. 
(5)  All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  In passing upon applications for special exception permits or requests for variances, the board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(6)  The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location. 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(11)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site. 
(12)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (b) of this section, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of special exception permits or variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities. 
(2)  Limitation on periods of use and operation. 
(3)  Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions. 
(4)  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the state department of natural resources and are deemed the only practical alternative for achieving the purposes of this chapter. 
(5)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The board of adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. Such floodproofing measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
b.  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or similar methods of construction. 
c.  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
d.  Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls. 
e.  Addition of mass or weight structures to resist flotation. 
f.  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
g.  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters. 
(6)  Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for building to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures. 
(7)  Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris. 
(8)  Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures. 
(9)  Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will ensure that they are not subject to flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-35), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-32. - Development requiring approval by state department of natural resources. 
    For those uses requiring state department of natural resources approval, such approval shall be obtained in writing and provided to the board of adjustment prior to issuance of a special exception permit. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-36), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-33. - Duties of zoning administrator relative to development in flood hazard areas. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator or his official designee to: 
(1)  Review all floodplain development permit applications to ensure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied. 
(2)  Review all floodplain development permit applications to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state or local governmental agencies. 
(3)  Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD), of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
(4)  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
a.  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD); and 
b.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 26-30(b). 
(5)  Maintain for public information all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(7)  Review subdivision proposals to ensure that such proposals minimize flood damage, provide adequate drainage and are consistent with the purpose of this chapter, and advise the city council or potential conflicts. 
(8)  Notify adjacent communities and counties and the state department of natural resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(9)  Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the city's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-37), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-34. - Liability limitations. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions, or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside of the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain districts or land uses permitted within those districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. The granting of approval of any structure or use shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the city or the board of adjustment, or by any officer or employee thereof, of the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause action against any such body, officer or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-38), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-35. - Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the county and incorporated areas and the city, panels 19013C0145F, 0153F, 0154F, 0158F, 0161F, 0162F, 0163F, 0164F, 0166F, 0168F, 0276F, 0277F, 0278F, 0279F, 0281F, 0282F, and 0283F, dated July 18, 2011, which were prepared as part of the flood insurance study for the county, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the official floodplain zoning map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained within the flood insurance study are also declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-39), 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 26-36-26-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 26-59. - Membership; appointment of members. 
    A board of adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of seven members, each to be appointed by the mayor subject to approval of the city council for the term of five years. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-56), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-60. - Meetings and rules of procedure. 
    The board of adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and the presence of four members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-57), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-61. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  In appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make special exceptions to the terms of this chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent. Any property owner aggrieved by the provisions of this chapter or any regulations or restrictions under this chapter may petition the board of adjustment directly to modify the regulations and restrictions as applied to such property owner, and the following rules shall apply: 
a.  The board of adjustment shall have a public hearing on the petitions under the same terms and conditions as provided in this division for the hearing of appeals by the board of adjustment. 
b.  The board of adjustment, in making any exception to this chapter, shall be guided by the general rule that the exceptions shall, by their design, construction and operation, adequately safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of adjoining and surrounding property, shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, shall not increase congestion in the public streets, shall not increase public danger of fire and safety and shall not diminish or impair established property values in surrounding areas. 
c.  The board of adjustment is specifically authorized to permit erection and use of a building or the use of premises or vary the height and area regulations in any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes or for purposes of public communication, including the distribution of newspapers, which the board determines reasonably necessary for public convenience or welfare. 
d.  The board of adjustment is specifically authorized to permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in a single ownership as shown of record or by existing contract or purchase at the time of the passage of this chapter, but in no case shall extension of the district boundary line exceed 40 feet in any direction. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the department of developmental services in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. Special conditions shall include, but not be limited to, a property owner who can show that his property was acquired in good faith and that, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situations, the strict application of the terms of this chapter actually prohibits the use of his property in a manner reasonably similar to that of other property in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-58), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-62. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the department of developmental services. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the department and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The department shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
(b)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the department certifies to the board, after notice of appeal has been filed with the department, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, with notice to the department, and on due cause shown. 
(c)  The appealing party shall be required to submit to the secretary of the board, ten days prior to the public hearing, a petition duly signed by the owners of the property immediately adjacent, in the rear and to the side thereof, extending the depth of one lot but not to exceed 200 feet therefrom, and of those directly opposite thereto, extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, indicating knowledge of the appeal and the date of the public hearing. Should an adjacent property owner refuse to sign the petition, it shall then be the duty of the appealing party to contact the adjacent property owner by certified mail, notifying the property owner of the appeal before the board, and the appealing party shall submit proof of the certified mail to the secretary of the board ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall give a reasonable time for hearing the appeal. The board shall publish notice of the public hearing on the appeal once, not less than seven nor more than 14 days before the date of the hearing, in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(e)  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. Before an appeal is filed with the board of adjustment, the appellant shall pay to the city clerk, to be credited to the general fund of the city, the cost of publishing the notice and the administrative costs of the appeal as determined by the board. 
(f)  In exercising the powers mentioned in this section, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as it believes proper, and to that end shall have all the zoning administration powers of the department of community development. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the department, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter; provided, however, that the action of the board shall not become effective until after the resolution of the board, setting forth the full reason of its decision and the vote of each member participating therein, has been spread upon the minutes. Such resolution, immediately following the board's final decision, shall be filed in the office of the board, and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-59), 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2943, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 26-63-26-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 26-83. - Regulations of chapter applicable to division. 
    The regulations specified in this chapter shall be subject to the exceptions and interpretations set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-76), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-84. - Review of proposed public improvements by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixture, public structure or appurtenance, shall be located or erected, or a site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the city for the erection or location thereof, until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the city planning and zoning commission and its recommendations thereon obtained. If the commission disapproves the proposed improvement, it may be approved by the city council only by an affirmative vote of a simple majority of all the membership of the council. 
(b)  Such requirements for recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for such improvements where such commission, after 60 days' written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file the recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-77), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-85. - Use of existing lots of record. 
    In any district where dwellings are permitted, a single-unit dwelling may be located on any lot or plot of official record as of April 3, 1970, irrespective of its area or width; and, in addition, any two-unit dwelling may be located on any lot or plot in an R-3 Residence District that has a lot width of not less than 60 feet and a lot area of not less than 8,000 square feet and is of official record as of April 3, 1970; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The sum of the side yard widths of any such lot or plot shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of the lot, but in no case shall the width be less than five feet for any one side yard. 
(2)  The depth of the rear yard of any such lot need not exceed 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but in no case shall the depth be less than ten feet. 
(3)  In the case of a lot of record where the requirements of subsection (1) or (2) of this section are greater than those of the district in which it is located, the lesser requirement shall apply. 
(4)  In the case of platted building setback lines established on lots of record as of April 3, 1970, such setback lines may apply in lieu of those required by this section unless existing adjacent building setbacks are greater than specified on the plat of record, in which case the provisions of sections 26-122 through 26-132 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-78), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-86. - Exceptions to height limits. 
    The building height limitations of this chapter shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, spires and radio or television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with the ordinances of the city. Wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to approval by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may compel applicants to provide documentation indicating that the design, construction and operation of the system adequately safeguards the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of all adjoining and surrounding properties. 
(2)  Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, medical clinics, senior housing facilities, nursing homes, housing for the elderly, professional offices, professional services, sanatoriums or schools, or other uses permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet to the ridge line or top of the roof, and churches and temples, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each building setback line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided for in the district in which the building is built. The additional setback area must be provided in open green space with living landscape material, berming and other vegetative screening elements along any property line adjacent to a public right-of-way. The building will utilize high quality materials such as brick, natural stone, glass or other materials used in the neighborhood. These materials shall be incorporated on all sides of the building. In addition, restrictive covenants, developmental agreements or design guidelines may be used to further supplement the building or site design. 
(3)  Single-unit dwellings and two-unit dwellings in the dwelling districts may be increased in height by not more than ten feet when two side yards of not less than 15 feet each are provided, but they shall not exceed three stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-79), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-87. - Exceptions to lot area requirements. 
    In any district where public water supply or public sanitary sewer is not accessible, the lot area requirements shall be determined and approved by the planning and zoning commission upon recommendation by the county board of health, the city public works department and the department of developmental services. The commission shall evaluate the long-term use of the property and projected provision of public service to the area to determine the lot size and type of water and sewer service to be required. However, should public water or public sewer not be available, the minimum lot size required shall not be less than 15,000 square feet nor more than three acres. In all cases, if the lot requirement of the district is more restrictive than this regulation, the district lot requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-80), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-88. - Measurement of rear or side yard when yard opens onto alley. 
    In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where the rear or side yard opens on an alley, one-half of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear or side yard, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-81), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-89. - Yards for double frontage lots. 
    Buildings on through lots and extending through from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both streets. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-82), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-90. - Other exceptions to yard requirements. 
(a)  Obstructions in required yards. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed with any above grade building or structure with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, roof eaves and ornamental features, such projections not to exceed 36 inches. 
(2)  Handicap accessible ramps, railings or walkways that may extend to the property line in order to accommodate handicap access and egress. 
(3)  The usual steps of enclosed or unenclosed porches, stoops, or other entryways, said steps to extend no closer than five feet from the property line. 
(4)  Unenclosed and unroofed decks may extend no closer than five feet from a side yard property line. Said unenclosed and unroofed decks shall extend no further than ten feet into the required front yard or required rear yard area. 
(5)  Other decorative lawn ornaments such as bird feeders, lighting fixtures, art work, or any similar item not recognized by the International Building Code and International Residential Code as a building or structure shall be allowed. 
(6)  Permitted accessory structures and fences. Said accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages or storage sheds, shall not be allowed in any portion of a required front yard. 
(b)  Swimming pools. In all residential zoning districts, detached aboveground and in-ground swimming pools are permitted for private use. The size and location of said swimming pools on the site will be governed by the regulations controlling detached accessory structures (section 26-126). However, said swimming pools will be allowed the area permitted in section 26-126 exclusive of any existing or proposed accessory structures on the lot, provided that minimum setbacks and building separations are maintained. No permanent swimming pools will be permitted in the required front yard. In addition, a fence measuring at least five feet in height shall be established around the perimeter of said swimming pool. 
(c)  Rowhouses and condominiums. In all districts providing for multiple unit dwellings, the front, rear and side yard requirements shall apply to the building where utilized as a row or condominium dwelling, and shall not be required for each individual unit. 
(d)  Conversion of duplex to bi-attached dwelling. In the case of a duplex conversion to bi-attached dwelling status, the front, rear and side yard requirements shall apply to the duplex structure as a whole, as required by the zoning classification in which the duplex is located, if the duplex was constructed prior to March 9, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-83), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-91. - Satellite receiving dishes. 
    Satellite receiving dishes shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following: 
(1)  Satellite receiving dishes shall be classified as an incidental use, and shall not be permitted upon a lot unless such lot has a principal permitted use located thereon. No more than one dish shall be permitted on any parcel. 
(2)  The size of satellite receiving dishes shall not be subject to the total square footage limitation for accessory buildings as outlined in section 26-126, but the dish shall be set back at least two feet from private property lines as measured at the most extreme axis. 
(3)  A building permit shall be issued by the city prior to the installation or structural alteration of any satellite receiving dish. The dish shall meet all requirements of the building and electrical codes. 
(4)  No satellite receiving dish shall be permitted within a provided front yard, or within any portion of a required side yard lying closer to the front lot line than the rear of the principal structure. 
(5)  Satellite receiving dishes shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet, as measured at the most extreme vertical axis. 
(6)  Roof-mounted satellite receiving dishes shall be restricted to commercial and industrial zoning districts, and shall not extend more than ten feet above the height limit established for the district in which the structure is located. 
(7)  No satellite receiving dish shall be permitted to cause electrical disturbances, nor interfere with the transmission of communication signals to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-84), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-92. - Enclosing of open porches. 
    An existing open porch may be remodeled or rebuilt to an enclosed nonhabitable vestibule entranceway, which may include closet space, when projecting not more than one-fourth of the width of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-85), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-93. - Walls, fences and hedges. 
(a)  In any residential or agricultural zoning district, a wall, fence or hedge not to exceed four feet in height may be located and maintained on any part of a lot, except in the case of a corner lot it shall not exceed three feet in height above the curb level in the triangular area formed by the intersection of two public rights-of-way, excluding alleys, with two sides of the triangle being 30 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way line measured from their point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two lines. However, a fence not to exceed four feet in height may be located within this triangular area if it is constructed of materials which provide openings of not less than 75 percent in area of the vertical surface of the fence to permit transmission of light, air and vision through the vertical surface at a right angle. A wall, fence or hedge not to exceed eight feet in height may be located and maintained anywhere on a lot to the rear line of the required front yard. However, in the case of a corner lot or reversed lot, it shall not be closer to the property line than to the rear of the side yard requirement. Fences shall be constructed of materials commonly used for landscape fencing, such as masonry, block, lumber or chainlink, but shall not include corrugated sheet metal, barbed wire or salvage material, or be electrified. 
(b)  In any commercial or industrial zoning district, no wall or fence, except as noted in this subsection, shall be located or maintained within the following described areas: 
(1)  The areas of property on both sides of an accessway, driveway or alley formed by an intersection with a public right-of-way with two sides of each triangle being formed by lines extending a distance of ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the ten-foot sides. 
(2)  The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two public rights-of-way, excluding alleys, with two sides of the triangle being 30 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two lines. 
However, fences not exceeding height requirements may be located within these triangular areas if constructed of materials which provide openings of not less than 75 percent in area of the vertical surface of the fence to permit transmission of light, air and vision through the vertical surface at a right angle. No structure, material storage, vehicle or other obstruction shall be situated therein preventing the view of traffic approaching the intersection from either way. 
(c)  In any commercial zoning district, a wall, fence or hedge not to exceed eight feet in height may be located and maintained on any part of a lot, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  In any industrial zoning district, a wall, fence or hedge not to exceed ten feet in height may be located and maintained on any part of a lot, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  In any commercial or industrial zoning district, fences shall not be constructed of salvage material, shall not be electrified, and shall not use barbed wire closer than six feet to the ground or higher than the maximum allowable fence height in the applicable zoning district. 
(f)  In all zoning districts, no portion of any wall, fence or hedge shall extend beyond the owner's private property line. 
(g)  Fences used solely for permitted livestock containment purposes may be electrified or utilize barbed wire or corrugated sheet metal within the height requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(h)  No wall, fence or hedge shall be so located as to obstruct the view of traffic approaching an intersection from any direction. 
(i)  No wall, fence or hedge shall be located as to obstruct direct access to a fire hydrant from the public right-of-way, nor shall any wall, fence or hedge be situated closer than four feet to a fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-86), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-94. - Stormwater detention. 
(a)  Required; request for review. In all zoning districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business, trade, institutional, recreational or dwelling use, and similar uses, stormwater detention shall be provided and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. A request for stormwater detention review shall be accompanied by two copies of plans showing all existing landscaping, surface treatments, structures, measurements and elevations and two copies of plans showing proposed improvements, surface types, measurements, elevations, stormwater detention calculations and method of detention. In all zoning districts, all uses shall provide stormwater detention in accordance with the criteria in this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. Stormwater detention will not be required for: 
(1)  Individual single-unit dwelling units, duplexes, bi-attached dwelling units or similar uses or lots with low runoff coefficients. 
(2)  All uses on undeveloped lots of record as of September 26, 1983, where the difference between the runoff of a ten-year frequency rainfall, as applied to the entire lot, including the proposed improvements, is less than or equal to one cubic foot per second when compared to the amount of total stormwater runoff generated from a two-year frequency rainfall on the lot as it existed in its natural, undeveloped state. However, following initial development, should any deed transfer, lot split, resubdivision or addition reduce the computed lot area or increase the amount of impervious surface, increasing the runoff by an amount greater than one cubic foot per second, then stormwater detention shall be provided for the entire lot in conformance to the criteria in subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  Additions to existing structures or new structures on developed lots of record as of September 26, 1983, where the total stormwater runoff generated from a ten-year frequency rainfall, applied to the entire area of the addition or new structure, including the proposed improvements and required parking addition, is less than or equal to one cubic foot per second when compared to the amount of total stormwater runoff generated from a two-year frequency rainfall on the affected area in its existing state. However, following completion of the proposed addition or new structure without stormwater detention, should any deed transfer, lot split, resubdivision, new addition or structures be added to the lot which reduce the computed lot area or increase the amount of impervious surface such that the sum of the improvements generate a runoff greater than one cubic foot per second, then stormwater detention shall be provided for all additions or new structures added after September 26, 1983, in conformance to the criteria in subsection (c) of this section. 
(4)  Reconstruction, repair or replacement of uses on developed lots in conformance with all other applicable sections of this chapter and this Code, provided that such reconstruction, repair or replacement may not increase the total stormwater runoff generated by the lot as it existed prior to reconstruction. Should the reconstruction, repair or replacement generate runoff greater than that discharged prior to construction, the lot shall conform to the criteria in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(5)  Individual lots recorded after September 26, 1983, if the plat in which the lots are located provides stormwater detention for all lots, on site or off site, equal to the difference between the total stormwater runoff generated from a ten-year frequency rainfall applied to the entire plat, including proposed improvements, public and private, and a two-year frequency rainfall applied to the site as it existed in its natural undeveloped state. 
(6)  Any lot where a governmental body or private drainage district has provided overall drainage basin detention facilities and the city has waived by resolution the detention criteria for individual lots in that basin. 
(c)  Detention requirements for nonexempt lots. All lots not exempted by subsection (b) of this section shall detain all on site stormwater runoff equal to the difference between the total stormwater runoff generated from a ten-year frequency rainfall as applied to the entire lot, including the proposed improvements, and a two-year frequency rainfall applied to the lot as it existed in its natural undeveloped state. 
(d)  Special detention requirements. The city council, upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or at its own discretion, may prescribe that a higher degree of stormwater detention be required if it is in the best interest of the general public. The special detention requirement will normally be reserved for developments with large quantities of impervious surfaces, where the drainage basin in which the development is located is experiencing flooding problems, or where receiving stormwater facilities cannot accept the normal two-year storm discharge. 
(e)  Waivers. Stormwater detention requirements may be waived by the city council following receipt of sufficient written justification from the property owner indicating that it is not physically or economically feasible to detain stormwater and that such discharge will not be injurious to downstream properties in the drainage basin. 
(f)  Evaluation of drainage system. All developments and subdivisions which are required by this section to provide stormwater detention or installation of a public storm sewer system shall provide an evaluation of the 100-year storm overflow from the development's primary drainage system. The evaluation will be reviewed by the city to ensure unobstructed overflow areas are provided for a 100-year storm as a protection to new construction in the development and downstream properties. 
(g)  Determination of specific requirements. The charts following this section shall be used to determine if stormwater detention is required. 
(h)  Inspection and approval. All required stormwater detention shall be in place, inspected and approved by the city engineer or his staff designees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. However, installation prior to occupancy may be waived in accordance with section 26-220(g)(6). 
TABLE B-1. RAINFALL INTENSITIES, WATERLOO, IOWA 
(Compiled from U.S. Weather Bureau Technical Paper #40) 
Rainfall Intensities are in Inches per Hour 
(24 hours) 1440 0.11 0.13 0.16 0.19 0.22 0.24 0.27 (12 hours) 720 0.19 0.23 0.29 0.33 0.38 0.42 0.47 (6 hours) 360 0.32 0.38 0.48 0.57 0.65 0.73 0.80 (3 hours) 180 0.55 0.67 0.85 0.93 1.10 1.23 1.35 (2 hours) 120 0.76 0.90 1.15 1.31 1.55 1.70 1.85 Storm Duration 
(Minutes) 90 1.03 1.23 1.53 1.76 2.00 2.20 2.50 60 1.29 1.54 1.95 2.22 2.55 2.82 3.15 50 1.44 1.72 2.14 2.46 2.80 3.08 3.50 40 1.65 1.97 2.45 2.82 3.20 3.52 4.00 30 2.06 2.46 3.06 3.52 4.00 4.40 5.00 20 2.57 3.07 3.82 4.40 5.00 5.50 6.25 15 2.97 3.54 4.41 5.07 5.76 6.34 7.20 10 3.52 4.21 5.23 6.02 6.84 7.52 8.55 5 4.57 5.46 6.79 7.81 8.88 9.77 11.10 0 _______ 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-year Storm Frequency (Years)  
      
TIME OF CONCENTRATION 
(Overland Flow) 
Example: Bare, rocky soil on 1.5% slope. Find time of concentration for overall length of 1,000 feet. Procedure: Connect overland condition (1) With slope (2), Where line crosses the pivot line (3), Extend a line from the length (4), Through the pivot line (3), To the time of concentration (5).  
      
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR VARIOUS AREAS 
Type of Drainage Area Runoff Coefficient, C Residential: Single-unit areas 0.30-0.50 Multi-units, detached 0.40-0.60 Multi-units, attached 0.60-0.75 Apartment dwelling areas 0.50-0.70 Suburban 0.25-0.40 Business: Downtown areas 0.70-0.95 Neighborhood areas 0.50-0.70 Industrial: Light areas 0.50-0.80 Heavy areas 0.60-0.90 Parks, cemeteries 0.10-0.25 Playgrounds 0.20-0.35 Railroad yard areas 0.20-0.40 Unimproved areas 0.10-0.30 Streets: Asphalt 0.70-0.95 Concrete 0.80-0.95 Brick 0.70-0.85 Gravel 0.45-0.60 Drives and walks 0.75-0.85 Roofs 0.75-0.95 Lawns: Sandy soil, flat (0-2% slope) 0.05-0.10 Sandy soil, average (2-7% slope) 0.10-0.15 Sandy soil, steep (7% or greater slope) 0.15-0.20 Heavy soil, flat (0-2% slope) 0.13-0.17 Heavy soil, average (2-7% slope) 0.18-0.22 Heavy soil, steep (7% or greater slope) 0.25-0.35  
      
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR RURAL AREAS 
Topography and 
Vegetation Open 
Sandy Loam Clay and 
Silt Loam Tight Clay Woodland: Flat (0-5% slope) 0.10 0.30 0.40 Rolling (5-10% slope) 0.25 0.35 0.50 Hilly (10-30% slope) 0.30 0.50 0.60 Pasture: Flat 0.10 0.30 0.40 Rolling 0.16 0.36 0.55 Hilly 0.22 0.42 0.60 Cultivated: Flat 0.30 0.50 0.60 Rolling 0.40 0.60 0.70 Hilly 0.52 0.72 0.82  
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-87), 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 26-95-26-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-117. - Districts established. 
    In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the city is hereby divided into 26 classes of districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each class of district, and the districts shall be known as: 
A-1 Agricultural District R-1SU Single-Unit Residence District R-1 Residence District R-2 Residence District R-3 Multiple Residence District R-4 Multiple Residence District R-5 Residence District S-1 Shopping Center District C-1 Commercial District C-2 Commercial District C-3 Commercial District M-1 Light Industrial District M-2 Heavy Industrial District M-P Planned Industrial District F-W Floodway Overlay District F-F Floodway Fringe Overlay District F-P General Floodplain Overlay District R-P Planned Residence District HCG Highway Corridor and Greenbelt Overlay Zoning District CHN College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District MPC Major Thoroughfare Planned Commercial District PO-1 Professional Office District BR Business/Research Park District MU Mixed Use Residential District HWY-1 Highway Commercial District PC-2 Planned Commercial District HWY-20 Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District CBD Central Business District Overlay Zoning District P Public Zoning District  
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-106), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-118. - District boundaries. 
(a)  Zoning maps. 
(1)  General zoning map. The boundaries of the districts established by this article are indicated upon the zoning map of the city, which map is made a part of this article by reference. The zoning map of the city and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this article as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by the map were all fully described in this article. The zoning map is on file in the office of the city planner, at the city hall. It shall be the responsibility of the city planner to see that the zoning map is kept current at all times. 
(2)  Digital zoning map. An electronic computerized version of the zoning map that displays the boundaries of the districts established by this article are indicated upon the digital zoning map of the city, which map is made a part of this article by reference. The digital zoning map of the city and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this article as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by the map were all fully described in this article. The digital zoning map is on file in the office of the city planner, at the city hall. It shall be the responsibility of the city planner to see that the digital zoning map is kept current at all times. 
(3)  Resolving inconsistencies between zoning maps. To the extent there is any inconsistency between the zoning map referenced in subsection (a)(1) of this section and the digital zoning map referenced in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the digital zoning map shall take precedence. 
(b)  Interpretation of boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this article, the following rules apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are either street lines or alley lines unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this article are bounded approximately by street lines or alley lines, the street lines or alley lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. Street and alley rights-of-way are not included in zoned areas. 
(2)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this article shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(3)  Publication of the legal description of property zoned or rezoned shall constitute an official amendment to the official zoning map, and, as such, the map or portion of the map need not be published. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-107), 5-7-2018) 
Editor's note- The map referred to in the preceding section is on file in the city clerk's office and may be seen by the general public. 
Sec. 26-119. - Establishment of floodplain districts. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in Iowa Code ch. 414, delegated the responsibility to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(2)  Such losses, hazards and related adverse effects are caused by: 
a.  The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood; and 
b.  The cumulative effect of floodplain construction on flood flows, which causes increases in flood heights and floodwater velocities. 
(3)  This article relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the department of natural resources. 
(c)  Classes of districts. In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specific uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings within established floodprone areas, the city is hereby divided into three classes of floodplain districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each class of district, and the districts shall be known as the F-W floodway district, the F-F floodway fringe district and the F-P general floodplain district. 
(d)  Purpose of districts. It is the purpose of the floodplain districts to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private damages due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health. 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard. 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize flood blight areas. 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard. 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(9)  Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially. 
(10)  Ensure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-108), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-120. - Boundaries of floodplain districts. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled flood insurance study for the city, dated February 1, 1985, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The maps shall be referenced in this article as the official floodplain zoning map. The boundaries of the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain zoning map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries, the zoning administrator or his official designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case and submit technical evidence. 
(b)  There shall be established and maintained by the zoning administrator of the city the official floodplain zoning map, which shall indicate thereon or encompass the boundaries of the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain districts provided for by this article. The floodplain management regulations found within this article shall apply only within the floodway, floodway fringe and general floodplain districts and shall be null and void and of no effect in areas not being mapped as being included in such districts. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-109), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-121. - Classification of territory annexed to city. 
    All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall automatically be classed as lying in the A-1 agricultural district unless the city council, having a recommendation from the city planning and zoning commission at the time of its annexation proceedings, determines that a different zoning classification is more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-110), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-122. - Compliance with district regulations. 
    Except as specified in this article, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the district regulations established by this article for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-111), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-123. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Continuation of existing uses. The use of a building existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this article for the district in which it is located. Any use in existence at the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived which was not an authorized nonconforming use under previous zoning chapters shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming use pursuant to this article or amendments thereto. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses or buildings in A and R districts. No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this article in a residence district in which such building or premises is located, except when required by law, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located, except as follows: 
(1)  Substitution. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. 
(2)  Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the building or premises shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Additions. If the existing building or premises is devoted to a use permitted in the district but the structure is nonconforming by virtue of inadequate yard area, such structure may be enlarged: 
a.  Into those yard areas exceeding yard requirements of this article, provided the addition meets the requirements of this article as these apply to the new construction and yard area in which construction takes place; and 
b.  Into those yard areas not meeting yard requirements only to the extent the addition does not exceed the building lines established by already existing walls of the structure or building. The term "existing walls" shall not include fences, independent walls on or near the property line or other such similar structures independent from principal use structures. 
In neither case shall this construction infringe upon the sight distance requirements for corner or triangular lots as set out in this article. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses or buildings in districts other than A and R districts. 
(1)  Structural alterations and enlargements. Any buildings in any district other than an R district devoted to a use made nonconforming by this article may be structurally altered or enlarged in conformity with the lot area, lot frontage, yard and height requirements of the district in which situated, provided such construction shall be limited to buildings on land owned of record by the owner of the land devoted to the nonconforming use prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. In the event of such structural alteration or enlargement of buildings, the premises involved may not be used for any nonconforming use other than the use existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, other provisions of this article notwithstanding. 
(2)  Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the building or premises shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(d)  Replacement of damaged buildings. Any nonconforming building or structure damaged to an extent 50 percent or more of its fair market value at the time of damage of any origin, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, war, riot or act of God shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as before such happening unless restored or reconstructed in compliance with this article, provided that such restoration or reconstruction work is started within six months of such happening. Any pre-existing residential use established in a district where such use is not permitted shall be allowed to be restored or reconstructed, provided such property is not located in a designated floodway or floodway fringe district. If the building or structure is less than 50 percent damaged, it may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided that such restoration or reconstruction work is started within six months of such happening. Restoration or reconstruction of nonconforming buildings or structures located in the floodplain that are damaged by flood is further governed by sections 26-176 and 26-177. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-112), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-124. - Construction under existing building permit. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, or part thereof, for which approvals and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of this article, the construction of which conforms with such plans, when construction has been started prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for reasons other than those beyond the builder's control. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-113), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-125. - Access to public street for residential buildings. 
    Residential lots may be established for building purposes within existing residential neighborhoods on residentially zoned properties where said lots provide less than 40 feet public street frontage under the following conditions: 
(1)  The property must contain at least one acre of land area prior to subdivision. 
(2)  A subdivision plat must be submitted for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council in conformance with normal subdivision platting requirements with regards to the provision of basic utility easements and sanitary sewer service. No such lot may be created without connection to municipal sanitary sewer service. Private septic sewerage systems are prohibited. 
(3)  The lots being created must provide lot area that is in conformance with prevailing neighborhood lot area standards. Proposed lots must be as large as and no smaller than lots immediately abutting the property. Data must be submitted with the plat application that illustrates the size and location of all immediately adjacent properties along with the property owners' names and addresses for those immediately abutting properties. In addition, the names and addresses of all property owners for all properties within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision area must be submitted. 
(4)  In lieu of public street frontage of at least 40 feet width, access and utility easements must be provided to the proposed lots, said easements intended to provide a route of vehicular and pedestrian access and also a route for the establishment/extension of utility services, municipal sanitary sewers and other necessary public infrastructure. Said easements must be at least 25-foot width servicing one single-unit dwelling and 50 foot-width for two single-unit dwellings or for a duplex dwelling or multi-unit dwellings. 
(5)  No duplex residence or multi-unit dwellings (three units or more) shall be established on such lots in neighborhoods where at least 50 percent of the abutting properties are occupied by single-unit dwellings or where the prevailing use of properties on the same block (50 percent or more of all properties) are single-unit residential dwellings. In those cases where it is appropriate to establish a lot for an allowable duplex or multi-unit use, an access easement measuring at least 50 feet wide shall be provided to not more than one duplex or one multi-unit dwelling (three units or more). 
(6)  No driveway access to any new lots shall be located closer than five feet from an adjacent property line. Screen fencing measuring at least four feet height and in conformance with general fencing requirements of the zoning chapter (section 26-93) shall be installed when a new driveway created for this purpose is located closer than 20 feet from an abutting residential structure on an adjacent property. 
(7)  Driveway width shall be at least ten feet for one single-unit residential structure. A driveway measuring at least 20 feet width to permit two-way traffic shall be provided for lots where two single-unit dwellings are being created or where a duplex residential dwelling or multi-unit dwelling (three or more units) is being established. All driveways must be hard surfaced with either concrete or asphalt surface. Permeable hard surfacing will be permitted, not to include gravel or granular surfaced driveways. 
(8)  A pedestrian sidewalk measuring at least four feet in width extending from the public sidewalk or public right-of-way to the dwellings on newly created lots must be established within the access easement area in those situations where more than one single-unit dwelling is established (i.e., for multiple dwellings, duplex or multi-unit dwelling). 
(9)  A lighting plan must be submitted in conjunction with new building construction that illustrates the placement of any external lights and their potential impact upon nearby residences. No yard light, spotlight, landscaping light or any other similar external light shall create any glare or disturbance to any pre-existing residential dwelling occupants. 
(10)  Any building construction or land alteration activities on such lots must comply with all stormwater management ordinances of the city. No project may create added stormwater runoff upon adjacent properties compared to pre-construction runoff rates. No landscaping, berming or other land alterations shall direct the flow of stormwater towards a neighboring property. In addition, normal water runoff generated by sump pumps, drainage spouts or other typical sources of water discharge shall not be directed towards or encroach upon adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-114), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-126. - Detached accessory structures. 
    Accessory structures shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the floodplain regulations contained in this article, where applicable, in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Such detached accessory structures shall not be closer to a side lot line than ten percent of the width of the lot, unless the front line of such accessory structure is situated at least 18 feet behind the front line of the principal structure, in which case the accessory structure may be two feet from the side lot line, except on corner lots, and two feet from the rear lot line. In any case, when the rear lot line abuts an alley, the structure may be built within one foot of the rear property line. However, no portion of the accessory structure, including roof eaves, shall extend across the private property line. On corner lots, accessory structures shall be no closer to the side property line abutting the longer street side of the property than the rear of the required side yard setback in that district, or no closer to the longer street side than the building line of the principal structure, whichever setback is greater. No detached accessory structure shall be allowed in the required front yard of any district. 
(2)  Regardless of its location, an unattached accessory structure shall maintain a clearance of eight feet, wall-to-wall, between structures on a single lot. 
(3)  An accessory structure serving principal single-unit or two-unit residences shall not exceed 1,024 square feet in area, nor 45 percent of the required rear yard, whichever is less. An accessory structure serving a commercial, professional office, industrial or institutional use, including religious, educational, government, hospital, or nursing homes or convalescent centers shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in area. The maximum allowable square footage of the floor area of accessory structures serving residential uses shall be calculated in the following manner: lot width times required rear yard times 45 percent (LW × RY × 0.45 = maximum allowable square footage). The total allowable square footage calculation shall be based upon the area of the base or "footprint" of the structure. 
(4)  In agricultural zoning districts, accessory structures serving principal agricultural uses on properties larger than 20 acres in area shall not be subject to the size or height limitations specified herein. However, on those properties in agricultural districts which contain less than 20 acres in area and where the principal use is residential, the regulations specified herein for residential uses shall apply. 
(5)  a.  An accessory building serving a commercial, professional office, industrial or institutional use including religious, educational, government, hospital, nursing homes, or convalescent centers shall not exceed 20 feet in height as measured from the slab floor of the structure to the top of the roof ridge. For all residential uses, including single-unit, duplex, and multi-unit residences, the maximum height of detached accessory structures shall be 18 feet as measured from the slab floor to the top of the roof ridge. 
b.  However, on properties containing principal residential structures exceeding one story in height, the residential accessory structure may exceed the 18-foot overall height limitation provided that the structure does not exceed the following components: 
1.  Maximum allowable wall height for two opposite walls as measured from the slab floor to the top of the wall is 18 feet. 
2.  The maximum overall height of the detached structure, as measured from the slab floor to the roof ridge, shall not exceed 30 feet. 
3.  The overall height of the detached structure shall not exceed the height of the principal residence on the property. The height of the principal residential structure shall be determined from the natural grade immediately adjacent to the residential structure to the highest point of the roof ridge of the structure. The natural grade adjacent to the principal residential structure shall be considered to be at a point that represents the prevailing or average grade surrounding the structure excluding the at-grade elevation of an exterior basement entryway. 
4.  There shall be no more than two floors, including the base or main floor of the structure, within any detached accessory structure. 
(6)  When more than one accessory structure is constructed on a lot, the total floor area of all accessory structures on the lot shall not exceed the area requirements specified in this section. 
(7)  In all districts, when additions are made to accessory structures, the entire structure shall thereafter meet all the requirements specified in this section. 
(8)  No accessory structure is permitted on any lot unless such lot has a principal permitted use located thereon. 
(9)  No portion of an accessory structure shall be allowed to encroach into a public utility easement. 
(10)  An accessory structure used in conjunction with a multi-unit residence (three or more dwelling units) shall not exceed a total size of more than 576 square feet in area per dwelling unit, or 45 percent of the total required rear yard, whichever is less. 
(11)  The exception to size limitations for detached accessory structures set out in this section shall apply to any lot which measures at least one acre in area, but not more than 20 acres in area, and which contains a principal permitted use located thereon. All detached accessory structures must be located on the same lot where the principal permitted use is located. For any lot which measures one acre or more in area, but not more than 20 acres in area, the maximum allowable sizes of detached accessory structures, as measured by the combined base floor area of all detached accessory structures which are located on the property, shall be limited as follows: 
Lot area Maximum size of all 
detached accessory 
structures on lot At least 1 acre but not more than 2 acres 1,200 square feet More than 2 acres but not more than 3 acres 1,400 square feet More than 3 acres but not more than 5 acres 1,600 square feet More than 5 acres but not more than 8 acres 3,000 square feet More than 8 acres but not more than 11 acres 4,000 square feet More than 11 acres but not more than 20 acres 5,000 square feet  
Each detached accessory structure which measures 1,200 square feet or more in base floor area on any property containing a residential or commercial principal permitted use shall be located on the property at least 18 feet behind the front line of the structure which comprises the principal permitted use on the property. Furthermore, there shall be established a minimum separation of eight feet, as measured wall-to-wall, between each detached accessory structure of any size and each principal structure, and between each such detached accessory structure and any other detached accessory structure of any size located on the property. In addition, each detached accessory structure measuring more than 1,200 square feet in base floor area must satisfy minimum required side yard and minimum required rear yard setback requirements as specified for the zoning district within which the principal permitted use on the property is located. No detached accessory structure of any size shall be allowed within the required front yard area of any property in any district. Building height limitations as specified in this section shall apply to each detached accessory structure, regardless of base floor area dimension. 
(12)  a.  Each detached structure which measures 600 square feet or more in base floor area on any property containing a residential principal permitted use shall be located on the property at least 18 feet behind the front line of the structure which comprises the principal permitted use on the property. Furthermore, there shall be established a minimum separation of eight feet as measured wall to wall, between each detached structure of any size and each principal structure and between each such detached accessory structure and any other detached accessory structure of any size located on the property. In addition, each detached accessory structure measuring 600 square feet or larger in base floor area must provide minimum building setbacks of ten feet as measured from the rear yard property boundaries to the base of the detached accessory structure and a side yard setback of ten percent of the lot width as measured from the side property line to the base of the detached structure. In residential districts no detached accessory structure of any size shall be placed in the front yard area of any residential structure. This provision shall not recognize the "required front yard," but shall recognize any portion of the front area of the lot extending from the front lot line and extending to the front line of the principal residential structure. 
b.  All pre-existing detached accessory structures that are damaged or destroyed more than 50 percent of their value by fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, war, riot, or act of God shall be allowed to be re-established on the same building footprint as previously existed before the damage occurred. 
(13)  All detached accessory structures measuring at least 600 square feet in base floor area but no larger than 1,200 square feet in base floor area, which are established in residential zoning districts in compliance with the regulations set forth in this article, shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal residential structure located on the property at the time such detached accessory structure is established, and shall be required to adhere to the following design guidelines: 
a.  The detached accessory structure must utilize similar exterior wall siding materials as then exist on the principal residential structure on the property. Siding panels must approximate the size and dimensions of those siding materials on the principal residential structure. No corrugated metal coverings or siding materials shall be established on the detached accessory structure. No vertical siding materials shall be established unless similar vertical siding materials are then established on the principal residential structure. No steel siding materials shall be permitted unless the principal residential structure then utilizes steel siding materials. In the case of residential structures utilizing brick siding materials, similar brick or masonry materials must be used on the front portion of the exterior walls of the detached accessory structure. Masonry or brick "accents" or trim elements matching similar components on the principal residence are acceptable to complement a residence constructed with brick siding materials. For the remainder of the accessory structure located on a lot with a brick residence, siding materials must resemble siding materials utilized on at least one other non-brick residential structure found on an adjacent property or on the same block in the residential neighborhood if any. In cases where the preceding option is unclear, the proposed structure shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission in conformance with subsection f of this section. 
b.  The color and texture of exterior wall materials used on the detached accessory structure must be similar to the color and texture of exterior wall materials on the principal residential structure. 
c.  Roof lines and angles on the detached accessory structure must resemble or be similar to the roof lines and angles of the principal residential structure on the property. No flat roofs shall be permitted on the detached structure unless the main residential structure then has a flat roof covering more than half of the residence, excluding a garage or carport flat roof feature attached to the principal residential structure. 
d.  Other architectural features of the detached accessory structure must resemble or be similar to features found on the principal residential structure including the size and dimensions of windows. Windows shall be established on at least two walls of detached accessory structures. 
e.  Roofing materials utilized on the detached accessory structure must be similar to roofing materials used on the principal residential structure. Metal roofing materials may be utilized only if the principal residential structure on the property then utilizes metal roofing materials. 
f.  For preexisting structures that are enlarged or improved resulting in a structure size 600 square feet in base floor area or larger, the entire enlarged or improved structure shall comply with the design and architectural requirements stated herein. 
g.  Every property owner applying for a detached accessory structure in a residential zoning district measuring at least 600 square feet in base floor area but no larger than 1,200 square feet in base floor area shall submit to the city planning division office renderings illustrating materials and design characteristics on all four sides of the proposed detached accessory structure, along with then-current photographs of all four sides of the principal residential structure on the property, and a description of the siding and roofing materials and colors of those materials along with a description of the roof pitch on the principal residential structure and how those features compare with the proposed detached accessory structure. City planning division staff shall evaluate the architectural consistency between the proposed detached accessory structure and the principal residential structure based upon the guidelines set forth in this subsection, before issuing a land use permit. In the case of a dispute or uncertainty between city planning division staff and the property owner relating to architectural details or features, or in the event the planning division staff does not approve the architectural/design plans submitted by the property owner, the application for the proposed detached accessory structure shall be submitted to the city planning and zoning commission followed by referral to the city council for architectural/design review purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-115), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-127. - Setbacks for corner lots. 
(a)  For corner lots platted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the street side yard shall be equal in width to the setback regulation of the lots to the rear having frontage on the intersecting street. 
(b)  On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the side yard regulation shall apply to the longer street side of the lot, except in the case of reverse frontage where the corner lot faces an intersecting street. In this case there shall be a side yard on the longer street side of the corner lot of not less than 50 percent of the setback required on the lots to the rear of such corner lot, and no accessory building on the corner lot shall project beyond the setback line of the lots in the rear, provided that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record, or as shown by existing contract of purchase at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to less than 28 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building. 
(c)  On corner lots, frontage may be considered on either street, provided that, if front and rear yards are parallel to the lot line having the longer dimension, then setbacks along both streets shall conform to the front yard requirements of the district in which the lot is located. 

Corner Lot Setback
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-116), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-128. - Front yard setback for developed blocks in R districts. 
    In any R district, there shall be a minimum front yard required as stated in the yard requirements for that particular district; provided, however, that where lots comprising 30 percent or more of the frontage within 200 feet of either side lot line are developed with buildings at a greater setback, the average of these building setbacks shall be established. The required front yard setback shall be the average setback line plus ten feet towards the front yard. In no case, however, shall a setback line established in this manner be less restrictive than the minimum setback required for that district. In computing the average setback line, buildings located on reversed corner lots or entirely on the rear half of lots shall not be counted. 
METHOD OF COMPUTING 
BUILDING SETBACK IN A DEVELOPED BLOCK 

Front Yard Setback
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-117), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-129. - Reduction of required yards. 
    No lot shall be reduced in area so as to make any yard or any other open space less than the minimum required by this article. No part of a yard or other open space provided about any building or structure, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this article, shall be included as part of a yard or other open space required under this article for another building or structure. Off-street parking and loading areas may occupy all or part of any required yard or open space except as otherwise specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-118), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-130. - Encroachment into required setback area. 
    Any principal use as defined in chapter 26, as amended, in existence as of the date of the final passage of Ordinance No. 1975 for which a building permit had been obtained as required by the city as of the date of passage is hereby declared to meet and conform to all front, side, and rear yard requirements of chapter 26, as amended, if said principal use does not encroach into the required setback area more than ten percent of said required setback. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-119.1), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-131. - Minimum dimension of dwellings. 
    The minimum dimension of the main body of a dwelling shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-120), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-132. - Bi-attached dwellings. 
(a)  All bi-attached dwelling units in existence on March 9, 1981, which do not contain a one-hour fire-resistive wall between units shall become a bi-attached dwelling equipped with smoke detectors, the detectors to be placed in corridors used in common, the nominal spacing of which shall not exceed 30 feet. All bi-attached dwellings constructed after March 9, 1981, shall be separated vertically and horizontally from each other and from corridors used in common by not less than one-hour fire-resistive construction. 
(b)  No dwelling shall be entitled to the status of a bi-attached dwelling unless the owner thereof obtains approval of such status by the zoning administrator and executes a covenant and easement agreement regarding the dwelling. The owner shall submit to the zoning administrator for review and approval the information required in section 26-163, including a copy of the proposed covenant and easement agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-121), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-133. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a)  Bed and breakfast establishments shall consist of bed and breakfast enterprises and bed and breakfast inns. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast enterprises shall be permitted as an accessory use within a single-unit residence where such residence is occupied by the owner or the owner's designee. 
(c)  Bed and breakfast establishments shall not be permitted in R-1 SF districts. 
(d)  Bed and breakfast enterprises are permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-5 zoning districts if the bed and breakfast enterprises meet the following minimum guidelines: 
(1)  Provide minimum living area as defined by the city minimum rental housing code: 220 square feet for the first person; 200 square feet for each additional person. Minimum living area requirements shall be calculated for the entire structure (except garage, porches and decks) in relation to the number of resident families plus the potential number of overnight lodging guests. Potential lodging guests shall be assumed to be two persons per lodging room. 
(2)  The principal residence shall meet minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the respective zoning district. 
(3)  One sign may be erected on the property and shall be limited in size to six square feet in sign area. The sign may be illuminated. 
(e)  No minimum off-street parking area shall be required of a bed and breakfast enterprise. 
(f)  Bed and breakfast enterprises containing no more than five guest rooms may be established in other zoning districts, provided such enterprises meet the following minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-122), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-134. - Communication towers. 
(a)  Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to regulate and guide the location of new communication towers, antennas and related accessory structures. The goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 
(3)  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(4)  Strongly encourage the joint use or co-location of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(6)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(7)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(8)  Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and 
(9)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
    Backhaul network means the lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
    Camouflage design describes a communication tower or communications facility which takes on the appearance of a piece of art or of some natural feature, or of an architectural structural component or other similar element and which blends in naturally and aesthetically with the surrounding building environment. Examples of camouflage design include, but are not limited to, flagpoles, trees, vegetation, clock towers, monuments, and church steeples, but only if situated in an appropriate location or setting. Camouflage design also applies in the architectural integration of communication facilities (i.e., antennas) onto existing buildings, sports field's lights, highway signs, water towers, or other existing structures. 
    Co-location of communication equipment. In an effort to reduce the proliferation of multiple communication towers throughout the city, existing communication towers and other structures to the greatest extent practicable shall be utilized for mounting or locating communication antennas or related communication equipment. 
    Communication tower structure means any tower or any other elevated structure that supports antennas, as defined herein. 
    Communication tower structure site means a tract or parcel of land that contains the wireless communication tower structure, accessory support buildings, and on-site parking, and which may include other uses associated with the normal operations of wireless communications and transmissions. 
    Monopole construction means a tower consisting of a single vertical structure not supported by radiating guy wires or a support structure. A monopole tower shall be distinctive from a two-legged or multi-legged, lattice constructed tower structure. 
    Private radio operator of communication towers means personal, amateur or hobby radio operators and communication equipment, including towers and antennas necessary to conduct personal, amateur or hobby radio operations. 
    Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and the like. The term "tower" includes the structure and any support thereto. 
    Tower height measurement means the distance between the base of the tower (ground level) and the top of the tower or the top of the highest appurtenance mounted on the tower, whichever measurement is greater. 
(c)  Applicable documents and agencies. The following documents and agencies referenced herein are applicable to the extent specified: 
(1)  EIA-222. Electronics Industries Association, Standard 222 Structural Standards for steel antenna towers and antenna support structures. 
(2)  FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  FCC. Federal Communications Commission. 
(4)  ANSI-95.1. The most recently adopted standard of the American National Standards Institute which establishes guidelines for human exposure to non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
(d)  General requirements. 
(1)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses, but shall in any event comply with all of the requirements of this section and of this article relating to principal and/or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(2)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
(3)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the city planner an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city, or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city planner may share such information with other applicants applying for a land use permit under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city; provided, however, that the city planner is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(4)  Exemption for certain towers of governmental bodies. Communications towers and/or antennas erected by city, county or state governmental bodies for public safety or other essential public purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Regulation of all communication towers. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring all towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the city to require the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
b.  NIER. The NIER (non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation) emitted from a communications tower or associated equipment shall not exceed the most recently adopted standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI-95.1). 
c.  Height. Towers (including top-mounted appurtenances) shall not exceed the overall height recommended by the FAA or the FCC or as limited herein. 
d.  Precedence. Where regulations and requirements of this section conflict with those of the FAA or FCC, the federal requirements shall take precedence. 
e.  Advertising. Advertising on communication towers shall be prohibited. Commercial signage or other type of sign messaging on towers, other than specific tower site signage such as safety messaging, ownership signs or no trespassing signs, shall also be prohibited. 
f.  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have a period of 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such codes and standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 day period shall constitute grounds for the city to require the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
g.  Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
h.  Tower removal. The tower owner and/or operator shall notify the city inspection services division when a tower is removed, no longer in use, or is knocked down, or blown down, or damaged to such an extent that major structural repairs are required. If a tower is removed, knocked down, blown down, or damaged to such an extent that major structural repairs are required, said tower shall not be reconstructed or replaced without prior review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. If said damaged tower is abandoned or inoperable with no intention by the owner to replace said tower, the tower shall be removed in a timely fashion at the expense of the tower owner or the property owner where the tower is located, as directed by the city planner. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying both the tower owner and the owner of the property on which the tower is located, of such abandonment. Failure of the tower owner or property owner to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for the city to require removal of the tower or antenna at the expense of the tower owner or property owner. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. If the city is required to remove a tower at the expense of the tower owner or property owner, the costs of removal, if not paid by the tower owner, or by the owner of the property on which the tower is located, within 30 days of the city's written demand for payment, shall be reported to the city clerk, who shall levy the cost thereof as an assessment, which shall be a lien on the real estate on which the tower is located. The city clerk shall certify such assessments to the county auditor to be paid by the owner of the property on which the tower is located, in installments in the same manner as property taxes, as provided by law. 
i.  Interference. Any signal interference complaints associated with communication towers or related equipment shall be addressed in accordance with FCC rules and procedures. 
j.  Lighting. No towers shall be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other federal or state authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views and/or the surrounding or abutting properties. 
k.  Coloration. Towers, accessory structures, and other related components shall use paint or coloration which blends in, to the maximum extent possible, with the surrounding environment and surrounding buildings. 
l.  Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness to the maximum extent possible. 
2.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
3.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
m.  Property owner information. It shall be the responsibility of the tower owner to furnish to the city any change in name or address of the owner of the property upon which the tower is situated. 
n.  Tower separation requirements. 
1.  If any tower is removed from a site within the city for any reason, including, without limitation, a tower that is knocked down, blown down, or damaged to such an extent that major structural repairs are required, or if the tower is removed for any other reason, and if a new or replacement tower is proposed on the same property and at the same location, such new or replacement tower may be considered for erection at the same location on the same property, subject to compliance with the review process and standards contained in this section. Any such application shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
2.  The tower separation requirements of this section shall not, in and of themselves, necessarily serve as a basis for denial of such an application. The planning and zoning commission and city council may waive the tower separation requirements with respect to said application if, after considering all relevant circumstances, including whether the applicant has clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commission and the council that all practical and feasible co-location alternatives have been investigated, considered and appropriately rejected, and, based upon all other relevant factors and circumstances, the commission and council determine that approval of the application shall serve the interests of the community. 
o.  Tower design. In furtherance of the goal set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section, to strongly encourage co-location of communication antennas on existing towers or other existing structures, each applicant proposing to construct a new communications tower shall be required to design the proposed new tower so as to accommodate the co-location of the antenna arrays of at least three additional telecommunications carriers or providers, in addition to the antenna requirements of the applicant proposing to construct the new tower. 
(2)  Tower application. Prior to the installation of any communication tower within the city, the owner/operator shall submit to the city planner an application for a land use permit. Said application shall include, at a minimum, the following information and/or documentation: 
a.  Detailed, scaled site plan illustrating property location and address, including a location map, property dimensions, tower location, tower height, and adjacent land uses and zoning districts within 200 feet of the tower site, on site land uses and zoning classification of the property under consideration, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and any other information the city planner deems to be necessary to determine compliance with this section. Names and addresses of property owners within 200 feet of the property on which the tower is proposed to be located shall be shown on the site plan. 
b.  Description of tower usage and ownership including name of tower company and principal company contact person, including telephone number and address. 
c.  Name and address of owner of the property where the tower facility is proposed to be located together with a description of the terms of the proposed lease between the tower owner and property owner, including, but not limited to, duration of lease, renewal provisions, liability provisions and tower removal arrangements in the event of tower failure, lease expiration, or antenna or tower abandonment. The application shall be accompanied by a written consent of the property owner that provides that if the application is granted, the property owner acknowledges the provisions regarding tower removal contained in this section, and agrees to be responsible for removal of the tower, or payment of the costs of removal, on the terms and conditions set forth in subsection (e)(1)h of this section. 
d.  Landscaping plan, with a description of exterior fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination, and a description of on-site landscaping along with the description of related communication tower facilities that may be established in adjacent structures on the communication tower site. 
e.  Copies of FAA and/or FCC permits. 
f.  Structural specifications as verified by a licensed professional engineer relating to: structural materials, soils information, method of installation and erection, list of types of antennas, cables and other appurtenances, a statement that the structure is designed in accordance with current EIA 222 structural standards, and wind load/ice load specifications. 
g.  Description of camouflage design options and opportunities for the proposed facility. The applicant must give a description, including photographs or illustrations, of the proposed tower design and general appearance, including coloration details, and comment upon whether or not camouflage options have been considered or are practical to apply. 
h.  Description of co-location efforts in accordance with the requirements of subsection (f) of this section, including list of companies and tower sites within the city that were investigated, and the reasons why co-location is not possible. Technical data shall be submitted to support this explanation. Information must be submitted to city staff in order to verify that co-location inquiries have been made with other existing tower facility owners. Furthermore, a description of future co-location opportunities on the proposed tower must also be presented in conjunction with the proposed tower structure, as provided for in subsection (f) of this section. 
i.  Safety narrative. Submittal of a written description of tower structural components, including basic construction methods, weight or load capacity, durability in terms of wind and ice loads, structural failure probability and predicted fall zones, and other relevant data requested by the city planner, all certified by the applicant's engineer. 
j.  A nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council from time to time to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
k.  All information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits to the city in connection with the application, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified as true, correct and complete by a licensed professional engineer who is qualified to make such certification with respect to that field of engineering. 
l.  Legal description and street address of the tract of land and of the leased parcel, if applicable, on which the tower will be located. 
m.  A notarized statement by the applicant's engineer as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users, and if so, how many and what size and type of such antennas. 
n.  Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower described in the application, and for other tower sites owned or operated by the applicant in the city. 
o.  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures, including co-location on an existing tower or other structure, to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed tower, accompanied by a certification thereof from the applicant's engineer. 
p.  The distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. 
q.  The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection (d)(3) of this section shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing towers and the owner/operator of the existing towers, if known. 
r.  The separation distance between the location of the proposed new tower and all other existing communications towers located within 5,000 feet of the proposed tower, together with the specific location, type of construction, and name of owner/operator of each such existing tower, and whether such existing tower is structurally and technologically capable of accommodating any additional antennas on such tower, and if so, how many and what type of antennas may be accommodated on each such other existing tower. 
s.  A description of the feasible location of future towers or antennas within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected. 
t.  A description of any artificial lighting proposed with respect to the applicant's tower, including a description of how such lighting will impact the surrounding views and the surrounding or abutting properties. 
u.  Information and documentation which demonstrates that the applicant complies with all of the provisions of this section, and all applicable federal, state and other local laws. 
v.  The inventory of existing sites as required in subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
w.  Description of vehicular access route to the proposed tower site, including proposed curb cuts, subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
x.  Such other information and documentation as may be requested by the city planner to evaluate the application and to determine whether it satisfies the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Request for tower construction. Following receipt of all completed materials and documentation the city planner shall, if appropriate, refer the request for tower construction to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for further review. 
(4)  Applications for tower installation. The planning and zoning commission and city council shall review such applications for tower installation to assure that the structure meets all safety requirements, is properly engineered, is compatible with surrounding land uses, will have no adverse impact upon nearby properties, and complies with the requirements of this section. 
(5)  Antenna application. Prior to the installation of any antenna on an existing communication tower, building, or other structure of any kind, the owner/operator of the antenna shall submit to the city planner an application for an antenna/land use permit. Said application shall include at a minimum the following information and/or documentation: 
a.  A description of the number, size, and type of antennas proposed to be installed. 
b.  A description of the structure to which the proposed antennas will be affixed, whether communication tower, building or other structure, including the street address, legal description, location map and other information that will assist the city planner in determining where the antennas will be installed, together with the name, including principal contact person, telephone number and address of the owner of the tower, building or other structure upon which the antennas will be installed, and the written consent of such owner to the installation of the antennas. 
c.  Structural specifications as verified by a licensed professional engineer, that the installation of the antennas on the tower or other structure will meet the structural specifications contained in this section. 
d.  Any other information and documentation as may be requested by the city planner to evaluate the application and to determine whether it satisfies the requirements of this section and of applicable federal, state and other local laws. 
e.  A nonrefundable fee, if any, as established by resolution of the city council from time to time to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the antenna application. 
f.  A description of the accessory cabinet, structure or building that will serve the proposed antennas, together with documentation demonstrating that such accessory structure complies with the requirements of all applicable city ordinances, including applicable local building codes and ordinances. 
Following receipt of all completed materials and documentation, the city planner shall either approve the application, if the city planner determines that the application complies with all requirements of this section or, in the discretion of the city planner, the application may be referred to the planning and zoning commission and city council for further review. The planning and zoning commission and city council shall review any antenna applications referred by the city planner to assure that the proposed antennas meet all safety requirements, are properly engineered, and otherwise comply with the requirements of this section and all applicable federal, state and other local laws. 
(f)  Factors considered in granting land use permits for towers. The planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a land use permit, although the planning and zoning commission and city council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning and zoning commission and city council conclude that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. This consideration shall involve evaluation of any proposed camouflage design options and whether any such camouflage options are in character with the surrounding area and that the proposed design achieves the desired camouflage effect. 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(8)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures. 
(g)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission and city council that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed tower structure and/or antennas. An applicant shall submit information requested by the city planner related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet the applicant's reasonable and technologically sound engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's reasonable and technologically sound engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment, and still meet applicable structural requirements described in this section. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna such that the applicant's antenna would not be technologically feasible. 
(5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable, based on reasonable technological and/or engineering criteria. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable, based on reasonable technological and/or engineering criteria. 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wire line system, is unsuitable, based on reasonable technological and/or engineering criteria. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
(h)  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a land use permit is required: 
(1)  Towers must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements that are applicable to principal uses on the property where the proposed tower will be situated. 
(2)  Guy wire and other structural support elements and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements that are applicable to principal uses on the property where the proposed tower will be situated. 
(3)  If towers are established on properties located adjacent to a freeway, state highway, a major or minor arterial street/roadway or collector street, all such streets and roadways indicated on the city major thoroughfare map, the tower structure must be located at least the height of said tower in distance from the adjacent said public right-of-way. 
(i)  Location and installation. 
(1)  Residential districts. Communication towers intended to serve personal and amateur radio operators, including hobby radio operators (i.e., private radio operators) shall be permitted within any residential zoning district as an accessory use to a principal permitted residential use, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Said private radio communication towers in residential districts shall not be located in front of any residence and not within any required side or rear yard areas. If the tower is supported with guy anchors or other radiating support structure, said anchors or support structure shall not be allowed within five feet of a rear or side property line. Said anchors or support structure shall not be allowed within a required front yard. 
b.  The maximum allowable height of a fixed tower including antennas and appurtenances serving private radio operators and also including roof-mounted communication antennas within a residential zoning district serving private radio communication towers shall be 80 feet. Said maximum height shall be measured from the average natural grade of the property immediately adjacent to the tower. 
c.  Prior to the installation of any private radio communication tower in a residential zoning district, the owner/operator shall submit to the city planner an application for a land use permit as outlined in subsection (e)(1) of this section. For those proposed towers or roof-mounted antennas that have an overall height of less than 40 feet as measured from the natural grade, the city planner may issue a land use permit without any further review by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. 
d.  If the overall height of the proposed private radio communication tower or antenna exceeds 40 feet above the natural grade, the request shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. The owner/applicant shall submit evidence that the tower and, if roof-mounted, the tower and building to which it is attached, are constructed to specifications of tower industry standards. The owner/applicant shall be responsible for providing a statement from an independent structural engineer that the proposed tower or antenna structural specifications satisfy basic industry safety standards as described in this section. 
(2)  Communication tower structures intended for use for commercial purposes or by any entity other than a private radio operator shall be strongly discouraged within the city in any zoning district that allows residential uses as a principal permitted use. However, in those instances where an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission and the city council that the interests of the community will be served by the installation of a tower in any such residential zoning district, such application may be granted, provided that said proposed tower must be of an acceptable camouflage design and shall not exceed 80 feet in overall height. The planning and zoning commission and city council shall determine whether the proposal to place the tower in any such residential zoning district is in conformity with the purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section, and otherwise meets all of the applicable requirements of this section. No two-legged or multi-legged lattice structure or guy wire supported towers shall be permitted in any residential zoning district under any circumstances. Commercial and private communication equipment, including antennas and accessory support facilities (i.e., small detached structures) may be permitted within any such residential zoning district only when all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  It is proposed to affix communication antennas to a camouflaged tower, existing structure such as a church steeple, water tower, telephone or electric pole, or other acceptable camouflage design; 
b.  The antenna and accessory communication equipment are camouflaged or heavily screened so as to be as unobtrusive and unnoticeable within the neighborhood as possible; 
c.  The applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the applicable requirements of this section; and 
d.  Subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, if applicable under subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(3)  Commercial districts. Communication towers intended for use for commercial purposes or by any entity other than a private hobby radio operator shall be permitted as a principal permitted use in the following zoning districts: A-1, except as limited herein, C-2, PC-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2, upon site plan review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said communication towers shall not be allowed as principal permitted uses in the following zoning districts: C-1, MPC, S-1, PO-1, BR, MU, HWY-1, HWY-20 districts or within the HCG Highway Corridor and Greenbelt Overlay Zoning District. 
(j)  Towers as principal permitted or accessory uses. 
(1)  Towers that are proposed as principal permitted uses or accessory uses shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Towers proposed to be established as principal permitted or accessory uses in the A-1 agriculture zoning district shall be guided by the city's schematic land use map. There are many A-1 agriculture zoning districts within the city which are located adjacent to residential zoning districts and which have not yet been rezoned for development purposes. Therefore, in order to discourage the establishment of commercial communication towers immediately adjacent to or within existing residential neighborhoods, the city's schematic land use map shall be utilized as a guide in evaluating which properties are designated as future residential development areas. It is the intent of this section that towers proposed to be established in the A-1 agriculture zoning district must be located in those areas intended for future commercial or industrial development areas and shall not be permitted in those areas designated for future residential development as indicated on the city's schematic land use map, except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection (i)(2) of this section. Said towers will be governed by the following standards outlined herein. 
b.  Towers proposed to be established as principal permitted or accessory uses in A-1, M-1 or M-2 districts shall be limited to an overall height, as measured from natural grade, of 250 feet. All such towers that are 150 feet or less in overall tower height must be of monopole construction. 
c.  Towers proposed to be established as principal permitted or accessory uses in C-2, PC-2 or C-3 zoning districts shall be limited in overall height to 120 feet. All such towers must be of monopole construction. 
d.  All towers proposed to be established as principal permitted or accessory uses shall be located on the lot so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line, or leased property boundary, meets the minimum building setback requirement for the zoning district in which the tower is located. 
e.  Guy wires or radiating tower support structures, if utilized in conjunction with a tower, shall maintain a setback from the property line equal to the building setback requirement in the zoning district in which it is located. 
f.  All towers proposed to be established as principal permitted or accessory uses shall be certified by a registered engineer stating that the tower structure will withstand wind pressures of 80 miles per hour with one-half inch ice load. If said tower is roof-mounted the same engineering certification shall be provided for both the tower and the building to which it is attached. 
g.  Camouflage design options for the tower structure and related facilities must be evaluated based upon the requirements of this section. It is the intent of this regulation to seek out and pursue camouflage design options to the maximum extent possible. 
h.  Security fencing, measuring at least six feet in height, shall be required around the base of the tower and also around guy anchors of any tower, and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, unless waived by the city council, as it deems appropriate. 
i.  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a land use permit is required; provided, however, that the city council may waive such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
1.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide and six feet high at the time of planting, located outside the perimeter of the compound. 
2.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the commission and city council. 
3.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be considered a sufficient buffer. 
j.  Upon completion of tower site construction, a placard containing the name, address and telephone number of the principal owner or operator of the tower structure shall be affixed in a location so that it is clearly visible at the perimeter of the site. Said placard shall not exceed three square feet in area. The pertinent ownership information on the placard shall be kept current and updated as needed. 
k.  Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed tower base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in table 1 as follows: 
Table 1. Existing Towers; Types 
Monopole Height Lattice Guyed 80 Feet or 
Greater Less Than80 Feet Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750 Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750 Monopole 80 Feet in Height or Greater 1,500 1,500 1,500 750 Monopole Less Than 80 Feet in Height 750 750 750 750  
(2)  Other zoning districts. Other zoning districts where tower structures are generally prohibited may be considered for the installation of towers and related communication equipment, including antennas and accessory support facilities under the same guidelines as outlined in section (h)(1) of this section, residential districts, provided that said consideration does not conflict with any other requirements of this article . 
(3)  a.  Roof-mounted towers shall be permitted in any allowable commercial or industrial zoning district as specified herein subject to the standards set forth in subsection (j)(3)b of this section. 
b.  Maximum height of the tower shall be 40 feet above the roof upon which the tower is established, but not more than 120 feet above ground level. 
(k)  Additional requirements of application. Every application for a land use permit to install a communication tower or antenna in the city must comply with all provisions of this section, all provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, compliance with all on-site parking requirements including driveway/aisle access requirements of this article applicable to the site on which the communication tower or antenna will be installed, and all other provisions of this code which are applicable to the site, the installation of the tower or antenna, and all other provisions of this code which are in any way applicable to said application. 
(l)  Additional conditions on approval of application. In granting a land use permit under this section, the planning and zoning commission and city council may impose reasonable conditions to the extent such conditions are deemed necessary to satisfy the purposes of this section and in order to minimize any adverse effect or impact of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-123), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-135. - Adult entertainment establishments; general regulations. 
(a)  General statement of intent. Adult entertainment establishments, because of their special characteristics, are recognized as having potential deleterious impacts on surrounding establishments and areas, thereby contributing to creation of blight and to the decline of the neighborhoods. These negative impacts appear to increase significantly if several adult entertainment establishments concentrate in one area. Recognized also is the need to protect lawful rights of expression and use of property and to not unduly restrain general public access. Therefore, it is the intent of these regulations to prevent concentrations of adult entertainment establishments in all areas, to more severely limit their locations in areas where minors would be expected to live or congregate and to otherwise regulate their locations in order to protect and preserve the welfare of the community. It is the intent also to provide for sufficient locations for such establishments to protect basic legal rights of expression and public access. These regulations have been enacted with full consideration of the legal and constitutional issues heretofore adjudicated. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult artist-body painting studio means an establishment or business which provides the services of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein). 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having at least 25 percent of the retail floor space presently being used by said business or at least 25 percent of the gross business income derived from or attributable to printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes or motion picture films, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as hereinafter defined. 
    Adult cabaret means any place holding a liquor license or beer permit, or combination permit for consumption of beer or liquor, or both, on the premises wherein entertainment is characterized by emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as described herein). 
    Adult conversation/rap parlor means any establishment which excludes minors by reason of age and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as herein defined. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any other establishment not otherwise defined herein, but of the same general classification as the other establishments herein defined, having as a substantial or significant portion of its business, stock in trade of materials, scenes, or other presentations characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as herein defined. 
    Adult health/sport club means a health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age and is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as herein defined. 
    Adult massage parlor means any place of business which restricts minors by reason of age, wherein any method of pressure on or friction against, or rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating the external parts of the body with the hand or any body parts, or by a mechanical or electrical instrument, under such circumstances that is reasonably expected that the individual to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give other consideration or gratuity therefor, wherein the massage is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, or involving specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult modeling studio means an establishment or business which provides the services of modeling for the purposes of reproducing the human body by any means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise wherein the activity is distinguishing or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. 
    Adult sexual encounter center means: 
(1)  An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
(2)  Any business, agency or persons who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provide a place for three or more persons, not all members of the same family, to congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of performing activities distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. 
    Adult steam room/bathhouse facility means a building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bath room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such a building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. 
    Adult theater means a motion picture theater or stage show theater or combination thereof used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult uses mean and include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse facilities, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets and other premises, enterprises, businesses, private clubs/establishments or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, which are capable of being seen by members of the public. 
    Protected uses mean and include a building in which at least 25 percent of the gross floor area is used for residential purposes; a day care center where such day care center is a principal use; a house of worship; a public library; an elementary, junior high or high school (public, parochial or private); public park; public recreation center or public specialized recreation facility as identified in the parks and recreation element of the Cedar Falls Long Range Plan; a civic/convention center; a community residential facility; a mission. However, this definition shall not apply if the protected use is a legal nonconforming use. 
    Specified anatomical areas include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region; 
b.  Buttock; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities include the following: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
(c)  Regulations governing the location of adult entertainment establishment. 
(1)  Zoning districts where allowed. All adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult theaters, adult artist-body painting studios, adult modeling studios, adult sexual encounter centers, adult cabaret, and all other adult entertainment establishments shall be allowed in the C-2 and C-3 zoning districts as a principle permitted use. Said uses shall not be allowed in any other zoning district. 
(2)  Minimum separation requirements. 
a.  No such adult entertainment establishment described in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be located within 600 feet of any other such establishment. 
b.  No such adult entertainment establishment described in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be established within 600 feet from any residential (R) zoning district or within 600 feet from any protected use as defined herein which distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line on which the adult use is located to the closest point of the property line on which is located an aforementioned protected use. If a protected use is a legal nonconforming use, this provision shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-124), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-136. - Addition or expansion of attached garage to principal residential structure. 
    Any proposed garage addition or expansion of an existing attached garage to an existing principal residential structure shall satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  All minimum building setback or yard requirements shall be satisfied as specified for principal permitted uses within the zoning district where the structure is located; 
(2)  The garage addition/expansion must be connected to the principal residential structure or existing attached garage by a continuous footing/foundation and must also be connected to the principal residential structure or existing attached garage by wall and roof structural connections; 
(3)  The garage addition/expansion must be constructed utilizing the same or similar external finish building materials and the same or similar coloration of said materials as found on the principal residential structure; 
(4)  The garage addition/expansion must establish similar roof pitch with similar or same roof materials and coloration of said roof materials as exist on the principal residential structure; 
(5)  The garage addition/expansion shall not exceed the existing height of the principal residential structure; 
(6)  The expanded, completed garage addition/expansion shall not exceed in base floor area the total base floor area or ground floor area of the existing principal residential structure, excluding porches, deck areas and excluding any existing attached garage floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-125), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-137. - Temporary storage containers. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section, temporary storage containers, including, but not limited to, truck trailers, storage box shipping containers, storage moving "pods," or any other similar portable storage containers, whether with or without wheels, and whether with or without a chassis, may only be placed upon a property for a period not to exceed 60 days in any consecutive 12-month period. No more than one such temporary container can be placed on a property during any 12-month period. The owner or tenant in possession of the property must first obtain a temporary land use permit from the city planner prior to the placement of any such temporary portable storage containers on the property. The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable in all zoning districts in the city except as otherwise expressly provided for in subsection (c) of this section. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to tents or similar temporary enclosures that are established for purposes of storage. This section shall not apply to pre-fabricated garden sheds or similar structures specifically designed and intended for use on properties for storage purposes and which comply with all city ordinances applicable to detached accessory structures. 
(b)  The city planner shall have the discretion to permit the placement of temporary storage containers on a property for a period longer than 60 days in any consecutive 12-month period if the placement of such temporary storage container on the property is reasonably required in order to accommodate the storage of construction equipment during a construction or reconstruction project on the property. The owner of the property and the owner's contractor, if any, shall apply for the land use permit for the temporary storage container as part of the application for a building permit for the construction or reconstruction project. The land use permit for the temporary storage container shall only be allowed for such period as is reasonably necessary for, and only with demonstrated progress towards, completion of such construction or reconstruction project, all as determined in the discretion of the city planner and the city building official, and in any event, shall expire no later than the time the building permit for the construction or reconstruction project expires. Such temporary portable storage containers shall meet all requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, the location and setback requirements specified in section 26-125 for detached accessory structures. 
(c)  The owner or tenant in possession of property located in a commercial or industrial zoning district upon which is located the principal permitted use of a trucking business or a similar transportation or warehousing business, may place temporary storage containers, including, but not limited to, truck trailers, storage box shipping containers, storage moving "pods" or any other similar portable storage containers, whether with or without wheels, and whether with or without a chassis, on such property for periods longer than 60 days and without obtaining a land use permit as otherwise provided for in subsection (a) of this section. For all other properties located in commercial or industrial zoning districts, the placement of such temporary storage containers on any property is expressly prohibited except as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Any temporary storage container existing on any property in the city on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall either be removed from such property, or brought into compliance with the provisions of this section, within 60 days of the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-126), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-138. - Wind energy facilities. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all wind energy facilities (large and small) for which an application for a special permit or building permit has been submitted to the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  Wind energy facilities for which a required permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section; provided, however, that any such preexisting wind energy facility which is discontinued or does not provide energy for a continuous period of 12 months shall meet the requirements of this section prior to recommencing production of energy. However, no modification or alteration to an existing wind energy facility shall be allowed unless in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a regulatory means for controlling the construction and operation of large and small wind energy facilities in the city, with the use of reasonable restrictions, which will preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. The city adopts these provisions to promote the effective and efficient use of the city's wind energy resource. 
(c)  Findings. The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  Wind energy is an abundant, renewable and nonpolluting energy resource for the city and its conversion to electricity may reduce dependence on nonrenewable energy sources and decrease the air and water pollution that results from the use of conventional energy sources. 
(2)  The generation of electricity from properly sited wind energy facilities can be cost effective and can reduce consumption of traditional energy sources and in many cases existing power distribution systems can be used to transmit electricity from wind-generating systems to utilities or other electric power users. 
(3)  Regulation of the siting and installation of wind energy facilities is necessary for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of neighboring property owners and the general public. 
(4)  Wind energy facilities represent significant potential aesthetic and environmental impacts because of their potential size, lighting, noise generation, ice shedding and shadow "flicker" effects, if not properly sited and planned. 
(5)  If not properly sited, wind energy facilities may present risks to the property values of adjoining property owners. 
(6)  Without proper planning, construction of large wind energy facilities can create traffic problems and damage local roads. 
(7)  If not properly sited, wind energy facilities can interfere with various types of communications or otherwise interfere with electromagnetic waves. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Decommissioning means the process of use termination and removal of all or part of a large or small wind energy facility by the owner of the wind energy facility. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Facility owner means the property owner, entity or entities having an equity interest in the wind energy facility. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Hub height, when referring to a wind turbine, means the distance measured from ground level to the center of the turbine hub. 
    MET tower means a meteorological tower used for the measurement of wind speed. 
    Site means the parcel of land where a wind energy facility is to be placed. The site can be publicly or privately owned by an individual or group of individuals controlling single or adjacent properties. Where multiple lots are in joint ownership or control, the combined lots shall be considered as one for purposes of applying setback requirements. 
    Total height means, when referring to a wind energy facility, the distance measured from ground level to the windmill blade or similar wind-capture device mounted on the facility extended at its highest point. 
    Use termination means the point in time at which a wind energy facility owner provides notice to the city that the wind energy facility is no longer used to produce electricity unless due to a temporary shutdown for repairs. Such notice of use termination shall occur no less than 30 days after actual use termination. 
    Wind energy facility, large, means a facility that includes a tower structure, wind turbine and other related fixtures and facilities that generates electricity or performs other work consisting of one or more wind turbines under common ownership or operating control, and includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other buildings accessory to such facility, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers. The power output of such facility shall exceed 100 kilowatts (kw). It also includes any wind energy facility not falling under the definition of a small wind energy facility. 
    Wind energy facility, small, means a facility that may include a tower structure, wind turbine and other related fixtures and facilities that generates electricity or performs other work, has a total height of 120 feet or less or is affixed to an existing structure, has a power output rated capacity of 100 kilowatts (kw) or less, and is intended to primarily reduce the on-site consumption of electricity of the principal use on the property. Small wind energy systems may include roof-mounted facilities. Any wind energy facilities not falling under this definition shall be deemed large wind energy facilities. 
    Wind farm means two or more large wind energy facilities under common ownership or control. 
    Wind turbine means a wind energy conversion system which converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the turbine, blade, or other wind-capturing device, tower, base, and pad. Turbines may be of a horizontal or vertical design. 
(e)  Regulatory framework. 
(1)  Large wind energy facilities exceeding 120 feet in overall tower height and not to exceed 250 feet in overall tower height may only be constructed in areas that are zoned A1 Agricultural District, M-1 Light Industrial, M-P Planned Industrial or M-2 Heavy Industrial Districts subject to review and approval of a special exception permit by the city planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(2)  Small wind energy facilities that are less than 120 feet in overall height and generate less than 100 kw of power may be constructed in any C commercial district or planned commercial district or within mixed use residential districts as either a principal or accessory use subject to approval of a special exception permit by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Taller tower structures, not to exceed 150 feet in overall height, may be allowed in C commercial districts, planned commercial districts or within mixed use residential districts subject to careful review of special conditions and circumstances that justify increased tower structure height by the commission and city council. Taller tower structures allowed within mixed use residential districts or within larger multiple unit residential development areas shall be established for the benefit of multiple users, dwellings or businesses within the facility project area. More than one wind energy facility may be considered with larger commercial or residential development projects. 
(3)  Small wind energy facilities intended for use in R residential districts shall be guided by the recommendation that wind energy facilities or tower structures should generally conform to the maximum height limits in that residential district, but shall not exceed 60 feet in overall height. The commission may recommend and the city council may consider allowance of taller tower structures up to 80 feet in height in special circumstances where the natural topography of the property under consideration is substantially lower than the natural topography of immediately abutting properties. The presence of taller trees or buildings on or near the property under consideration shall not be sufficient justification for a taller tower structure. A single tower structure will be permitted for each single residential property. Additional wind-generating mechanisms may be permitted, such as roof-mounted mechanisms on individual residential properties where a tower structure already exists. However, the roof-mounted mechanisms may not extend more than 15 feet above the height of the residential structure in all cases. 
(4)  Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be permitted in all districts. It is anticipated that these types of systems will be designed for smaller scale, single-site power generating applications. Roof-mounted systems must be reviewed and approved in the same fashion as tower-mounted wind energy system proposals. Setback requirements for roof-mounted systems may be less than the setback required for tower structures; however, an analysis of the height of the mechanism along with considerations of "ice-throw" distances will establish a safe setback distance for roof-mounted mechanisms. 
(5)  Application for a special exception permit for a large or small wind energy facility including tower structures or roof-mounted structures shall be submitted with the following information: 
a.  A signed petition by the property owner detailing the request for one or more large or small wind energy system on a single property including address and legal description of the property, name of the managing company or interest in the wind energy facility and general description of the proposed facility or tower or roof-mounted facility, such as number of tower structures, number of energy-generating turbines, height of the proposed tower structure, general characteristics, etc. Any related lease agreement with an outside party relating to establishment or maintenance of the wind energy facility must also be submitted with the name and address of the leasing party clearly presented. A proposed time line for installation and operation of the proposed system must be described. 
b.  A signed statement indicating that the applicant or leasing party has legal authority to construct, operate, and develop the wind energy facilities under state, federal and local laws and regulations, including Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and state and local building codes. 
c.  A description of the number and kind of wind energy facilities to be installed along with a description of the key structural components such as type of tower structure with illustrations provided. In addition, any proposed accessory structures to be installed in conjunction with the wind energy system need to be described with illustrations and description of building materials and building design. 
d.  Submittal of a professionally prepared detailed site plan illustrating the specific location of the proposed wind energy facilities or tower structure, showing property boundaries, existing utility easements or other types of easements across the property, topography of the site at two-feet increments, proposed setbacks from the property boundary and also showing all other structures and facilities on the property including other accessory structures, parking lots and nearby streets. Multiple wind energy facilities, if part of an overall project plan, may be portrayed on the submitted site plan with a "phasing plan" clearly delineated. The proposed wind energy facility must not eliminate or interfere with any on-site parking stalls or driveway access to parking areas on the property. In addition, properties within 200 feet of the property where the wind energy facilities or tower structures are to be located need to be illustrated with names and addresses of all property owners of those properties shown on the site plan application. The site plan must also illustrate all structures on abutting properties and the distance between those structures and the proposed wind energy facilities or tower structure. Nearby streets and roadways, including the entire public right-of-way located closest to the proposed wind energy facility also needs to be clearly illustrated. All aboveground utility structures, including, but not limited to, overhead electric lines need to be illustrated on the site plan. 
e.  A diagram illustrating the potential "fall zone" (i.e., in the event of catastrophic collapse of the tower structure of the wind energy system and/or tower structures with property boundaries, building structures and public right-of-ways clearly illustrated within the potential "fall zone." 
f.  A diagram illustrating the estimation of "ice throw" distances that can be anticipated from the wind energy facility during operation. 
g.  A diagram illustrating anticipated prevailing wind directions and how those prevailing winds will serve the proposed wind energy system. Trees, building structures or other impediments to prevailing wind flows on or off the property must be delineated. No off site trees, hills, structures, or other facilities not located on the property under review may be trimmed, graded, altered or removed to benefit the wind circulation serving the proposed wind energy facility without approval from the city council and the owner of the off-site property. 
h.  A description of the large or small wind energy facility's height and design, including cross sections, elevation, and diagram of how the wind energy facility will be anchored to the ground or structures, prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state. A description of the facility's function must also be described (i.e., whether a horizontal or vertical turbine) and general direction of rotation with a description of anticipated noise generation by a properly maintained mechanism. An illustration of ice shedding or "ice throw" areas and any affected building structures or nearby properties also need to be clearly illustrated by a professional engineer. 
i.  A statement from the applicant that all wind energy facilities will be installed in compliance with manufacturer's specifications, and a copy of those manufacturer's specifications must be provided with particular attention to wind load capacity and other details regarding structural integrity. Other details relating to matters such as "ice throw" distances, shadow "flicker" or noise generation must also be provided. 
j.  A signed statement from the landowner of the site stating that he will abide by all applicable terms and conditions of this section particularly with respect to responsibility for proper maintenance of the wind energy facility and responsibility for removal of the wind energy facility including tower structure in the event of severe damage, disuse or abandonment. 
k.  A statement indicating what hazardous materials will be used or stored on the site in conjunction with the wind energy facility or tower structure or its operation. 
l.  A statement indicating how the wind energy facility will be illuminated, if applicable, with demonstration that any such required illumination will not affect nearby properties. Illumination of or on wind energy systems or tower structures shall be prohibited unless required by the FCC or FAA. 
m.  A statement by an appropriate authority with regard to any potential electromagnetic interference with radio, television or cellular communication air waves in the vicinity of the proposed wind energy facility. 
n.  A description of noise levels anticipated to be generated by the wind energy facility. 
o.  A statement from the city electric utility that the proposed wind energy facility is compatible with the local energy grid system and that the proposal is acceptable to the local electric power utility. A description of electrical generation and use of "excess" power must be provided. Any proposed wind energy facility to be installed with the intent to distribute electricity directly to Cedar Falls Utilities (CFU) or any other electrical distributor or to a facility with electric service from CFU must meet CFU safety and interconnection requirements and receive pre-approval from CFU or any other local electrical utility. 
p.  For large and small wind energy facilities, including roof-mounted facilities, photo exhibits illustrating the proposed wind energy facilities and/or tower structures shall be provided to illustrate the finished product. 
q.  Each application shall contain an indemnification provision which meets the requirements of subsection (f)(2)i of this section. 
(6)  Submittal of a plan for site grading, erosion control, stormwater drainage, and stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval prior to granting building permits. 
(7)  All other permits, including building permits and permits for work done in public rights-of-way, shall be applied for by the applicant to the appropriate agency prior to construction. 
(8)  Wind energy facilities shall not include offices, vehicle storage, or other outdoor storage unless permitted by the special exception permit. Accessory storage building may be permitted for large wind energy facilities at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. The size and location of any proposed accessory building shall be shown on the site plan. No other structure or buildings accessory to the wind energy facility are permitted unless used for the express purpose of the generation of electricity or performing other work related to the wind energy facility. 
(9)  No grading, filling, or construction shall begin until a building permit is issued. A separate building permit shall be required for each individual wind energy facility including tower structures and appurtenant facilities prior to construction of each wind turbine tower and appurtenant facilities to be constructed. 
(10)  A wind energy facility authorized by special exception permit shall be started within 12 months of special permit issuance and completed within 36 months of special permit issuance, or in accordance with a timeline approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(11)  For large wind energy facilities, the applicant shall submit a copy of all "as built plans" prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state including structural engineering and electrical plans for all facilities following construction to the city to use for removal of large wind energy facilities, if the large wind energy facility owner fails to meet the requirements of this section or the special permit. 
(12)  The planning and zoning commission and city council may require additional conditions as deemed necessary upon the proposed wind energy facility or tower structure to ensure public health, safety, and welfare. 
(13)  Wind energy facilities that are constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(14)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to give any applicant the right to cut down surrounding trees and vegetation on any property not on the applicant's site for the purpose of reducing wind flow turbulence or increasing wind flow to the wind energy facility. Nothing in this section shall be deemed a guarantee against any future construction or city approvals of future construction that may in any way impact the wind flow to any wind energy facility. 
(f)  General requirements. 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  No television, radio or other communication antennas may be affixed or otherwise made part of a wind energy facility, except pursuant to the regulations for wireless communication towers. Applications may be jointly submitted for wind energy facilities and wireless communication facilities. 
b.  Wind energy facilities shall utilize measures to reduce the visual impact of the facility to the extent practicable. Facilities with multiple tower structures shall be constructed with an appearance that is similar throughout the site, to provide reasonable uniformity in overall size, geometry, and rotational speeds. No signage, lettering, company insignia, advertising, or graphics shall be established on any part of the wind energy facility including tower structure, blades or any other component of the system. 
c.  For small wind energy facilities constructed as an accessory use to a residential use, only one small wind energy tower per site shall be allowed. In addition to a single tower structure, more than one roof-mounted wind mechanism may be installed provided the height of the roof-mounted facility is no more than 15 feet above the height of the residential structure. 
d.  For larger multi-unit or "mixed use" residential/commercial complexes, more than one small wind energy facility may be permitted to serve the needs of the on-site complex subject to review and approval by the commission and city council. 
e.  Small wind energy facilities shall be used primarily to reduce the on-site consumption of electricity by the principal use located thereon. 
f.  At least one warning or notice sign shall be posted on the wind energy facility or tower structure at a height of no more than five feet above natural grade warning of electrical shock or high voltage, harm from revolving machinery, and the hazard of falling ice. The name, address and contact information for the primary operator of the wind energy facility must be posted in a location clearly visible from adjacent property, said sign to be no more than six square feet in area and located no higher than five feet above natural grade. This contact information may be waived in the case of small residential wind energy systems clearly serving an existing residential structure. 
g.  Wind energy facilities including tower structures exceeding 60 feet in height and located on commercial or industrial properties shall be constructed to provide one of the following means of access control: 
1.  Tower-climbing apparatus mounted on the tower located no closer than 12 feet from the ground. 
2.  A locked anti-climb device installed on the tower structure. 
3.  A locked, protective fence at least six feet in height that encloses the tower structure. 
h.  Monopole tower construction is recommended for wind energy facility tower structures exceeding 60 feet in height. Lattice-designed towers are to be discouraged, but may be permitted upon site plan review and approval of safety considerations by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Guy wires or other external stabilizing components shall be discouraged in all cases. However, for small wind energy facilities serving residential properties, limited guy wire support systems may be allowed subject to review and approval by the commission and city council. 
(2)  Design and installation. 
a.  Wind energy facilities shall be painted a nonreflective, non-obtrusive color, such as grey, white, or off-white. 
b.  At large wind energy facility sites, the design of any allowed accessory buildings and related building structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the large wind energy facility to the natural setting and existing environment. 
c.  Minimum lighting necessary for safety and security purposes shall be permitted. Techniques shall be implemented to prevent casting glare from the site, except as otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
d.  No form of advertising including signs, banners, balloons or pennants shall be allowed on the wind energy facility including tower structure, wind turbine, blades, or other buildings or facilities associated with the facility, except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or contact information of the operator of the wind energy facility as noted in subsection (f)(1)f of this section. 
e.  All wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a redundant braking system for the rotating mechanism. This includes both aerodynamic over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a failsafe mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-speed protection. 
f.  All wind energy facilities shall comply with all applicable city building codes and standards. 
g.  Electrical controls, control wiring, and power lines shall utilize wireless or underground service connections except where wiring is brought together for connection to the transmission or distribution network, adjacent to that network. This provision may be waived by the commission and city council for any wind energy facility approved by special permit if deemed appropriate. 
h.  All electrical components of the wind energy facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local, state, and national electrical codes, and relevant and applicable international standards. 
i.  The owner of a wind energy facility shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officials from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities whatsoever including attorney fees arising out of the acts or omissions of the operator or the operator's contractors concerning the construction or operation of the wind energy facility without limitation, whether said liability is premised on contract or tort. Owner's submittal for a building permit for a wind energy facility shall constitute agreement to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officials. 
j.  The owner of a large wind energy facility shall reimburse the city and/or the county for any and all repairs and reconstruction to the public roads, culverts, and natural drainageways resulting directly from the construction of the large wind energy facility. 
k.  Where wind energy facility construction cuts through a private or public drain tile field, the drain tile must be repaired and reconnected to properly drain the site to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
l.  Any recorded access easement across private lands to a wind energy facility shall in addition to naming the wind energy facility owner as having access to the easement shall also name the city as having access to the easement for purposes of inspection or decommissioning. If no such access easement exists, approval of the special exception permit for a wind energy facility shall constitute granting to the city a right to access the wind energy facility for purposes of inspection or decommissioning. 
m.  Any wind energy facility that does not produce energy for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed in accordance with the removal provisions of this section. Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this section or with any and all conditions that may be attached to the granting of any building permit for a wind energy facility shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the permit by the city. 
n.  A large wind energy facility owner and operator shall maintain a telephone number and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project, and shall provide updated information on such to the city planning division. 
(g)  Setbacks. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all wind energy facilities: 
(1)  Each wind turbine associated with a large wind energy facility shall be set back from the nearest nonparticipating landowner's property line and from any other wind turbine a distance of no less than 1.5 times its total height. 
(2)  Each wind turbine associated with a small wind energy facility shall be set back from the nearest property line a distance of no less than 1.0 times its total height, except that a wind turbine associated with a small wind energy facility may be located closer than 1.0 times its total height if approved provided it is demonstrated that such a setback will not have an adverse impact on the adjoining properties. The planning and zoning commission and city council may grant a waiver to the setback requirements where strict enforcement would not serve the public interest and where it is demonstrated that such a setback will not have an adverse impact on the adjoining properties, however the setback shall generally not be less than 0.5 times the total height of the tower structure or any support element of the structure including poles and guy wires. 
(3)  Wind energy facilities must satisfy all utility setbacks and/or easement separations. The owner of the wind energy facility is responsible for contacting the appropriate utility entities to determine the location of all aboveground and underground utility lines on the site including, but not limited to, electricity, natural gas, cable television, communication, fiber optic/communications, etc. 
(h)  Noise and vibration. 
(1)  Except during short-term events including severe windstorms, audible noise due to wind energy facility operations shall not exceed maximum allowable noise decibel levels, when measured at the site property lines. If audible noise exceeds maximum allowable decibel levels as specified in the applicable provisions of this Code relating to nuisance and/or noise the offending wind turbine must be inoperable until repairs are completed. 
(2)  Wind energy facilities shall not create an audible steady, pure tone such as a whine, screech, hum, or vibration. 
(i)  Minimum ground clearance. 
(1)  For small wind energy facilities, the minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor or blade system shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  For large wind energy facilities, the minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor or blade system shall be 30 feet. 
(j)  Signal interference. The wind energy facility owner shall mitigate any interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, computers, communication devices, or television signals, including any public agency radio systems, caused by any wind energy facility. However, in no case shall a wind energy facility be located within the microwave path of an emergency communication tower. 
(k)  Shadow flicker. The wind energy facility owner shall attempt to avoid shadow flicker from the facility affecting any off site residences. The wind energy facility owner and/or operator shall make reasonable efforts to minimize or mitigate shadow flicker to any off site residence to the reasonable determination of the city planner. 
(l)  Ice shedding. The wind energy facility owner and/or operator shall ensure that ice from the wind turbine blades does not impact any off site property. 
(m)  Waste management. All hazardous waste generated by the operation and maintenance of the facility, including, but not limited to lubricating materials, shall be handled in a manner consistent with all local, state, and federal rules and regulations. 
(n)  Removal. 
(1)  Wind energy facility or tower removal. The tower owner and/or operator shall notify the city inspection services division when a tower is removed, no longer in use, or is knocked down, or blown down, or damaged to such an extent that major structural repairs are required. If a tower is removed, knocked down, blown down, or damaged to such an extent that major structural repairs are required, said tower shall not be reconstructed or replaced without prior review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. If said damaged wind energy facility or tower is abandoned or inoperable with no intention by the owner to replace said facility, the facility or tower shall be removed in a timely fashion at the expense of the facility or tower owner or the property owner where the facility is located, as directed by the city planner. Any wind energy facility or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such wind energy facility or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying both the wind facility owner and the owner of the property on which the wind facility or tower is located, of such abandonment. Failure of the owner or property owner to remove an abandoned wind energy facility or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for the city to require removal of the facility or tower at the expense of the facility owner or property owner. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the wind energy facility. If the city is required to remove a facility at the expense of the owner or property owner, the costs of removal, if not paid by the wind energy facility owner, or by the owner of the property on which the tower is located, within 30 days of the city's written demand for payment, shall be reported to the city clerk, who shall levy the cost thereof as an assessment, which shall be a lien on the real estate on which the wind energy facility or tower is located. The city clerk shall certify such assessments to the county auditor to be paid by the owner of the property on which the facility is located, in installments in the same manner as property taxes, as provided by law. 
(2)  The wind energy facility site shall be stabilized, graded, and cleared of any debris by the owner of the facility or its assigns. If the site is not to be used for agricultural practices following removal, the site shall be seeded to prevent soil erosion. 
(3)  Any foundation of the wind energy facility shall be removed to a minimum depth of four feet below grade, or to the level of the bedrock if less than four feet below grade, by the owner of the facility or its assigns. Following removal, the location of any remaining wind energy facility foundation shall be identified on a map as such and recorded with the deed to the property with the office of the county recorder. 
(4)  Any access roads to the wind energy facility shall be removed, cleared, and graded by the owner of the facility, unless the property owner wants to keep the access road. The city will not be assumed to take ownership of any access road unless through official action of the city council. 
(5)  Any expenses related to the decommissioning and removal of a wind energy facility shall be the responsibility of the wind energy facility owner, including any expenses related to releasing any easements. 
(6)  Removal of the wind energy facility shall conform to the contract between the property owner and the owner/operator of a wind energy facility, in addition to the requirements set forth in this section. 
(o)  Violation and permit revocation. 
(1)  All wind energy facilities shall be maintained in operational condition at all times, subject to reasonable maintenance and repair outages. Operational condition includes meeting all noise requirements and other permit conditions. Should a wind energy facility become inoperable, or should any part of the wind energy facility be damaged, or should a wind energy facility violate a permit condition, the owner/operator shall remedy the situation within three months after written notice from the city. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other abatement provision, if the wind energy facility is not repaired or made operational or brought into compliance after said notice, the city council may, after a public meeting at which the operator or owner shall be given opportunity to be heard and present evidence, including a plan to come into compliance: 
a.  Order either remedial action within a specified timeframe; or 
b.  Order revocation of the permit and require removal of the wind energy facility within three months. 
(3)  Any wind energy facility that does not meet the requirements of this section, including, but not limited to, those dealing with noise, height, setback, or visual appearance, or does not meet any conditions attached to approval of the wind energy facility shall be deemed an unlawful structure and shall provide grounds for the revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-127), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-139. - Prohibition on conversion of single-unit residences located in R-1 and R-2 Residence Districts to two-unit dwelling units. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this article, no existing single-unit residential structure located in an R-1 residence zoning district or in an R-2 residence zoning district of the city shall be converted or otherwise structurally altered or expanded for the purpose of accommodating the creation or establishment of a second separate dwelling unit within, around or adjacent to the original single-unit residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-128), 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 26-140-26-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 26-162. - A-1 Agricultural District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the A-1 Agricultural District is to act as a "holding zone" in areas of the city that are undeveloped and not served by essential municipal services (i.e., sanitary sewer, water, roadways) but where future growth and development is anticipated according to the city plan. No use shall be installed or established within the agricultural zone that in the judgement of the planning and zoning commission or the city council will discourage or inhibit normal commercial or residential urban growth and development patterns as indicated by the city plan. 
(b)  Principal permitted uses. The following listed uses are permitted: 
(1)  Agricultural uses and the usual agricultural accessory structures as limited herein. Minimum parcel size: 20 acres. 
a.  Typical agricultural uses shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, land-based production activities including grains, small grains, hay, legumes, vegetables, fruits, orchards, and other specialty crops including seeds, tubers, roots and bulbs provided that said crops are not considered nuisance or hazardous crops by the state department of agriculture. On-farm facilities shall be permitted for the storage, drying, processing, and finishing for commercial purposes products produced on-farm. 
b.  Animal production, including breeding, feeding and finishing for private or commercial use shall be allowed within the limitations specified herein. 
1.  Agricultural accessory structures shall be those facilities or buildings normally associated with and generally essential to the operation of an agricultural use. Such structures or facilities shall include, but not be limited to: 
(i)  Machine sheds; 
(ii)  Storage sheds, granaries; 
(iii)  Grain bins for the storage of on-farm produced crop products, silos, animal housing facilities, animal feeding floors, repair shop, paddocks, etc. 
2.  (i)  Enclosed, unenclosed, or partially enclosed animal feedlots or other animal housing facilities shall be considered to be accessory structures to a principal permitted agricultural use. Prior to the establishment of such accessory structures involving any number or species of animals, detailed building, management, and business plans shall be submitted for review by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. No animal feedlot or animal housing facility shall be established that, in the judgement of the city council does not meet recognized principles of sound land use planning or that will have a negative impact upon the quality of life of the residents of the city. 
(ii)  No animal feedlot or animal housing facility shall be established within one quarter mile from the nearest off site residence as measured from property line to property line. 
3.  Nonconforming animal facilities. 
(i)  No existing animal feedlot or animal housing facility shall be expanded, reconstructed, or structurally altered without the prior review and approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said change or use shall not be permitted if, in the judgment of the city council, the proposal does not meet recognized principles of sound land use planning or that will have a negative impact upon the quality of life of the residents of the city. 
(ii)  If an existing animal feedlot or animal housing facility is discontinued for a period of one year the premises shall not be reestablished for such use without the prior review and approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said change or use shall not be permitted if, in the judgement of the city council, the proposal does not meet recognized principles of sound land use planning or that will have a negative impact upon the quality of life of the residents of the city. 
(2)  Nurseries, greenhouses for commercial purposes, provided that the tract contains at least five acres. 
(3)  Riding stables for commercial or recreational uses, provided that: 
a.  The parcel measures at least ten acres in area. 
b.  Animal density is limited to no less than 5,000 square feet per adult animal as measured within the principal animal holding areas. 
c.  The use is established at least one quarter mile from the nearest residence as measured from property line to property line. 
(4)  Agricultural infrastructure facilities including grain elevators, commercial feed outlets, farm supply stores, truck and animal weigh stations, agricultural chemical or fuel bulk and storage facilities, provided that: The facility is located on a parcel measuring at least five acres in area. 
(5)  Mining and extraction of minerals or raw materials subject to review and approval of a business plan, environmental plan, and land rehabilitation recovery plan by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, provided that: 
a.  The use is established at least one mile from the nearest residence as measured from property line to property line. 
b.  The owner and/or his successors agree to leave or rehabilitate the land to a condition suitable for typical urban development (including recreational) patterns and uses in conformance with the long range city land use plan. 
(6)  Airports and landing fields in conformance with FAA guidelines and requirements. 
(7)  Forest and forestry. A business plan including planting/harvesting plan is submitted for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(8)  Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, both public and private, and other recreational uses such as nature trails, bicycle trails or snowmobile trails, but excluding gun or shooting ranges, auto race tracks or other motorized vehicle racing areas or challenge courses. 
(9)  Public utility structures and equipment for the operation thereof. 
(10)  Radio and television transmitting stations and related accessory structures, provided that: 
a.  Setbacks as measured from the property line to the base of the tower or to the base of support structures extending from the tower, whichever is nearest to the property line, shall be at least 100 feet. 
b.  The facility shall be located at least one quarter mile from any residence as measured from property line to property line. 
(11)  Residential dwellings, limited to no more than one-unit or one two-unit dwelling, may be permitted only in the following circumstances: 
a.  Incidental to the following principal permitted uses: Agriculture (20 acres minimum lot area). 
b.  If located on a lot of record as of August 1, 1979 with a minimum lot area of three acres. 
(12)  Mandatory review. Prior to the establishment of any principal permitted use or any accessory use related to animal housing facilities said request with detailed site plan and description of operation shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. Said use shall not be permitted if, in the judgement of the city council, the proposal does not meet recognized principles of sound land use planning or that will have a negative impact upon the quality of life of the residents of the city. 
(13)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the A-1 agricultural district shall be as follows: 
Use Lot Area Lot Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front Yard 
Depth Side Yard Widths 
(Least Width on Any One Side) Rear Yard 
Depth Dwellings 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet Other permitted uses 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet  
The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-141), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-163. - R-1SU Single-Unit Residence District. 
    In the R-1SU Single-Unit Residence District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Single-unit dwellings. 
b.  Churches and accessory buildings, upon approval of the city council after recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission. 
c.  Private noncommercial recreational areas and facilities, swimming pools, and institutional or community recreation centers, including country clubs and golf courses. 
d.  Group homes. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Private garages, tool storage, fences and other incidental uses. Stables and the keeping of animals are not a permissible accessory use. 
b.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
c.  Home occupations. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is lower, and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or 18 feet in height, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, frontage and yard requirements for the R-1SU single-unit residence district shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width 2 
(Least on Any One Side) Rear 
Yard 
Depth Single-unit 9,000 square feet 75 feet 9,000 square feet 30 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet Other permitted uses 10,000 square feet 80 feet - 35 feet 10% of lot width 35 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official street plan. 
2 Where structures do not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, the maximum side yard required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-142), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-164. - R-1 Residence District. 
    In the R-1 Residence District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  One- and two-unit dwellings. 
b.  Churches and accessory buildings, upon approval of the city council after recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission. 
c.  Public and parochial schools, elementary and high, and other educational institutions having an established current curriculum the same as ordinarily given in city public schools. 
d.  Private noncommercial recreational areas and facilities, swimming pools, and institutional or community recreation centers, including country clubs and golf courses. 
e.  Farming and truck gardening, but not on a scale that would be obnoxious to adjacent areas because of noise or odors. 
f.  Group homes. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Private garages, tool storage, fences and other incidental uses. 
b.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
c.  Home occupations. 
d.  Stables, noncommercial, where there exists an area devoted to such purposes of 20,000 square feet, with an additional 10,000 square feet per animal exceeding two in number housed or tethered, and provided further than no structure or building for the stabling of animals or tethering area shall be closer than 50 feet to the abutting residential properties. The area devoted to such uses shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, frontage and yard requirements for the R-1 residential district shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width 2 
(Least on Any One Side) Rear 
Yard 
Depth One-unit dwellings 9,000 square feet 75 feet 9,000 square feet 30 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet Two-unit dwellings 10,000 square feet 80 feet 5,000 square feet 30 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet One-unit bi-attached dwellings 5,000 square feet 40 feet 5,000 square feet 30 feet 20% of lot width 30 feet Other permitted uses 10,000 square feet 80 feet - 35 feet 10% of lot width 35 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 Where structures do not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, the maximum side yard required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-143), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-165. - R-2 Residence District. 
    In the R-2 Residence District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are any use permitted in the R-1 Residence District, but not including animal and poultry husbandry on any lands used or platted for residential purposes. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Any accessory use permitted in the R-1 district with the exception of noncommercial stables. 
b.  Family day care homes. The off-street parking area required of the principal residence shall suffice. 
(3)  Height regulations. Height regulations are the same as specified in the R-1 Residence District. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the R-2 Residence District shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width 2 
(Least on Any One Side) Rear 
Yard 
Depth One-unit 7,200 square feet 60 feet 7,200 square feet 25 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet Two-unit 8,000 square feet 70 feet 4,000 square feet 25 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet One-unit bi-attached dwellings 4,000 square feet 35 feet 4,000 square feet 25 feet 20% of lot width 30 feet Other permitted uses 10,000 square feet 80 feet - 35 feet 10% of lot width 35 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 Where structures do not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, the maximum side yard required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-144), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-166. - R-3 Multiple Residence District. 
    In the R-3 residence district, the following provisions, regulations, and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-2 district. 
b.  Multiple dwellings, including condominiums and row dwellings. 
c.  Boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
d.  Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature, including libraries. 
e.  Hospitals, day nurseries and nursing and convalescent homes, excepting animal hospitals and clinics. 
f.  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those the principal activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Accessory uses permitted in the R-2 district. 
b.  Other accessory uses and structures, not otherwise prohibited, customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal use. 
c.  Storage garages for personal belongings and tools relevant to the maintenance of buildings, where the lot is occupied by multiple dwelling, hospital or institutional building. 
(3)  Height regulations. No principal building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is lower, except that additional height for additional stories may be added at the rate of two feet in height for each one foot that the building or portion thereof is set back from the required yard lines. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the R-3 multiple residence district shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width 2 Rear 
Yard 
Depth One-unit 7,200 square feet 60 feet 7,200 square feet 25 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet Two-unit 8,000 square feet 70 feet 4,000 square feet 25 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet One-unit bi-attached dwellings 4,000 square feet 35 feet 4,000 square feet 25 feet 20% of lot width 30 feet Multi-unit 10,000 square feet 80 feet 2,500 square feet 30 feet 10% of lot width 30 feet Other permitted uses 10,000 square feet 80 feet - 35 feet 10% of lot width 35 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 Where structures do not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, the maximum side yard required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-145), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-167. - R-4 Multiple Residence District. 
    In the R-4 residence district, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-3 district. 
b.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
c.  Hotels, motels and auto courts, in which retail shops may be operated for convenience of the occupants of the building; provided, however, that there shall be no entrance to such place of business except from the inside of the building, nor shall any display of stock or goods for sale be so arranged that it can be viewed from the outside of the building. 
d.  Offices such as the following: 
1.  Accountants. 
2.  Architects. 
3.  Art schools. 
4.  Artists. 
5.  Barbershops. 
6.  Beauty shops. 
7.  Church offices. 
8.  Civil engineers. 
9.  Collection agencies. 
10.  Credit bureaus. 
11.  Dental offices. 
12.  Entertainment bureaus. 
13.  Insurance offices. 
14.  Lawyers. 
15.  Medical offices with dispensary. 
16.  Nurses registries. 
17.  Public stenographers. 
18.  Psychologists. 
19.  Real estate offices. 
20.  Other similar uses, subject to review by the city planning and zoning commission and approval of the city council. 
e.  Tourist home. 
f.  Mobile home park. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are accessory uses permitted in the R-3 district. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is lower, except that additional height for additional stories may be added at the rate of two feet in height for each one foot that the building or portion thereof is set back from the required yard lines. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the R-4 multiple residence district shall be as follows: 
Side Yard Width 4 Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Least on 
Any One 
Side Minimum Sum 
of Both Sides Rear 
Yard 
Depth One-unit 6,000 
square 
feet 60 feet 6,000 
square 
feet 20 feet 10% of lot width - 30 feet Two-unit 7,200 
square 
feet 60 feet 3,600 
square 
feet 20 feet 10% of lot width - 30 feet One-unit bi-attached dwellings 4,000 
square 
feet 30 feet 4,000 square feet 20 feet 20% of lot width 30 feet Multi-unit and other permitted uses: 1 and 11/2 stories 8,000 
square 
feet 65 feet 2,000 
square 
feet 
for the 
first 4 
units, plus 20 feet 8 feet 16 feet 35 feet 2 and 21/2 stories 8,000 square feet 65 feet 850 
square 
feet 
per unit 
on 1st, 
2nd and 
3rd floors, 
and 20 feet 10 feet 22 feet 35 feet 3 stories 8,000 square feet 70 feet 450 
square 
feet 
per unit 
above 3rd 
floor 20 feet 10 feet 25 feet 35 feet 4 or more stories 10,000 square feet 80 feet See subsection (4) of this section for yard requirements Motels and auto courts 2 1 acre 100 feet 1,500 square feet per unit 25 feet 20 feet 40 feet 40 feet Mobile home parks 2, 3 20 acres 100 feet 3,500 square feet per unit 25 feet 20 feet 40 feet 40 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 All access drives to motels, auto courts and mobile home parks shall be of all-weather, dust-free surfacing. Yard requirements for motels, auto courts and mobile home parks apply to total area and not individual units. Side yard requirements for motels, auto courts and mobile home parks may be reduced to ten feet where such motel, court or park abuts a less restrictive zoning district. 
3 Where any boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts property which is improved with a permanent residential building located within 25 feet of such boundary, or directly abuts unimproved property which may, under existing laws and regulations, be used for permanent residential construction, a fence, wall or hedge shall be provided along such boundary. 
4 For one- and two-unit dwellings where the structures do not exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, the maximum side yard required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-146), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-168. - R-5 Residence District. 
    In the R-5 Residence District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Purpose. The R-5 Residence District is to provide for long-term low-density residential uses of a semisuburban character which provide for ultimate design densities compatible with public health and safety regulations and the land use plan. 
(2)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are any use permitted in the R-1 Residence District, except two-unit dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are any accessory use permitted in the R-1 Residence District. 
(4)  Height regulations. Height regulations are the same as specified for the R-1 Residence District. 
(5)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirement for the R-5 Residence District shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Depth Rear 
Yard 
Depth One-unit 3 acres 2 100 feet 43,560 square feet 50 feet 3 20 feet 50 feet 3 Other permitted uses 3 acres 2 100 feet 50 feet 3 20 feet 50 feet 3  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line as shown in the official major street plan. 
2 Minimum lot area may be reduced to no less than one acre by the city council following recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. Acceptance of the lot area reduction shall be in accordance with long range land use plans, platting standards, soil conditions, sewer availability (long-term and short range), water availability, adopted large lot development policies of the city, and existing and future street condition and access. 
3 No access shall be granted on any major thoroughfare shown on the official street plan unless no other prudent alternative is available. In all cases, the building setback lines shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line of the thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-147), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-169. - S-1 Shopping Center District. 
    In the S-1 Shopping Center District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Purpose. The S-1 district is intended to provide for the development of shopping centers. For the purpose of this section, the term "shopping center" means a planned retail and service area under single ownership, management or control characterized by a concentrated grouping of stores and compatible uses, with various facilities designed to be used in common, such as ingress and egress roads, extensive parking accommodations, etc. 
(2)  Procedures. The owner of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than five acres shall submit to the city planning and zoning commission and city council, in addition to the requirements of subsection 26-4(b), a plan for the commercial use and development of such tract for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. The city planning and zoning commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the comprehensive plan and with recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscaping architecture. The commission may approve the plan as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan as the commission deems necessary to the end that it preserve the intent and purpose of this division to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The plan shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the feasibility of the project and its effects on surrounding property and shall include each of the following: 
a.  A site plan defining the areas to be developed for buildings, the areas to be developed for parking, the location of sidewalks and driveways and the points of ingress and egress, including access streets where required, the location and height of walls, the location and type of landscaping, and the location, size and number of signs. 
b.  An analysis of market conditions in the area to be served, including the types and amount of service needed and general economic justification. 
c.  A traffic analysis of the vicinity indicating the effect of the proposed shopping center on the adjacent streets. 
d.  A statement of financial responsibility or reasonable financial arrangements or potential to ensure construction of the shopping center, including landscaping, in accordance with the plan and the requirements of this section. 
A copy of such plan shall be filed with the building official and maintained as a permanent part of the records of the city. 
(3)  Standards. Uses permitted in the S-1 district shall include any use permitted in the C-3 district and as limited by this district; provided, however, that the council may consider any additional restrictions proposed by the owner. The lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements of the C-2 district shall be considered minimum for the S-1 district; however, it is expected that these minimums will be exceeded in all but exceptional situations. Buildings may be erected to heights greater than those allowed in the C-2 district in accordance with the intent and purpose of this section. 
(4)  Completion. The construction of the shopping center and improvements shall be completed within a reasonable period of time; provided, however, that, in the determination of such period, the scope and magnitude of the project and any schedule or timetable submitted by the developer shall be considered. Failure to complete the construction and improvement within such period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause for the rezoning of the property as provided in subsection 26-4(b). 
(5)  Changes and modifications. 
a.  Major. All changes, modifications or amendments to the plans for the commercial use and development of property in the S-1 zone, deemed to be substantial by the planning and zoning staff after city approval of the plans, shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major modifications include, but are not limited to, the following: new building construction, vehicular access rerouting, significant parking changes and general design and orientation changes. 
b.  Minor. Minor changes, modifications or amendments to the plans for the commercial use and development of property in the S-1 zone shall be administratively reviewed by the planning and zoning staff. If the change is deemed insignificant in nature, the staff may recommend to the council that the change be approved without the benefit of a mandatory review before the planning and zoning commission. The council may approve such change, or may determine that the magnitude of the change is significant in nature and requires that the appropriate plat or plan be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Changes pertaining to the location, construction or replacement of signs shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning staff. If the staff deems that sign changes are significant in nature, it may submit the proposal to the council for review and approval. 
(6)  Existing shopping centers. Shopping centers in existence at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this division is derived which are zoned S-1 by this division shall be considered as having met all the requirements of this section. All new construction, additions, enlargements, etc., to structures within these shopping centers shall be in accord with the use and bulk regulations of the C-2 district, except in cases where more restrictive controls have been imposed by agreement between the city and the property owners involved. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-148), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-170. - C-1 Commercial District. 
    In the C-1 Commercial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply. For the purpose of this section, a C-1 Commercial District is defined as a commercial district adjacent to residence districts in which such uses are permitted as are normally required for the daily local retail business needs of the residents of the locality. 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any nonresidential use permitted in the R-4 district. 
b.  Residential uses subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council of a development site plan and other required elements as specified herein. A development site plan must be submitted which clearly illustrates the proposed residential facility, on-site parking, building setbacks and prevailing topography along with an illustration of surrounding land uses, roadways, streets and utility services within 200 feet of the development site. The proposed residential use must be in conformance with standards of the comprehensive plan and recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. The commission and city council shall consider the appropriateness of the residential use with respect to considerations for protection and preservation of existing commercial zoning districts for commercial uses in the city. In addition, provisions for adequate access for vehicles and pedestrians, including sidewalk provision, shall be clearly illustrated and provided. Impacts upon local municipal services such as sanitary sewer, storm sewer and other utility needs shall be considered. Certain amenities appropriate for residential uses such as open green space, landscaping, and outdoor recreation areas shall be provided in order to be generally consistent with other similar residential developments. Stormwater runoff and soil erosion controls shall be established in accordance with city regulation. Building design shall be of an appropriate architectural design and utilize similar building materials compared to similar residential facilities in residential zoning districts. Signage shall be limited and of a size, height and scale normally allowed in typical residential neighborhoods. Commercial scale signage shall not be allowed for residential uses in commercial districts. Minimum required building and parking lot setbacks shall generally conform to those requirements specified in the R-4 district. However, these standards may be modified by the city council in consideration of special circumstances of the property in question. Lot area and density standards shall generally conform to standards outlined in the R-4 district. Construction of the proposed residential development must commence (i.e., city building permits secured) within one year following city council approval, or the original approval shall be void and the application shall be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the city council, to review any changes in local conditions. 
c.  Any local retail business or service establishment such as the following: 
1.  Animal hospital or veterinary clinic, provided all phases of the business conducted upon the premises be within a building where noises and odors are not evident to adjacent properties. 
2.  Antique shop. 
3.  Apparel shop. 
4.  Bakery whose products are sold only at retail and only on the premises. 
5.  Financial institution. 
6.  Barbershop or beauty parlor. 
7.  Bicycle shop, sales and repair. 
8.  Bookstore. 
9.  Candy shops, where products are sold only at retail and only on the premises. 
10.  Clothes cleaning and laundry pickup station. 
11.  Collection office of public utility. 
12.  Commercial parking lots for passenger vehicles in accordance with the provisions in section 26-220(d) and (e). 
13.  Dairy store, retail. 
14.  Dance or music studio. 
15.  Drapery shop. 
16.  Drugstore. 
17.  Filling station. 
18.  Florist and nursery shop, retail. 
19.  Fruit and vegetable market. 
20.  Furniture store. 
21.  Gift shop. 
22.  Grocery and delicatessen. 
23.  Hardware store. 
24.  Hobby shop. 
25.  Household appliances, sales and repair. 
26.  Ice storage and distributing station of not more than five-ton capacity. 
27.  Jewelry shop. 
28.  Key shop. 
29.  Landscape gardener. 
30.  Launderette. 
31.  Locker plant for storage and retail sales only. 
32.  Music store. 
33.  Paint and wallpaper store. 
34.  Post office substation. 
35.  Photographic studio. 
36.  Radio and television sales and service. 
37.  Restaurant, cafe and soda fountain. 
38.  Shoe repair shop. 
39.  Sporting goods store. 
40.  Tailor shop. 
41.  Theaters. 
42.  Variety store. 
d.  Business or professional offices and the like, supplying commodities or performing services primarily for residents of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Accessory uses. 
a.  The following accessory uses are permitted in a C-1 district in which the contiguous area of such C-1 district is ten acres or less: 
1.  Accessory uses permitted in the R-4 district. 
2.  Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but not to exceed 40 percent of the floor area used for such use. 
b.  The following accessory uses are permitted in a C-1 district in which the contiguous area of such C-1 district is more than ten acres: 
1.  Accessory uses permitted in the R-4 district. 
2.  Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use, but not to exceed 40 percent of the floor area used for such use. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the C-1 Commercial District shall be as follows: 
Side Yard Width Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Least Width 
on Any 
One Side Minimum Sum 
of Both Side 
Yards Rear 
Yard 
Depth Dwellings Same as specified in the R-4 district Motels and auto courts Same as specified in the R-4 district Mobile home parks 5 acres 100 feet 3,500 
square 
feet 
per unit 25 feet 25 feet 2 50 feet 25 feet 2 Other permitted uses 25 feet None required except when adjoining any R district, in which case not less than 10 feet No less 
than 10 
feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 Where the adjoining land use (existing or permitted) is a nonresidential use, visual barriers of a size and character to ensure reasonable privacy and visual appeal (e.g., solid or louvered fencing, or open fencing with appropriate planting) shall be provided at a distance of not less than 20 feet from the nearest unit by the park developers. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-149), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-171. - C-2 Commercial District. 
    In the C-2 Commercial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-1 district. 
b.  Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics or kennels; provided any exercising runway shall be at least 200 feet from any R district and 100 feet from any C-1 district boundary. 
c.  Automobile, motorcycle, trailer and farm implement establishments for display, hire and sales, including sales lots, including as incidental to these major uses all repair work in connection with their own and customers' vehicles, but not including uses in which the major source of revenue is from body and fender work. In addition, this subsection shall not be construed to include automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking and rebuilding and used parts yards. 
d.  Ballrooms and dancehalls. 
e.  Billiard parlors and pool halls. 
f.  Bookbinding. 
g.  Bowling alleys. 
h.  Carpenter and cabinet shops. 
i.  Clothes dry cleaning and dyeing establishments using flammable cleaning fluids with a flash point higher than 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
j.  Commercial baseball fields, swimming pools, skating, golf driving ranges or similar open air recreational uses and facilities. 
k.  Drive-in eating and drinking establishments, summer gardens and roadhouses, including entertainment and dancing, provided the principal building is distant at least 100 feet from any R district. 
l.  Laundries. 
m.  Lawn mower repair shops. 
n.  Lumberyards, retail, but not including any manufacturing or fabricating for wholesale operations. 
o.  Monument sales yards. 
p.  Offices, business and professional. 
q.  Pet shops, including sales of aquariums. 
r.  Plumbing and heating shops. 
s.  Printing shops, not to include more than two 12-inch by 18-inch job presses. 
t.  Sheet metal shops. 
u.  Sign painting shops. 
v.  Taverns and restaurants. 
w.  Mobile home parks. 
x.  Used auto sales lots or any similar use. 
y.  Photo processing establishments using flammable fluids with a flash point higher than 100 degrees Fahrenheit and utilizing a floor area no longer than 20,000 square feet. 
z.  Residential uses subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council of a development site plan and other required elements as specified herein. A development site plan must be submitted which clearly illustrates the proposed residential facility, on-site parking, building setbacks and prevailing topography along with an illustration of surrounding land uses, roadways, streets and utility services within 200 feet of the development site. The proposed residential use must be in conformance with standards of the comprehensive plan and recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. The commission and city council shall consider the appropriateness of the residential use with respect to considerations for protection and preservation of existing commercial zoning districts for commercial uses in the city. In addition, provisions for adequate access for vehicles and pedestrians, including sidewalk provisions, shall be clearly illustrated and provided. Impacts upon local municipal services such as sanitary sewer, storm sewer and other utility needs shall be considered. Certain amenities appropriate for residential uses such as open green space, landscaping, and outdoor recreation areas shall be provided in order to be generally consistent with other similar residential developments. Stormwater runoff and soil erosion controls shall be established in accordance with city regulation. Building design shall be of an appropriate architectural design and utilize similar building materials compared to similar residential facilities in residential zoning districts. Signage shall be limited and of a size, height and scale normally allowed in typical residential neighborhoods. Commercial scale signage shall not be allowed for residential uses in commercial districts. Minimum required building and parking lot setbacks shall generally conform to those requirements specified in the R-4 district. However, these standards may be modified by the city council in consideration of special circumstances of the property in question. Lot area and density standards shall generally conform to standards outlined in the R-4 district. Construction of the proposed residential development must commence (i.e., city building permits secured) within one year following city council approval, or the original approval shall be void and the application shall be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the city council, to review any changes in local conditions. 
aa.  Mini-storage warehouse, upon site plan review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council of the city. This use must conform to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Accessory uses permitted in the C-1 district. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any permitted principal uses. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed three stories or 48 feet in height, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the C-2 Commercial District shall be as follows: 
Side Yard Width Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Least Width on 
Any One 
Side Minimum Sum 
of Both Side Yards Rear 
Yard 
Depth Dwellings Same as specified in the R-4 district Motels and auto courts Same as specified in the R-4 district Mobile home parks 5 acres 100 feet 3,500 
square 
feet 25 feet 25 feet 3 50 feet 25 feet 4 Other permitted uses See 
footnote 2 None, except when adjacent to an R district, in which case not less than 10 feet 5  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 Where all the frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets is located in the C-2 Commercial District, no front yard shall be required unless a front yard setback is required to meet a proposed right-of-way line. Where the frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets is located in the C-2 Commercial District, and a C-1 Commercial or R Residence District, one-half of the front yard requirements of the C-1 Commercial or R Residential Districts shall apply to the C-2 Commercial District. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, the front yard requirements stated shall apply to each street side of the corner lot, except that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
3 Where a mobile home park has frontage on more than one street, the required front yard depth shall be maintained from all streets. 
4 Where the adjoining land use (existing or permitted) is a nonresidential use, visual barriers of a size and character to ensure reasonable privacy and visual appeal (e.g., walls, solid or louvered fencing, or open fencing with appropriate planting) shall be provided at a distance not less than 20 feet from the nearest unit by the park developers. 
5 No requirement except when adjoining an R district in which case not less than ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-150), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-172. - C-3 Commercial District. 
    In the C-3 Commercial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-2 Commercial District. 
b.  Automobile body or fender repair shop. 
c.  Department store. 
d.  Exterminator sales. 
e.  Lumberyards or building material sales yards. 
f.  Manufacture or treatment of products clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail business conducted on the premises. 
g.  Office buildings. 
h.  Printing or publishing houses. 
i.  Storage warehouse or business. 
j.  Tire shop, including vulcanizing and retreading. 
k.  Wholesale warehouse or business. 
l.  Residential uses subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council of a development site plan and other required elements as specified herein. A development site plan must be submitted which clearly illustrates the proposed residential facility, on-site parking, building setbacks and prevailing topography along with an illustration of surrounding land uses, roadways, streets and utility services within 200 feet of the development site. The proposed residential use must be in conformance with standards of the comprehensive plan and recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. The commission and city council shall consider the appropriateness of the residential use with respect to considerations for protection and preservation of existing commercial zoning districts for commercial uses in the city. In addition, provisions for adequate access for vehicles and pedestrians, including sidewalk provisions, shall be clearly illustrated and provided. Impacts upon local municipal services such as sanitary sewer, storm sewer and other utility needs shall be considered. Certain amenities appropriate for residential uses such as open green space, landscaping, and outdoor recreation areas shall be provided in order to be generally consistent with other similar residential developments. Stormwater runoff and soil erosion controls shall be established in accordance with city regulation. Building design shall be of an appropriate architectural design and utilize building materials compared to similar residential facilities in residential zoning districts. Signage shall be limited and of a size, height and scale normally allowed in typical residential neighborhoods. Commercial scale signage shall not be allowed for residential uses in commercial districts. Minimum required building and parking lot setbacks shall generally conform to those requirements specified in the R-4 district. However, these standards may be modified by the city council in consideration of special circumstances of the property in question. Lot area and density standards shall generally conform to standards outlined in the R-4 district. In the case of a redevelopment of the site, a density bonus may be considered up to one unit per 450 square feet and a maximum height of four stories, provided the total number of bedrooms is no more than what would be permitted when the base density standards of the R-4 district are applied. To determine the base number of bedrooms, multiply the number of units by four. Construction of the proposed residential development must commence (i.e., city building permits secured) within one year following city council approval, or the original approval shall be void and the application shall be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the city council, to review any changes in local conditions. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are accessory uses permitted in the C-2 district. 
(3)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot and a height equal to 165 feet or three times the width of a street on which it faces, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that a tower not to exceed 20 percent of the lot area may be constructed without reference to the limitations set out in this subsection. 
(4)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the C-3 Commercial District shall be as follows: 
Side Yard Width Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depths 1 Least Width on 
Any One Side Minimum Sum of 
Both Side Yards Dwellings Same as specified in the R-4 district Mobile home parks Same as specified in the C-2 district Motels and auto courts Same as specified in the R-4 district Other permitted uses None, except when adjacent to an R district, in which case not less than 15 feet None, except when abutting an R district, in which case not less than 25 feet  
1 None required unless fronting on the proposed right-of-way of a thoroughfare shown on the official major street plan, in which case the building setback line shall be the proposed right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-151), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-173. - M-1 Light Industrial District. 
    In the M-1 Light Industrial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-3 district, except that no occupancy permit shall be issued for any dwelling, school, hospital, clinic or other institution for human care, except where incidental to a permitted principal use. 
b.  Automobile assembly. 
c.  Bag, carpet and rug cleaning; provided necessary equipment is installed and operated for the effective precipitation or recovery of dust. 
d.  Bakeries, other than those whose products are sold at retail only on the premises. 
e.  Welding or other metalworking shops, excluding shops with drop hammers and the like. 
f.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors, storage and sale of livestock, feed or fuel, provided dust is effectively controlled, and storage yards for vehicles of a delivery or draying service. 
g.  Carting, express, hauling or storage yards. 
h.  Circus, carnival or similar transient enterprises, provided such structures or buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any R district. 
i.  Coal, coke or wood yard. 
j.  Concrete mixing and concrete products manufacture. 
k.  Cooperage works. 
l.  Creamery, bottling works, ice cream manufacturing (wholesale), ice manufacturing and cold storage plant. 
m.  Enameling, lacquering or japanning. 
n.  Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry not causing noxious fumes or odors. 
o.  Flammable liquids, underground storage only, not to exceed 25,000 gallons, if located not less than 200 feet from any R district. 
p.  Junk, iron or rags, storage or baling, where the premises upon which such activities are conducted are wholly enclosed within a building, wall or fence not less than six feet in height, completely obscuring the activity, but not including automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking or used parts yards. 
q.  Laboratories, experimental, film or testing. 
r.  Livery stable or riding academy. 
s.  Machine shop. 
t.  Manufacture of musical instruments and novelties. 
u.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, instruments and devices. 
v.  Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns. 
w.  Manufacture and repair of electric signs, advertising structures and sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment. 
x.  Milk distributing station, other than a retail business conducted on the premises. 
y.  Sawmill or planing mill, including manufacture of wood products not involving chemical treatment. 
z.  The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and food products except fish and meat products, cereals, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, stock feed, flour and the rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
aa.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone, cloth, cork, fiber, leather, paper, plastics, metals or stones, tobacco, wax, yarns and wood. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
a.  Any accessory uses permitted in the C-3 Commercial District. 
b.  Any accessory uses customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted principal use. 
(3)  Required conditions. No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may become hazardous, noxious or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matter or water-carried waste. 
(4)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the buildable area of the lot and a height of 75 feet, or 11/2 times the width of the street on which it faces, whichever is the least. 
(5)  Lot area, frontage and yards. Minimum lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements for the M-1 light industrial district shall be as follows: 
Use Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Lot Area 
per Unit Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width Rear 
Yard 
Depth Dwellings Same as specified in the R-4 district Mobile home parks Same as specified in the C-2 district Motels and auto courts Same as specified in the R-4 district Other permitted uses 25 feet None required except when adjacent to an R district, in which case not less than 25 feet 25 feet 2  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
2 For every additional foot the front yard depth is increased over 25 feet, the rear yard may be decreased in direct proportion thereto, but in no case shall the rear yard be less than eight feet; and, in addition, if any portion of this rear yard area is used for an enclosed off-street loading space, the area above such an enclosure may be used for building purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-152), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-174. - M-2 Heavy Industrial District. 
    In the M-2 Heavy Industrial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Principal permitted uses. A building or premises may be used for any purpose whatsoever except those listed in subsections (1)a, b and c of this section: 
a.  No occupancy shall be issued for any use in conflict with any ordinance of the city or law of the state regulating nuisances. 
b.  No occupancy permit shall be issued for any dwelling, school, hospital, clinic or other institution for human care, except where incidental to a permitted principal use. 
c.  No occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such use and suitable enclosure shall have been authorized by the city council after report by the fire operations division and zoning commissioner: 
1.  Abattoirs and slaughterhouses or stockyards. 
2.  Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acids. 
3.  Automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking and used parts yards. 
4.  Cement, lime gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture. 
5.  Distillation of bones. 
6.  Explosive manufacture or storage. 
7.  Fat rendering. 
8.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
9.  Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping. 
10.  Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging. 
11.  Glue, size or gelatin manufacture. 
12.  Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage. 
13.  Rubber goods manufacture. 
14.  Sand or gravel pits. 
15.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
16.  Transmitting stations. 
17.  Waste paper yard. 
18.  Wholesale storage of gasoline. 
(2)  Required conditions. 
a.  The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste and the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisances shall be employed. 
b.  All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures, including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at least 200 feet from any R district and not less than 100 feet from any other district except an M-1 district. 
(3)  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed in height the distance measured to the centerline of the nearest street from any portion of the proposed building or structure. 
(4)  Yards. Minimum yard requirements for the M-2 heavy industrial district shall be as follows: 
Use Front 
Yard 
Depth 1 Side Yard Width Rear 
Yard 
Depth Permitted uses 25 feet None required except when adjacent to an R district, in which case not less than 200 feet 40 feet  
1 The front yard depth of any lot abutting on a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines as shown on the official major street plan. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-153), 5-7-2018) 
_____
Sec. 26-175. - M-P Planned Industrial District. 
    In the M-P Planned Industrial District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit the establishment of industrial parks and to provide for the orderly planned growth of industries in larger portions of land. The district shall normally contain lots not less than ten acres in size, and may not be further subdivided into less than one-half-acre lots. It is also intended that such industrial districts be developed to maximize the potentials of industrial areas and at the same time minimize any adverse effects upon adjacent properties in other zoning districts. 
(2)  Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  In the M-1, P Planned Light Industrial District, any use permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District except the following: 
1.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors, or storage and sale of livestock, feed or fuel. 
2.  Storage yards. 
3.  Circuses, carnivals or similar transient enterprises. 
4.  Coal, coke or wood yard. 
5.  Concrete mixing or concrete products manufacture. 
6.  Cooperage works. 
7.  Storage of flammable liquids exceeding the amount necessary for normal operation and maintenance of a principal permitted use. 
8.  Storage or baling of junk, iron or rags. 
9.  Livery stable or riding academy. 
10.  Sawmill or planing mill. 
b.  In the M-2, P Planned Heavy Industrial District, any use permitted in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District. 
(3)  Procedure for establishment and approval. 
a.  Establishment of zoning district. A zoning district plan shall be provided indicating location and boundaries and providing as many details as are available. This plan shall be submitted for approval to the planning and zoning commission and the city council in accordance with subsection 26-4(b). 
b.  Approval of development plan. Prior to development of all or a portion of the district, a development plan for that specific portion shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
1.  The development plan shall include the following information: The relation of the portion to be developed to the overall zoning district, internal street location and lines, lot sizes, railroad tracks and right-of-way, and proposed sanitary and storm sewer lines and water and power facilities. 
2.  Front building setback lines shall not be less than 25 feet, except that there shall be 35-foot setbacks from arterial streets as identified upon the major thoroughfare map. Such yards shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs or grass in such a manner as to reflect the intent of an industrial park. Off-street parking lots may be permitted in such yard areas, provided that they extend no closer than 25 feet to property lines abutting arterial streets. No outdoor storage shall be permitted within the identified front yard areas. All yards on the perimeter of the development plan abutting an A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-P zoning district shall maintain a 40-foot landscaped strip of trees, shrubs or grass, free of buildings and storage areas. 
3.  If applicable, the development plan must conform with the requirements and regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
4.  In considering the development plan, the planning and zoning commission shall review restrictive covenants and the landowner's agreement. 
c.  Implementation of development plan. A copy of the development plan required under subsection (3)b of this section, upon approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, shall be filed with the zoning administrator and maintained as a permanent part of the records of the city. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure unless the location and use are in substantial conformance with the plan on file. 
d.  Change and modification of plan. 
1.  Major. All changes, modifications and amendments to the development plan required for M-P development, deemed to be substantial by the planning and zoning staff after city approval of such plan, shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major changes include, but are not limited to, the following: street realignment, reconfiguration of lots and revisions to storm or sanitary sewer designs. 
2.  Minor. Minor changes, modifications or amendments to the development plan required for M-P development shall be administratively reviewed by the planning and zoning staff. If the change is deemed insignificant in nature, the staff may recommend to the council that the change be approved without the benefit of a mandatory review before the planning and zoning commission. The council may approve such change, or may determine that the magnitude of the change is significant in nature and require that the development plan be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. 
(4)  Site requirements. 
a.  Outdoor storage shall be permitted only when related to a permitted principal use and only when storage areas are suitably screened. Maximum height of outdoor storage shall be 20 feet and shall not exceed the height of the screen. Outdoor storage shall be located inside the required yard areas and not within 200 feet of a residence district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-P). 
b.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in such a manner as to reflect the intent of an industrial park. 
c.  Loading docks or doors shall be located 115 feet from the perimeter property line of the development plan. Yard areas must be adequate to accommodate movement of trucks and other vehicles within property boundaries and off landscaped areas. Loading docks and overhead doors may be located on any side of the building, but all loading, parking and backing areas shall be inside the property line and shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator and city engineer. 
d.  Building height within an M-1, P area shall not exceed 45 feet, and building height within an M-2, P area shall not exceed 90 feet. 
e.  Parking area requirements shall meet the standards established in section 26-220. 
(5)  Lot area, yards and site coverage. Requirements for lot area, yards and site coverage are as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot area: Two acres. 
b.  Maximum site coverage: 0.75. 
c.  Maximum floor ratio: 1.00. 
d.  Minimum front yard depth: 25 feet. 
e.  Least width on any one side: Ten feet. 
f.  Minimum rear yard depth: Ten feet. 
g.  In reviewing the development plan, the city council may, following the planning and zoning commission's recommendations, approve the inclusion of one-half-acre lots in all or a portion of the development plan. Acceptance of the one-half-acre minimum lot area shall be in accordance with recognized principles of civil design, land use planning and landscape architecture. 
h.  The rear yard shall not be less than 30 feet where the proposed use adjoins a residence district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-P). 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-154), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-176. - F-W Floodway Overlay District. 
(a)  Principal permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the F-W floodway district to the extent they are not prohibited by other provisions of this chapter or of this Code, or the underlying zoning district, and provided they do not require placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of materials or other equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse: 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horse riding trails. 
(4)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(5)  Other open space uses similar in nature to the uses listed in this subsection. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses, which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or other equipment, may be permitted only upon issuance of a special exception permit by the board of adjustment, and then only to the extent they are not prohibited by other provisions of this section or of this Code or the underlying zoning district. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the floodway district performance standards: 
(1)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses. 
(2)  Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement enterprises. 
(3)  Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards. 
(4)  Extraction of sand, gravel and other material. 
(5)  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves. 
(6)  Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines. 
(7)  Other uses similar in nature to the principal permitted and conditional uses described in this section which are consistent with the floodway district performance standards and the general spirit and purpose of this division. 
(c)  Performance standards. All floodway district uses allowed as a principal permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  No use shall be permitted in the floodway district that would result in any increase in the 100-year (one percent) flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. 
(2)  All uses within the floodway district shall: 
a.  Be consistent with the need to limit flood damage. 
b.  Use construction methods and practices that will limit flood damage. 
c.  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. 
(4)  Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the floodway fringe district and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows. 
(5)  From and after January 1, 2010, there shall be no construction of any new building or structure (temporary or permanent) of any type whatsoever, anywhere within the floodway overlay district in the city, including, but not limited to, new detached garages, storage buildings, or other accessory structures. 
(6)  From and after January 1, 2010, there shall be no restoration or reconstruction of any previously existing nonconforming building or structure located in the floodway overlay district that suffers damage to the extent of 50 percent or more of its fair market value at the time of damage of any origin, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, war, riot or act of God, unless permitted upon issuance of a variance and a special exception permit by the board of adjustment, in accordance with the provisions of sections 26-30 and 26-31. 
(7)  Any restoration or reconstruction of any building or structure located in the floodway overlay district that suffers damage to the extent of less than 50 percent of its fair market value at the time of damage of any origin, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, war, riot or act of God, may be restored or reconstructed without issuance of a variance or a special exception permit by the board of adjustment, and then only as follows: 
a.  May commence only upon issuance of a valid building permit issued by the city; 
b.  Must not allow any fill material to be used or placed on the lot in connection with the elevation and reconstruction of such building or structure; 
c.  Must comply in all other respects with all applicable city building codes in effect at the time of reconstruction; 
d.  Such restoration, rebuilding or reconstruction shall not allow any building addition or expansion without obtaining a variance or special exception permit from the board of adjustment; and 
e.  Any addition or expansion to an existing building or structure located in the floodway shall not be allowed, unless permitted upon issuance of a variance and special exception permit by the board of adjustment, in accordance with sections 26-30 and 26-31. 
(8)  Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be utilized for human habitation. 
(9)  Storage of materials or equipment that is buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway district within the time available after flood warning. 
(10)  Stream, watercourse, drainage channel or other water channel embankment stabilization, filling, alterations or relocations, including removal of vegetation, must be designed to maintain the flood-carrying capacity within the altered area, and shall not be allowed or undertaken without all required permits from and approvals by the state department of natural resources, and shall not proceed without approval of the city planner and oversight by the city engineer. 
(11)  Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary. 
(12)  Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. 
(13)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the floodway district shall either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-155), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-177. - F-F Floodway Fringe Overlay District. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, development shall be allowed in the floodway fringe overlay district only on lots of record as defined in this division which were in existence prior to January 1, 2010. 
(b)  The floodway fringe overlay district shall include and incorporate both the 100-year (one percent) and 500-year (0.2 percent) flood boundaries as illustrated on the official floodplain zoning maps. The elevation of the regulatory flood shall be considered to be the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood elevation. Flood insurance policies and insurance rates may continue to be evaluated and established based on federal and state laws and regulations. For all other city flood regulatory purposes, however, the regulatory elevation shall be the 500-year flood elevation. 
(c)  No new lots shall be established within the 500-year flood boundaries after January 1, 2010, unless the newly created lot has a floodplain buildable area outside of the 500-year flood boundary, provided further, that the 500-year floodplain does not encompass more than 25 percent of the newly created lot. All building lots which have been properly established under state law and this Code, filed with the county recorder and approved by the county auditor, all prior to January 1, 2010, shall be considered to be lots of record. A lot of record which is in existence on January 1, 2010, may be diminished in size via subdivision if the newly-created lot being separated from the existing lot has a floodplain buildable area outside of the 500-year flood boundary, provided further, that the diminished original lot of record will not be permitted a replacement or new structure constructed thereon if that structure is located within the 500-year floodplain boundaries. An existing structure located on the original lot of record, if located within the 500-year floodplain, will be allowed to be maintained, upgraded, enlarged or replaced in conformance with this Code. 
(d)  Critical facilities shall be located outside the 500-year floodplain boundaries. Critical facilities shall include, but not be limited to, hospitals, municipal government buildings, schools and residential facilities for elderly or infirmed/handicapped persons. The restriction on critical facilities shall not apply to structures required to be located in low-lying areas such as streets and roadways, bridges, culverts, waste water treatment facilities or sanitary sewer lift stations. 
(e)  Performance standards. All uses must be consistent with the need to limit flood damage to the maximum extent practicable, and shall meet the following applicable performance standards: 
(1)  All new development on lots of record in existence prior to January 1, 2010, must comply with all required standard flood protection measures, and must meet the following requirements: 
a.  May commence only upon issuance of a valid building permit issued by the city; 
b.  Any open areas underneath the lowest floor shall be floodable in order to allow the unimpeded free flow of floodwaters, in conformity with the requirements of subsections (e)(7)a.1 through 4 of this section, inclusive; and 
c.  Must comply in all other respects with all applicable city building codes in effect at the time of reconstruction. 
(2)  Any existing building or structure located in the floodway fringe that suffers damage to the extent of less than 50 percent of its fair market value from any origin including, but not limited to, fire, flood, tornado, storm, explosion, war, or act of God, may be reconstructed at its existing elevation, without issuance of a variance or special exception permit, if the reconstructed structure meets the following requirements: 
a.  May commence only upon issuance of a valid building permit issued by the city; and 
b.  Must comply in all other respects with all applicable city building codes in effect at the time of reconstruction. 
(3)  Any existing building or structure that is substantially damaged, may be reconstructed if the reconstructed structure meets all required standard flood protection measures, including, but not limited to, elevating the structure to a level such that the lowest floor is established one foot above the 500-year flood level, and is constructed either on elevated foundations, piers or similar elevated techniques that are in compliance with then applicable city building code requirements, or using fill which meets the requirements of this section, and which meets the following requirements: 
a.  May commence only upon issuance of a valid building permit issued by the city; 
b.  Any enclosed building areas underneath the lowest floor shall be floodable in order to allow the unimpeded free flow of floodwaters, in conformity with the requirements of subsections (e)(7)a.1 through 4 of this section; and 
c.  Must comply in all other respects with all applicable city building codes in effect at the time of reconstruction. 
(4)  All structures shall be: 
a.  Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage to the maximum practicable extent. 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that limit flood damage to the maximum practicable extent. 
(5)  Any new, substantially improved or substantially damaged residential structure, that is to be established or reconstructed as authorized in this chapter, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 500-year flood level. Construction may be upon limited amounts of compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood level unless the necessary amount of fill to satisfy this requirement exceeds allowable fill heights specified in subsection (e)(8)b of this section, and shall extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating, such as piers or elevated foundations, may be allowed where existing topography, street grades or other compelling factors preclude elevating by the use of compacted fill material. In all such cases, the methods used for structural elevation must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding as verified by a structural engineer. 
(6)  Any new, substantially improved or substantially damaged nonresidential structure, that is to be established or reconstructed as authorized in this chapter, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 500-year flood level. Construction may be upon limited amounts of compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood level or, together with attendance utility and sanitary sewerage systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When utilizing fill material, the amount placed on the site shall be in conformance with subsection (e)(8)b of this section. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year and 500-year flood event, and that the structure established below the 500-year flood elevation level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of certification, indicating the specific elevation, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, to which any structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the zoning/floodplain administrator. 
(7)  Any new, substantially improved or substantially damaged structure that is to be established or reconstructed as authorized in this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, not including basements that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. All said areas below the lowest floor shall be designed for low damage potential and shall not be habitable space. Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 500-year flood level. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above natural grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  Openings must be designed and installed so as to allow the natural entry and exit of floodwaters without the aid of any manual, mechanical or electrical systems either for operating the openings or assisting in the discharge of water from the lower area. 
b.  Any new, substantially improved or substantially damaged structure that is being established or reconstructed as authorized in this chapter, must be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
c.  Any new, substantially improved or substantially damaged structure that is being established or reconstructed must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. All such facilities including heating, cooling and ventilating systems or ducts shall be located or installed at least one foot above the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood level. 
(8)  Filling in the floodway fringe. 
a.  Fill activities may be permitted in the floodway fringe overlay district upon approval by the city planner and city engineer. All fill application permits shall be valid for a period of six months from date of issuance, may be renewed only upon filing of an application for renewal with the city planner, and then may only be renewed upon a showing of demonstrated progress towards completion of the fill activity. All fill application permits must be accompanied by a detailed plan describing the area to be filled, the estimated amount of fill to be used and the purpose of the fill project. Elevation and topographic data must also be submitted by a professional engineer registered in the state that illustrates changes in the topography and estimated impacts upon local flood flows. No fill project shall fill in or obstruct any local drainage channels without an alternative drainage plan design, and shall limit soil erosion and water runoff onto adjacent properties to the maximum practicable extent, and in compliance with the NPDES standards contained in chapter 27. Except as provided in subsections (e)(8)f and g of this section, adjacent property owners shall be identified and notified of the fill project by the applicant with proof of notification provided to the city planner. Any fill project must be designed to limit negative impacts upon adjacent property owners during flood events to the maximum practicable extent. 
b.  The amount of allowable fill must not increase the existing natural grade of the property by more than three vertical feet at any point, and shall be placed on no more than 33.33 percent of the total three vertical feet lot area. 
c.  Where fill is authorized under this chapter, any fill placed on a lot of record must be mitigated by removal of an equal volume of fill material from a comparable elevation within the 500-year floodplain, in order to provide the hydraulic equivalent volume of fill removal as compared to the placement of fill on any single property located in the floodplain. 
d.  The only portion of the property that may be filled is the area underneath the elevated structure, together with driveway access to the structure. In no case shall the maximum lot area of the property filled exceed 33.33 percent of the total area of the lot, and shall extend at least 18 feet from the outer foundation of the structure. 
e.  If a new or reconstructed structure is to be elevated utilizing fill material, any required building elevation standard exceeding the three-foot fill limitation as referenced in subsection (e)(8)b of this section must be achieved through the use of elevated foundations, piers or similar structural elevation techniques that are in compliance with then-applicable city building code requirements as certified by a structural engineer. 
f.  Fill is allowed for property maintenance purposes in the floodway fringe area upon approval of the city planner. For purposes of this subsection, the term "property maintenance purposes" means landscaping, gardening or farming activities, erosion control, and filling in of washed-out sections of land. Property maintenance purposes shall only include the placement of such quantities of fill not to exceed the limitations specified herein and that do not inhibit the free flow of water. Said limited amounts of fill for property maintenance purposes need not be compensated by an equivalent amount of excavation area as specified in subsection (e)(8)c of this section. 
g.  Filling on public property is prohibited in the floodway fringe district with the exception of property maintenance purposes of public facilities, upon approval of the city planner. Limited quantities of asphalt, concrete and yard waste may be temporarily stored in the floodway fringe district when said materials are being staged for further processing. Raw materials may be stockpiled in the floodway fringe district when said materials are mined or excavated from a site in the floodway or floodway fringe. 
(9)  No floodplain map revisions (letter of map revision-fill or LOMR-f) involving placement of fill or involving land alterations in the floodway fringe overlay district, even if otherwise approved by FEMA, shall be allowed after January 1, 2010; provided, however, that owners of properties in the floodway fringe who have applied for a LOMR and which were in the process of being approved as of January 1, 2010, shall be exempt from this prohibition. 
(10)  Factory-built housing and factory-built structures shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
b.  Factory-built housing and factory-built structures, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the 500-year flood level. 
c.  Openings shall be established in the lower area to allow the natural entry and exit of floodwaters in compliance with subsections (e)(7)a.1 through 4 of this section. 
(11)  Subdivisions, including factory-built home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the following requirements. Subdivisions shall be consistent with the need to limit flood damage to the maximum practicable extent, and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals shall meet the applicable performance standards. Subdivision proposals intended for residential development shall provide all lots with a means of vehicular access that is above the 500-year (0.2 percent) flood level. 
(12)  Utility and sanitary systems shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 500-year flood elevation. 
b.  On site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
c.  New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 500-year flood elevation. 
d.  Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. 
(13)  Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 500-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or: 
a.  Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters; or 
b.  Be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(14)  Flood control structural works such as levees and floodwalls, shall provide, at minimum, protection from a 100-year (one percent) flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage, or at such higher elevation as may be mandated by the state or federal government. In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(15)  No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or other drainage facility or system. 
(16)  Detached garages, storage sheds, appurtenant structure and other similar detached accessory structures that are incidental to a residential use shall be allowed in the floodway fringe district with no minimum elevation requirement provided that all the following criteria are satisfied. Exemption from the elevation requirement for such structures may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents: 
a.  The total combined floor areas of all such structures located on the lot does not exceed a total of 576 square feet in area. Those portions of structures located less than one foot above the (0.2 percent) 500-year flood level must be constructed of flood resistant materials. 
b.  The structures are not suitable for and shall not be used for human habitation. 
c.  The structures will be designed to have low flood damage potential and shall be used solely for low damage potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. 
d.  The structures will comply with minimum required permanent openings as specified in subsections (d)(4)(a)(1) through (4). 
e.  The structures will be constructed and placed on the building site so as to limit resistance to the greatest practicable extent to the flow of floodwaters. 
f.  Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
g.  The structure's service facilities such as electrical, heating and ventilating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the (.2 percent) 500-year flood level. 
(17)  Recreational vehicles, if permitted in the underlying zoning district, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes when the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attached additions. 
(18)  Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation or due to action of flood flows. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-156), 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2929, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 26-178. - F-P General Floodplain Overlay District. 
(a)  Principal permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the F-P general floodplain district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or underlying zoning district and provided they do not require placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse: 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails. 
(4)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Any use which involves placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a special exception permit by the board of adjustment. All such uses shall be reviewed by the state department of natural resources to determine: 
(1)  Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe; and 
(2)  The 100-year or 500-year flood level. 
The applicant shall be responsible for providing the state department of natural resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination. 
(c)  Performance standards. 
(1)  All conditional uses or portions thereof to be located in the floodway, as determined by the state department of natural resources, shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the floodway district. 
(2)  All conditional uses or portions thereof to be located in the floodway fringe, as determined by the state department of natural resources, shall meet the applicable standards of the floodway fringe district. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. No structure located within the designated floodplain district may be subdivided or converted for the purpose of establishing a separate dwelling unit either wholly or partially below the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-157), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-179. - R-P Planned Residence District. 
    In the R-P Planned Residence District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the R-P Planned Residence District is to permit the establishment of multiuse and integrated use residential developments and to provide for the orderly planned growth of residential developments in larger tracts of land. The district shall normally be reserved for development of tracts not less than ten acres in size. It is also intended that such planned residence districts be designed and developed in substantial conformity with the standards of the comprehensive plan and with recognized principals of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. It is further intended that such planned residence districts be designed and developed to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare, to reasonably prevent and minimize undue injury to adjoining areas and to encourage appropriate land use. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-4 residence district. 
b.  Any use permitted in the C-1 Commercial District within the commercial area of the planned residence district. 
(3)  General standards. The land usage, minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses shall be determined by the requirements set forth below, which shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this chapter or any other ordinance: 
a.  There shall be no minimum yard or height requirements in a planned residence district except that minimum yards, as specified in the R-4 residence district, shall be provided around the boundaries of the planned residence district. 
b.  Uses along the project boundary lines that are less restrictive than R-4 uses shall not be in conflict with those allowed in adjoining or opposite property. To this end, the city planning and zoning commission may require, in the absence of an appropriate physical barrier, that uses of at least intensity or a buffer of open space or screening be arranged along the borders of the project. 
c.  After final approval and zoning by the city council, a plan of the planned residence district, showing building lines, building locations, common land, streets, easements, utilities and other applicable items shall be filed with the zoning administrator and maintained as a permanent part of the records of the city. The applicant for the planned residence district may also record or file such plan in the office of the county recorder. 
d.  In their review of the plan, the city planning and zoning commission and city council may consider any deed restrictions or covenants entered into or contracted for by the developer concerning the use of common land or permanent open space. For purposes of this section, common land shall refer to land dedicated to the public use and to land retained in private ownership but intended for the use of the residents of the development unit or the general public. 
e.  No permit for any commercial structure or building shall be issued until at least 25 percent of the planned residence district in question is developed for residential uses. 
(4)  Land use and density requirements. 
a.  No more than 15 percent of the total area of the planned residence district may be used for commercial uses. 
b.  The lot area per unit in any one- and two-unit areas in the planned residence district shall be the same as in the R-4 residence district. 
c.  Lot area requirements in the multiple unit area of the planned residence district shall be the same as in the R-4 residence district. 
d.  All density requirements shall be computed on a total area basis using private streets and drives, common open space, park areas, recreation areas and off-street parking areas, as well as building site areas. 
(5)  Modifications to plans. 
a.  Major. All changes, modifications and amendments in the various plats and plans required for R-P development, deemed to be substantial by the planning and zoning staff after city approval of such plats and plans, shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major changes include, but are not limited to, the following: land use changes, increased densities and street location or size. 
b.  Minor. Minor changes, modifications and amendments in the various plats and plans required for R-P development shall be administratively reviewed by the planning and zoning staff. If the change is deemed insignificant in nature, the staff may recommend to the council that the change be approved without the benefit of a mandatory review before the planning and zoning commission. The council may approve such change, or may determine that the magnitude of the change is significant in nature and require that the appropriate plat or plan be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Changes pertaining to the location, construction or replacement of signs shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning staff. If the staff deems that the sign changes are significant in nature, it may submit the proposal to the council for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-158), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-180. - HCG Highway Corridor and Greenbelt Overlay Zoning District. 
(a)  Boundaries. The highway corridor greenbelt (HCG) overlay zoning district boundaries are shown on the HCG master plan and legally described in attachments to Ordinance No. 2000. Said attachments are not set out at length herein but are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish a greenbelt corridor overlay district or the orderly development of properties located within the HCG overlay district. The emphasis of the greenbelt overlay district is to regulate the development within the Highway 58 and Greenhill Road Corridor and the West Lake area in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. New structures, certain modifications to existing structures that require building permits and certain site improvements shall conform to this section. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to any other zoning district regulations and requirements in which the land may be classified. In the case of conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall govern, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Landscaped area means an area not subject to vehicular traffic, which consists of living landscape material. 
    Living landscape means low growing woody or herbaceous ground cover, turfgrasses, shrubs, and trees. 
    Off-premises signs means a sign not entirely on the same property as the activity it advertises. 
    On-premises signs means a sign on the same property as the activity it advertises. 
    Overstory tree means a self-supporting woody plant having at least one well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread of at least 30 feet, and having a trunk that may, at maturity, be kept clear of leaves and branches at least eight feet above grade. 
    Parking strip means that portion of city-owned property between the curb line, shoulder line or traveled portion of the roadway or alley and the private property line. 
    Screen means an area of planting which provides an effective visual barrier. For a single row, the screen shall consist of spruce, firs, or pines spaced at a maximum spacing of 15 feet or a double staggered row of spruce, firs, or pine spaced at a maximum spacing of 20 feet within each row; for arborvitae and juniper, the spacing shall be a double staggered row with maximum spacing of ten feet within each row, or a single row with maximum spacing of six feet. 
    Shrub means a woody or perennial plant with multiple stems. 
    Understory tree means a self-supporting woody plant having at least one well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread of less than 30 feet. 
    Vehicular use areas means all areas subject to vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, accessways, driveways, loading areas, service areas, and parking stalls for all types of vehicles. The term "vehicular use areas" shall not apply to covered parking structures or underground parking lots. 
(d)  Administrative regulations. The provisions of this section shall constitute the requirements for all zones that lie within the boundaries of the highway corridor greenbelt overlay district. This section shall apply to all new construction, a change in use, or the following alteration or enlargement: 
(1)  In commercial or residential zones or for commercial or residential uses in those zones a ten percent increase in total area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  For industrial uses in manufacturing zones, but not for any commercial or residential use in manufacturing zones, a 20 percent increase in total area or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
In addition to the above, this section shall also apply to all sites being developed for the provision of parking as a primary use or for any improvement which results in the provision of or an increase in parking. 
(e)  Expansion of existing uses. 
(1)  For existing commercial and residential uses which will be expanding, the following amounts of the ordinance requirements relating to total points and total landscape area shall be applied to the project dependent upon the total size of all additions since November 1, 1992: 
The lesser of: Shall require that: 10%-20% addition or 1,000 square feet 25% of ordinance requirements be provided 21%-40% addition or 2,000 square feet 50% of ordinance requirements be provided 41%-50% addition or 2,500 square feet 75% of ordinance requirements be provided 51% addition or 2,501 square feet 100% of ordinance requirements be provided  
(2)  For existing industrial uses which will be expanding, the following amounts of the ordinance requirements relating to total points and total landscape area shall be applied to the project dependent upon the total size of all additions since November 1, 1992: 
The lesser of: Shall require that: 20%-39% addition or 3,000 square feet 25% of ordinance requirements be provided 40%-50% addition or 4,000 square feet 50% of ordinance requirements be provided 51%-60% addition or 5,000 square feet 75% of ordinance requirements be provided 61% addition or 5,001 square feet 100% of ordinance requirements be provided  
(3)  For projects as indicated above, no certificate of occupancy or building permit shall be issued unless such development project is found to be in conformance with this section. 
(f)  Landscape requirements. 
(1)  Submittal procedures. 
a.  Submittals for landscape approval shall include a separate planting plan showing species, type, size, and number of plantings; a site plan drawn to a scale not more than one inch equals 100 feet showing total area and total landscaped area and any supplementary information as required to demonstrate conformance to the landscape requirements. Any deviations from the approved landscape plan must receive approval from the department of developmental services of the city prior to installation. 
b.  Each submittal shall include fiscal arrangements by bond, certificate of deposit, or a nonrevocable letter of credit payable to the city to ensure that the landscaping will be installed. Said city may at its discretion accept other evidence of ability to pay. The fiscal arrangements shall reflect the cost of required landscaping not yet in place to ensure that such landscaping will be installed. The submittal must also grant said city or its licensed and contracted agent the right to enter upon the land for the purposes of installing the required landscaping, in the event that such landscaping is not in place by the date specified in the agreement. Such fiscal arrangements shall be released when landscape installation is verified. 
(2)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping in all zones and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(3)  Minimum requirements for designated zones. 
a.  R zones and residential uses. The minimum required landscape area shall be 65 percent of the lot exclusive of buildings. The yard shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs to achieve a minimum of 0.05 points per square foot of the landscaped area. 
b.  C-3 commercial zone. The minimum required landscape area shall be 65 percent of the lot exclusive of buildings and parking. The landscape area shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs to achieve a minimum of 0.05 points per square foot of landscaped area. 
c.  C and M zones. The minimum required landscape area shall be 25 percent of the total lot area. The landscape area shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs to achieve a minimum of 0.04 points per square foot of total lot area. 
For commercial and industrial lots exceeding one acre in size, the minimum required landscape area shall be 25 percent of the total lot area. The landscaped area shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs to achieve a minimum of 0.03 points per square foot of total lot area. In addition to said requirements, a 50 point reduction in minimum total landscape points required will be allowed based on each percentage point of green space (grass) provided in excess of the 25 percent required minimum. However, the total number of points reduced shall not exceed the following: 
200 points 1.00 to 2 acres 400 points 2.01 to 3 acres 800 points 3.01 to 4 acres 1,200 points 4.01 to 5 acres 1,600 points 5.01 to 6 acres 2,000 points 6.01 to 7 acres  
There shall be no reduction of required landscaping points for sites less than one acre in area. 
(4)  Additional landscaping requirements. The following additional landscaping requirements apply to all zones: 
a.  Vehicular use areas. 
1.  For vehicular use areas greater than 6,000 square feet, an area equivalent to a minimum of five percent of the total vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The required landscape area shall be located within the vehicular use area. 
2.  For vehicular use areas 6,000 square feet or less, a combination of trees and shrubs shall be planted in either the vehicular use area or within five feet of the perimeter or both to achieve the minimum landscape points as required by the underlying zone. 
3.  Tree spacing shall be such that no designated parking space is more than 50 feet from the trunk of a tree. 
4.  There shall be sufficient barriers to protect all landscaped areas from vehicular damage. 
5.  Wherever a parking area is located adjacent to the greenbelt boundary the parking area shall be separated from the boundary line by a landscaped area of a width no less than eight feet measured perpendicular to the boundary. This area must contain an effective visual screen for a minimum of 80 percent of that parking area. This screen must be at least six feet in height, and may be achieved through the use of landscaped berms and/or plant materials. If plant materials are used to achieve this screen there will be one point assigned per linear foot of the screen, no individual plant points will be assigned for this screen. 
6.  The vehicular use area must terminate at least five feet from any exterior building wall. Exceptions may be made where it is necessary to cross the nonvehicular use area to gain access to the building and for drive up facilities such as banks and restaurants. 
7.  All trees in the interior of the vehicular use area shall be two inch caliper or greater measured six inches above grade at the time of planting. 
8.  Areas less than 40 square feet in size or having an average dimension of less than three feet, shall not be included for purposes of calculating the required landscape area in the vehicular use area. 
b.  Maintenance. The owner of the real estate contained in this zoning district shall be solely responsible for the maintenance of any and all landscaping. This maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, removal of litter, pruning, mowing of lawns, adequate watering for all growing plant life, weeding, and replacement, as necessary, in order to preserve the landscaping plan as approved by this section. A maintenance agreement and right to enter agreement shall be signed prior to a building permit and occupancy permit being issued. 
c.  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage must be achieved in the city parking area (right-of-way). This point requirement shall be met through the provision of trees, and planting shall comply with guidelines established by the park and grounds maintenance of the city park division. If circumstances do not allow planting within the city parking area, street tree points shall be provided along the perimeter of the applicant's property. 
d.  Residential development. For one- and two-unit residential development in zoning districts other than residential zones, the residential requirements of this section shall apply. 
e.  Point distribution. A minimum of 65 percent of all required points shall be achieved through tree plantings. A minimum of ten percent of all required points shall be achieved through living landscape other than trees. 
f.  Reduction of landscaped area. A point score in excess of that required may be used to reduce the required landscaped area at a rate of one square foot per excess point up to a maximum reduction of 25 percent. 
g.  Screening. For any use that is oriented away from the highway corridor greenbelt boundary a screen shall be installed along the lot line adjacent to the boundary. There will be no individual tree points given for this screen. The screen will receive three points per linear foot if the trees are greater than six feet in height at the time of planting. The screen will receive one point per linear foot if the trees are greater than four feet in height at the time of planting. In no case shall the trees be less than four feet at the time of planting. 
(g)  Sign regulations; general prohibition. No person, firm, or corporation shall develop, install, locate, or construct any sign within the HCG overlay district except as expressly authorized in this section. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to any other zoning district in which land may be classified and that such lands may be used as permitted by such other districts. In the case of conflict the most restrictive provisions shall govern except as otherwise expressly provided in this section. 
(1)  Permitted signs. On-premises signs. In residential, S-1 and A-1 districts, only those signs permitted in the underlying districts shall be allowed. 
(2)  Commercial C-1. 
a.  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign per use, not to exceed 40 square feet on each face and not to exceed 20 feet in overall height. If more than two faces are used, the area of each side shall be reduced proportionately. 
b.  Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area; in no case shall the wall sign exceed ten percent of the first 15 vertical feet of wall area. The length of a wall sign shall not exceed two-thirds of the building wall length. Wall signs shall be mounted flat against the building. No more than two sides of a building shall have wall signs. For the purpose of this subsection, signs painted on awnings shall be considered as wall signs. 
(3)  Commercial C-2 and all other zoning classifications. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign per use, not to exceed 40 feet in height with an area not to exceed the smaller of the following: 
(i)  Two square feet for each foot of street frontage. 
(ii)  250 square feet. 
If more than two faces are used, the area of each side shall be reduced proportionately. 
2.  For multiple businesses under common ownership that share common parking, access or structures, they shall comply with this section as if a single business. For multiple businesses under diverse ownership that share common parking, access or structures, they shall be allowed one freestanding sign per use if the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The additional freestanding sign shall not be located closer than 150 feet to any other freestanding sign. 
(ii)  The maximum combined area of all freestanding signs on the site shall not exceed the allowed area for a single freestanding sign in that zone. 
(iii)  A sign plan showing square footage or proposed signs for each parcel be submitted for the entire site prior to sign permit approval. 
b.  Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area; in no case shall the wall signs exceed ten percent of the first 15 vertical feet of wall area. The length of a wall sign shall not exceed two-thirds of the building wall length. Wall signs shall be mounted flat against the building. No more than two sides of a building shall have wall signs. For the purpose of this subsection, signs painted on awnings shall be considered as wall signs. 
c.  Direction signs. Each use shall also be allowed directional signs as necessary to facilitate the orderly flow of traffic with a maximum area of six square feet each. A logo is permitted on the directional signs, but shall not exceed ten percent of the total sign area. These signs are for directional, not advertising purposes. The square footage of directional signs shall not be included in the calculation of the allowable square footage of other signage. 
d.  Menu signs. For drive-up menu signs for ordering, only one single sided menu sign shall be allowed with no advertisement on the back of the sign permitted. This sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet. The square footage of menu signs shall not be included in the calculation of the allowable square footage of other signage. 
e.  Roof signs. Roof signs shall be allowed in place of the wall sign only when both of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Insufficient area for a wall sign; 
2.  The building has a pitched roof and the roof sign does not project higher than the peak of the roof. 
f.  Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs shall not be allowed in the overlay district. 
(4)  Additional sign regulations. Freestanding signs shall be allowed in the front yard or the yard furthest from the HCG boundary. Freestanding signs as set forth in this chapter shall be allowed in the yard closest to the HCG boundary only when they conform as listed: 
a.  The signs shall have a maximum height of 25 feet above the surface of the highway or a maximum height of 40 feet above the grade on which they are mounted, whichever is less. 
b.  Each sign shall have a pole covering in proportion to its size. The covering shall be at least 50 percent of the sign cabinet face width. The construction material of the covering shall be compatible with the construction material of the building. 
c.  When a business ceases operation the on-premises signage shall be removed by the owner according to the following schedule: 
1.  Sign or sign cabinet, within 180 days. 
2.  Supporting structure, within one year. 
3.  When off-premises advertising is bare or in disrepair for a period of 90 days it shall be removed. If it is bare or in disrepair for a period of one year the structure shall be removed. 
(5)  Prohibited signs. The following signs are not considered appropriate within the HCG overlay district and shall not be permitted: 
a.  Portable signs. 
b.  Signs painted directly on buildings. 
c.  Signs painted on bus benches. 
d.  Billboard signs. Billboard signs in existence within the district at the time of enactment of this section shall be permitted to remain as legal nonconforming uses in the underlying zoning district. Existing billboards may be maintained and repaired but not enlarged in area or in height nor reconstructed or replaced. Furthermore, if said existing billboard is damaged to an extent more than 50 percent of its fair market value it shall not be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-159), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-181. - CHN College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District. 
    In the College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District, the following provisions, regulations and restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries. The College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District (CHN district) boundaries are shown in the College Hill neighborhood master plan and legally described in attachment A. (Said attachment is not set out at length herein but is on file in the office of the city planner.) 
(2)  Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of the College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District is to regulate development and land uses within the College Hill neighborhood and to provide guidance for building and site design standards, maintenance and development of the residential and business districts in a manner that complements the University of Northern Iowa campus, promotes community vitality and safety and strengthens commercial enterprise. New structures, including certain types of fences, certain modifications to existing structures and certain site improvements and site maintenance shall conform to this section. 
b.  The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to any other zoning district regulations and requirements in which the land may be classified. In the case of conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall govern unless otherwise expressly provided in this section. 
(3)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bedroom means a room unit intended for sleeping purposes containing at least 70 square feet of floor space for each occupant. Neither closets nor any part of a room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall be considered when computing floor area. 
    Change in use means and include residential uses changed from single-unit to two-unit or two-unit to multi-unit or to any increase in residential intensity within a structure (i.e., change from duplex to fraternity house). The term "change in use" shall also apply to changes in use classifications (i.e., residential to commercial). 
    Fraternity/sorority means residential facilities provided for college students and sponsored by university affiliated student associations. Such facilities may contain individual or common sleeping areas and bathroom facilities but shall provide common kitchen, dining, and lounging areas. Such facilities may contain more than one unit. 
    Greenway means open landscaped area maintained for floodplain protection, stormwater management and public access. Such area may contain pedestrian walkways or bicycle pathways but is not intended for regular or seasonal usage by motorized recreational vehicles. 
    Landscaped area means an area not subject to vehicular traffic, which consists of living landscape material including grass, trees and shrubbery. 
    Lot split, property transfer means not a subdivision plat where a new lot is being created; includes any transfer of small segments of property or premises between two abutting properties, whether commonly owned or owned by separate parties, where one property (the "sending property") is dedicating or deeding additional land to another abutting property (the "receiving property"). 
    Mixed-use building means a building designed for occupancy by a minimum of two different uses. Uses generating visitor or customer traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal services) are typically located on the ground floor facing the street, whereas uses generating limited pedestrian activity (such as office or residential uses) are typically located on upper floors or behind street-fronting commercial uses. 
    Neighborhood character. The College Hill neighborhood area is one of the city's oldest and most densely populated neighborhoods. As the University of Northern Iowa has grown the original single-unit residential neighborhood surrounding the campus area has been transformed into a mixture of single-unit, duplex and multiple unit dwelling units along with a few institutional uses and other university-related uses such as fraternities and sorority houses. These various uses are contained in a variety of underlying zoning districts (i.e., R-2, R-3, R-4 Residential and C-3 Commercial Districts). Architectural styles vary significantly among existing building structures while differing land uses and building types are permitted in different zoning districts. When references are made in this article to preservation of neighborhood character, uniformity of building scale, size, bulk and unusual or widely varying appearance are of primary concern regardless of the nature of the proposed building use. 
    New construction, including significant improvements to existing structures, shall be of a character that respects and complements existing neighborhood development. The following variables or criteria shall be used in determining whether a newly proposed construction or building renovation is in keeping with the character of the neighborhood: 
a.  Overall bulk/size of the building; 
b.  Overall height of the building; 
c.  Number of proposed dwelling units in comparison to surrounding properties; 
d.  4. Lot density (lot area divided by number of dwelling units); 
e.  Off-street parking provision; 
f.  Architectural compatibility with surrounding buildings. 
    Parking area means that portion of a parcel of land that is improved and designated or commonly used for the parking of one or more motor vehicles. 
    Parking lot means that area improved and designated or commonly used for the parking of three or more vehicles. 
    Parking space (also parking stall ) means an area measuring at least nine feet wide and 19 feet long for all commercial, institutional or manufacturing uses or eight feet wide and 18 feet long for residential uses only, connected to a public street or alley by a driveway not less than ten feet wide, and so arranged as to permit ingress and egress of motor vehicles without moving any other vehicle parked adjacent to the parking space. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including all structures thereon. 
    Residential building. Any building that is designed and/or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin or travel trailer. 
    Residential conversion means the alteration or modification of a residential structure that will result in an increase in the number of rooming units or dwelling units within the residential structure. The addition or creation of additional rooms within an existing rooming unit or dwelling unit does not constitute a residential conversion. 
    Structural alteration means any alteration, exterior or interior that alters the exterior dimension of the structure. This provision shall apply to residential, commercial and institutional uses including churches or religious institutions. 
    Substantial improvement means any new construction within the district or any renovation of an existing structure, including the following: 
a.  Any increase in floor area or increased external dimension of a residential or commercial structure. Additional bedrooms proposed in an existing duplex or multi-unit residence shall be considered a substantial improvement. Bedroom additions to single-unit residences shall not be considered to be a substantial improvement. 
b.  Any modification of the exterior appearance of the structure by virtue of adding or removing exterior windows or doors. Repair or replacement of existing windows or doors which does not result in any change in the size, number or location of said windows and doors shall not be considered to be a substantial improvement. 
c.  Any structural alteration that increases the number of bedrooms or dwelling units. Interior room additions, including bedroom additions, may be made to single-unit residential structures without requiring additional on-site parking. 
d.  All façade improvements, changes, alterations, modifications or replacement of existing façade materials on residential or commercial structures. Routine repair and replacement of existing siding materials with the same or similar siding materials on existing structures shall be exempt from these regulations. 
e.  Any new, modified or replacement awnings, signs or similar projections over public sidewalk areas. 
f.  Any increase or decrease in existing building height and/or alteration of existing roof pitch or appearance. Routine repair or replacement of existing roof materials that do not materially change or affect the appearance, shape or configuration of the existing roof shall not be considered a substantial improvement. 
g.  Any construction of a detached accessory structure measuring more than 300 square feet in base floor area for a residential or commercial principal use. 
h.  Any increase in area of any existing parking area or parking lot or any new construction of a parking area or parking lot, which existing or new parking area or parking lot contains or is designed to potentially accommodate a total of three or more parking stalls. 
i.  Any proposed property boundary fence, which utilizes unusual fencing materials such as stones, concrete blocks, logs, steel beams or similar types of atypical or unusual fence materials. Standard chain-link fences, wooden or vinyl privacy fences shall be exempt from these provisions. 
j.  Demolition and removal of an entire residential, commercial or institutional structure on a property shall not be considered a substantial improvement. 
(4)  Administrative review. 
a.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall constitute the requirements for all premises and properties that lie within the boundaries of the College Hill Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District. This section and the requirements stated herein shall apply to all new construction, change in use, structural alterations, substantial improvements or site improvements including: 
1.  Any substantial improvement to any residential, commercial or institutional structure, including churches. 
2.  Any new construction, change in use, residential conversion or structural alteration, as defined herein, for any structure. 
3.  Any new building structure including single-unit residences. 
b.  Emergency repairs. In the case of emergency repairs required as the result of unanticipated building or façade damages due to events such as fire, vandalism, flooding or weather-related damages, site plan review by the planning and zoning commission and the city council will not be required for completion of said emergency repairs, provided that the extent of damages and cost of said repairs are less than 50 percent of the value of the structure. However, said emergency repairs along with cost estimates related to the extent of building structural damages shall be verified by the city planner in conjunction with the city building inspector. Said emergency repairs, to the extent possible, shall repair and re-establish the original appearance of the structure. In the event that said emergency repairs result in dramatic alteration of the exterior appearance of the structure as determined by the city planner, the owner of the property shall make permanent repairs or renovations that re-establish the original appearance of the structure with respect to façade features, window and door sizes, locations and appearances of said windows and doors within six months following completion of said emergency repairs. Said emergency repairs shall not alter the number, size or configuration of pre-existing rooms, bedrooms or dwelling units within the structure. 
c.  Submittal requirements. Applicants for any new construction, change in use, structural alteration, façade alteration, residential conversion, substantial improvement, parking lot construction or building enlargement shall submit to the city planning division an application accompanied by such additional information and documentation as shall be deemed appropriate by the city planner in order for the planning division to properly review the application. The required application for any project may include one or more of the following elements depending upon the nature of the application proposal. Some applications will require submittal of more information than other types of applications. The city planner will advise the applicant which of these items need to be submitted with each application with the goal of providing sufficient information so that decision makers can make an informed decision on each application. 
1.  Written description of building proposal, whether a new structure, façade improvement, parking lot improvement, building addition, etc. The name and address of the property owner and property developer (if different) must be provided; 
2.  Building floor plans; 
3.  Building materials; 
4.  Dimensions of existing and proposed exterior building "footprint"; 
5.  Façade details/exterior rendering of the structure being modified, description of proposed building design elements including, but not limited to, building height, roof design, number and location of doors and windows and other typical façade details; 
6.  Property boundaries, existing and proposed building setbacks; 
7.  Parking lot location, setbacks, parking stall locations and dimensions along with parking lot screening details; 
8.  Lot area and lot width measurements with explanation if any portion of an adjacent lot or property is being transferred to the property under consideration; 
9.  Open green space areas and proposed landscaping details with schedule for planting new landscaping materials; 
10.  Trash dumpster/trash disposal areas; 
11.  Stormwater detention/management plans. 
Following submittal of the appropriate application materials as determined by the city planner, said application materials shall be reviewed by the city planning and zoning commission and the city council to determine if the submittal meets all chapter requirements and conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape architecture. The commission may recommend and the city council may approve the application as submitted, may deny the application, or may require the applicant to modify, alter, adjust or amend the application as deemed necessary to the end that it preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(5)  District requirements and criteria for review. 
a.  Minimum on-site parking requirements. The following standards shall apply in the College Hill Neighborhood Overlay District and shall govern if different from the requirements listed in section 26-220, Off-street parking spaces. 
1.  Single-unit dwelling: Two parking stalls per dwelling. 
2.  Single-unit dwelling, renter-occupied: Two parking stalls per dwelling unit plus one additional parking stall for each bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. 
3.  Two-unit dwelling: Two stalls per dwelling units plus one additional stall for each bedroom in each dwelling unit in excess of two bedrooms. 
4.  Multiple dwelling: Two stalls per dwelling unit plus one additional stall for each bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. One additional stall shall be provided for every five units in excess of five units for visitor parking. 
5.  Non-residential uses in the C-3 District: No parking required. 
6.  Dwelling units within mixed-use buildings in the C-3 District: One parking stall per bedroom, but not less than one stall per dwelling unit, except as follows. For mixed-use buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2019, parking is not required for existing dwelling units. In addition, for mixed-use and commercial buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2019, parking is not required for upper floor space that is converted to residential use. 
7.  Dwelling units within mixed-use buildings in zones other than the C-3 District: Two stalls per dwelling unit plus one additional stall for each bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. One additional stall shall be provided for every five units in excess of five units for visitor parking. 
8.  Boardinghouse/roominghouse: Five stalls plus one stall for every guest room in excess of four guest rooms. 
9.  Fraternity/sorority: Five parking stalls plus one stall for every two residents in excess of four residents. 
10.  Where fractional spaces result, the number required shall be the next higher whole number. 
11.  Bicycle accommodations: All new multi-unit residential facilities are encouraged to provide for the establishment of bicycle racks of a size appropriate for the anticipated residential occupancy of the facility. A general suggested bike parking standard is two bike stalls per residential unit. For commercial projects, if lot area is available, bike racks are encouraged to be installed in conjunction with the commercial project. 
b.  Parking lot standards. 
1.  All newly constructed or expanded parking lots (three or more parking stalls) shall be hard surfaced with concrete or asphalt, provided with a continuous curb, be set back a minimum five feet from adjacent property lines or public right-of-way with the exception of alleyways, in which case a three-foot permeable setback will be required, and otherwise conform to all parking guidelines as specified in this section and in section 26-220. Alternative parking lot surfaces may be considered to the extent that such surfaces provide adequate stormwater absorption rates, subject to city engineering review and approval, while providing an acceptable surface material and finished appearance. Gravel or crushed asphalt parking lots will not be permitted. However, other types of ecologically sensitive parking lot designs will be encouraged and evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
2.  Landscaping in parking lots shall be classified as either internal or peripheral. The following coverage requirements shall pertain to each classification: 
(i)  Peripheral landscaping. All parking lots containing three or more parking spaces shall provide peripheral landscaping. Peripheral landscaping shall consist of a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width, exclusive of vehicular obstruction, and shall be located between the parking area and the abutting property lines. One tree for each 25 lineal feet of such landscaping barrier or fractional part thereof shall be planted in the landscaping strip. At least one tree shall be planted for every parking lot (such as a three-stall parking lot) regardless of the lineal feet calculation. In addition to tree plantings, the perimeter of the parking lot shall be screened with shrubbery or similar plantings at least three feet in height as measured from the finished grade of the parking lot at the time of planting for purposes of vehicular screening. The vegetative screen should present a continuous, effective visual screen adjacent to the parking lot for purposes of partially obscuring vehicles and also deflecting glare from headlights. If landscaped berms are utilized, the berm and vegetative screening must achieve at least a three-foot tall screen at the time of installation as measured from the grade of the finished parking lot. Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material excluding paving, gravel, crushed asphalt or similar materials, in addition to the required trees, shrubbery, hedges or other planting material. Existing landscaping upon abutting property shall not be used to satisfy the requirements for said parking lot screening requirements unless the abutting land use is a parking lot. 
(ii)  Exceptions. 
A.  Peripheral landscaping shall not be required for single-unit or two-unit residential struc-tures where the primary parking area is designed around a standard front entrance driveway and/or attached or detached residential garage. However, if an open surface parking lot containing three or more parking stalls is established in the rear yard of a two-unit residential structure, the perimeter landscaping / screening requirements as specified herein shall apply. 
B.  Peripheral landscaping shall not be required for parking lots that are established behind building structures where the parking lots do not have any public street or alley frontage or is not adjacent to any open properties such as private yards, parks or similar open areas. Examples of such a parking lot would be one designed with a multiple unit apartment facility where the parking lot is encircled with building structures within the project site and where the parking lot is completely obscured from public view by building structures. 
C.  Underground or under-building parking lots. 
D.  Aboveground parking ramps shall provide perimeter screening as specified herein around the ground level perimeter of the parking structure. 
(iii)  Internal landscaping. All parking lots measuring 21 parking stalls or more shall be required to landscape the interior of such parking lot. At least one overstory tree shall be established for every 21 parking stalls. Each tree shall be provided sufficient open planting area necessary to sustain full growth of the tree. Not less than five percent of the proposed paved area of the interior of the parking lot shall be provided as open space, excluding the tree planting areas. These additional open space areas must be planted with bushes, grasses or similar vegetative materials. Each separate open green space area shall contain a minimum of 40 square feet and shall have a minimum width dimension of a least five feet. 
(iv)  Exceptions. Internal landscaping shall not be required for vehicular storage lots, trucking/warehousing lots or for automobile sales lots. However, perimeter landscaping/screening provisions, as specified herein, shall be required for all such parking areas when they are installed or enlarged in area. 
(v)  Parking garages or parking ramps. All such facilities where one or more levels are established for parking either below ground or above ground and where structural walls provide for general screening of parked vehicles, internal landscaping shall not be provided. 
(vi)  Open green space; landscape areas. It is the intent of this regulation that in parking development sites open green space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the parking development site rather than isolated in one area or around the perimeter of the parking lot. Trees and shrubs planted within parking areas shall be protected by concrete curbs and provide adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity of said vegetation. 
3.  Parking stalls must provide a minimum separation of four feet from the exterior walls of any principal structure on the property as measured from the vehicle (including vehicular overhang) to the nearest wall of the structure. No vehicular parking stall shall be so oriented or positioned as to block or obstruct any point of egress from a structure, including doorways or egress windows. 
4.  No portion of required front or side yards in any residential (R) zoning district shall be used for the establishment of any parking space, parking area, or parking lot, except for those driveways serving a single- or two-unit residence. For all other uses, a single driveway no more than 18 feet in width may be established across the required front and side yards, provided that side yard driveway setbacks are observed, as an access to designated rear yard parking areas, unless said lot is dedicated entirely to a parking lot, in which case a wider driveway access will be allowed across the required yard area to access said parking lot. 
5.  When a driveway or access off a public street no longer serves its original purpose as access to a garage or parking lot due to redevelopment of the property or is replaced with an alternative parking lot or parking arrangement with an alternate route of access, the original driveway access shall be re-curbed by the owner at the owner's expense and the parking/driveway area shall be returned to open green space with grass plantings or other similar landscaping materials. 
6.  Routine maintenance of existing parking areas and parking lots, including resurfacing of said areas with similar materials or with hard surfacing will be permitted without requiring review by the planning and zoning commission and city council, provided that no increase in area of said existing parking area or parking lot, or any new construction of a parking area or parking lot, which existing or new parking area or parking lot contains or is designed to potentially accommodate a total of three or more parking stalls, occurs. Any newly paved or hard surfaced parking lot, excluding those existing hard surface parking lots that are merely being resurfaced, must satisfy minimum required setbacks from the property line or alley and must provide a continuous curb around the perimeter of said improved parking lot. Hard surfacing of any existing unpaved parking area or parking lot will require an evaluation by the city engineering division regarding increased stormwater runoff/possible stormwater detention. 
c.  Stormwater drainage. 
1.  Stormwater detention requirements as outlined in section 24-338 and in section 26-94 shall apply to all newly developed parking lots and new building uses. In addition, said requirements shall apply to any existing parking lot that is resurfaced, reconstructed or enlarged subject to review by the city engineer. In those cases where no municipal storm sewer is readily available to serve a particular property or development site, the use of the property will be limited. The maximum allowable use that shall be permitted on any particular property or development site which is not served by a municipal storm sewer shall be limited to the following uses in Residential zoning districts: a parking lot; a single-unit residence; a two-unit residence; or a multi-unit residence. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be required to submit calculations, which shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineering division, that verify that the total impervious surface area on the particular property or development site that will exist immediately following completion of the proposed new development shall be no greater than the total impervious surface area on the particular property or development site that existed immediately prior to the proposed new development. 
2.  Soil erosion control. At the time of new site development, including parking lot construction, soil erosion control measures must be installed on the site in conformance with city engineering standards. Said soil erosion measures must be maintained until the site is stabilized to the satisfaction of the city engineering division. 
d.  Open space/landscaping requirements. 
1.  Principal permitted uses within the district shall provide minimum building setbacks as required in the zoning chapter. With the exception of construction periods said required front and side setback areas (required yards) shall be maintained with natural vegetative materials and shall not be obstructed with any temporary or permanent structure, on site vehicular parking including trailers or recreational vehicles, nor disturbed by excavations, holes, pits or established recreational areas that produce bare spots in the natural vegetation. 
2.  Driveways measuring no more than 18 feet in width, sidewalks and pedestrian access ways measuring no more than six feet in width may be established across the required front and side yard areas. 
3.  All newly constructed office or institutional buildings in the R-3 or R-4 districts and all newly constructed single-unit dwelling, two-unit dwelling, or multiple dwelling in residential or commercial districts shall provide on-site landscaping within the required yard areas or in other green space areas of the property at the rate of 0.04 points per square foot of total lot area of the site under consideration for the proposed residential development or improvement. Landscaping shall consist of any combination of trees and shrubbery, subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. In addition to these requirements, parking lot plantings and/or screening must be provided as specified herein. Plantings must be established within one year following issuance of a building permit. This provision shall not apply to commercial or mixed-use buildings established in the C-3 Commercial District. 
4.  Measured compliance. The following landscaping point schedule applies to required landscaping in all zoning districts within the College Hill Neighborhood Overlay District with the exception of commercial uses in the C-3 Commercial District, and shall be used in determining achieved points for required plantings. The points are to be assigned to plant sizes at time of planting/installation. 
Overstory Trees: 4-inch caliper or greater 100 points 3-inch caliper to 4-inch caliper 90 points 2-inch caliper to 3-inch caliper 80 points 1-inch caliper to 2-inch caliper 60 points Understory Trees: 2-inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2-inch caliper to 2-inch caliper 30 points 1-inch to 11/2-inch caliper 20 points Shrubs: 5-gallon or greater 10 points 2-gallon to 5-gallon 5 points Conifers: 10-foot height or greater 100 points 8-foot to 10-foot height 90 points 6-foot to 8-foot height 80 points 5-foot to 6-foot height 40 points 4-foot to 5-foot height 30 points 3-foot to 4-foot height 20 points  
e.  Fences/retaining walls. 
1.  Fences shall be permitted on properties in accordance with the height and location requirements outlined in section 26-93. Zoning/land use permits shall be required for fences erected within the district. 
2.  Any existing fence or freestanding wall that is, in the judgment of the building inspector, structurally unsound and a hazard to adjoining property shall be removed upon the order of the building inspector. 
3.  Retaining walls may be installed on property as a measure to control soil erosion or stormwater drainage. However, said retaining walls shall be permitted only after review and approval by the city engineer. 
f.  Detached accessory structures. All newly constructed detached accessory structures or expansions of existing detached accessory structures exceeding 300 square feet in base floor area proposed to be situated on residential or commercial properties shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Maximum allowable building height, size and location requirements for accessory structures as specified in section 26-126 shall apply. In addition to those standards, proposed detached accessory structures or expanded structures larger than 300 square feet in area shall be designed in such a manner as to be consistent with the architectural style of the principal residential or commercial structure on the property. Similar building materials, colors, roof lines, roof pitch and roofing materials shall be established on the accessory structure to match as closely as possible those elements on the principal structure. In addition, vertical steel siding along with "metal pole barn" type construction shall not be allowed. 
g.  No existing single-unit residential structure in the R-2 district shall be converted or otherwise structurally altered in a manner that will result in the creation or potential establishment of a second dwelling unit within the structure. 
h.  No duplex (two-unit) or multiple dwelling shall add dwelling units or bedrooms to any dwelling unit without satisfying minimum on-site parking requirements. If additional parking spaces are required, the entire parking area must satisfy parking lot development standards as specified herein. 
i.  No portion of an existing parcel of land or lot or plot shall be split, subdivided or transferred to another abutting lot or parcel for any purpose without prior review and approval by the city planning and zoning commission and the city council. Land cannot be transferred or split from one lot or property to be transferred to another for purposes of benefiting the receiving property while diminishing the minimum required lot area, lot width or building or parking lot setback area of the sending property. Such lot transfer or split shall not create a nonconforming lot by virtue of reduction of minimum required lot area, lot width or reduction of minimum required building or parking lot setbacks. Said lot transfer or split shall not affect any existing nonconforming property by further reducing any existing nonconforming element of the lot or property including lot area, lot width or building or parking lot setbacks in order to benefit another abutting property for development purposes. This provision shall not apply to those instances where separate lots or properties are being assembled for purposes of new building construction where existing structures on the assembled lots will be removed in order to accommodate new building construction. 
j.  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development site plans that are deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner shall be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission in the same manner as originally required in this section. Examples of major or substantial changes shall include, but are not limited to, changes in building location, building size, property size, parking arrangements, enlarged or modified parking lots, open green space or landscaping modifications, setback areas or changes in building design elements. 
k.  1.  Trash dumpster/trash disposal areas must be clearly marked and established on all site plans associated with new development or redevelopment projects. No required parking area or required parking stalls shall be encumbered by a trash disposal area. 
2.  Large commercial refuse dumpsters and recycling bins serving residential or commercial uses shall be located in areas of the property that are not readily visible from public streets. No such dumpster or bin shall be established within the public right-of-way. All dumpsters and bins shall be affixed with a solid lid covering and shall be screened for two purposes: 
(i)  Visual screening; and 
(ii)  Containing dispersal of loose trash due to over-filling. Screening materials shall match or be complementary to the prevailing building materials. 
(6)  Design review. Any new construction, building additions, façade renovations or structural alterations to commercial or residential structures, or substantial improvements to single-unit residences that, in the judgment of the city planner, substantially alters the exterior appearance or character of permitted structures shall require review and approval by the city planning and zoning commission and city council. 
a.  Criteria for review. 
1.  Applications involving building design review. Neighborhood character, as herein defined, shall be considered in all. 
2.  The architectural character, materials, textures of all buildings or building additions shall be compatible with those primary design elements on structures located on adjoining properties and also in consideration of said design elements commonly utilized on other nearby properties on the same block or within the immediate neighborhood. 
3.  Comparable scale and character in relation to adjoining properties and other nearby properties in the immediate neighborhood shall be maintained by reviewing features such as: 
(i)  Maintaining similar roof pitch. 
(ii)  Maintaining similar building height, building scale and building proportion. 
(iii)  Use of materials comparable and similar to other buildings on nearby properties in the immediate neighborhood. 
4.  Mandated second entrances or fire escapes established above grade shall not extend into the required front yard area. 
5.  Existing entrances and window openings on the front façades and side yard façades facing public streets shall be maintained in the same general location and at the same general scale as original openings or be consistent with neighboring properties. 
6.  Projects involving structural improvements or façade renovations to existing structures must provide structural detail and ornamentation that is consistent with the underlying design of the original building. 
7.  The primary front entrances of all residential buildings shall face toward the public street. Street frontage wall spaces shall provide visual relief to large blank wall areas with the use of windows or doorways and other architectural ornamentation. 
b.  Building entrances for multiple dwellings. Main entrances should be clearly demarcated by one of the following: 
1.  Covered porch or canopy. 
2.  Pilaster and pediment. 
3.  Other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes the main entrance. Simple "trim" around the doorway does not satisfy this requirement. 
c.  Building scale for multiple dwellings. Street facing walls that are greater than 50 feet in length shall be articulated with bays, projections or alternating recesses according to the following suggested guidelines: 
1.  Bays and projections should be at least six feet in width and at least 16 inches, but not more than six feet in depth. Recesses should be at least six feet in width and have a depth of at least 16 inches. 
2.  The bays, projections and recesses should have corresponding changes in roofline or, alternatively, should be distinguished by a corresponding change in some architectural elements of the building such as roof dormers, alternating exterior wall materials, a change in window patterns, the addition of balconies, variation in the building or parapet height or variation in architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals or stone accents. 
d.  Building scale for commercial buildings and mixed-use buildings. The width of the front façade of new commercial and mixed-use buildings shall be no more than 40 feet. Buildings may exceed this limitation if the horizontal plane of any street-facing façade of a building is broken into modules that give the appearance or illusion of smaller, individual buildings. Each module should satisfy the following suggested guidelines that give the appearance of separate, individual buildings: 
1.  Each module should be no greater than 30 feet and no less than ten feet in width and should be distinguished from adjacent modules by variation in the wall plane of at least 16 inches depth. For buildings three or more stories in height the width module may be increased to 40 feet. 
2.  Each module should have a corresponding change in roof line for the purpose of separate architectural identity. 
3.  Each module should be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least one of the following means: 
(i)  Variation in material colors, types, textures. 
(ii)  Variation in the building and/or parapet height. 
(iii)  Variation in the architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals, stones or tile accent. 
(iv)  Variation in window pattern. 
(v)  Variation in the use of balconies and recesses. 
e.  Balconies and exterior walkways, corridors and lifts serving multi-unit residences. 
1.  Exterior stairways refer to stairways that lead to floors and dwelling units of a building above the first or ground level floor of a building. Exterior corridors refer to unenclosed corridors located above the first floor or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways, exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following: 
(i)  Materials must generally match or be complementary to the building materials utilized on that portion of a building where the exterior corridor or balcony is established. 
(ii)  Unpainted wooden materials are expressly prohibited. 
(iii)  Stained or painted wood materials may only be utilized if said material and coloration is guaranteed for long-term wear and the material is compatible with the principal building materials on that portion of the building where the exterior corridor is established. 
(iv)  The design of any balcony, exterior stairway, exterior lift or exterior corridor must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or complementary to the design and materials used on that portion of the building where the feature is established. 
(v)  Exterior stairways, exterior lifts, corridors and balconies must be covered with a roof similar in design and materials to the roof over the rest of the structure. Said roof shall be incorporated into the overall roof design for the structure. Alternatively, such features (stairways, lifts, corridors or balconies) may be recessed into the façade of the building. 
(vi)  Exterior corridors may not be located on a street-facing wall of the building. 
2.  Exterior fire egress stairways serving second floor or higher floors of multi-unit residences shall be allowed according to city requirements on existing buildings that otherwise are not able to reasonably satisfy city fire safety code requirements, provided the fire egress stairway or structure is not located on the front door wall of a building that faces a street. All such egress structures that are located on the front door wall of a building that faces a street, whether new or replacement of an existing egress structure, shall be subject to review by the commission and approval by the city council. Areas of review shall be general design, materials utilized and location of the proposed egress structure. On corner lots, if a side street-facing mandated access is necessary and other options are unavailable, the side-street facing wall shall be used for this egress structure. In any case, fire egress stairways must utilize similar materials as outlined above; i.e., no unpainted wooden material shall be allowed. 
f.  Building materials for multiple dwellings, commercial, and mixed-use buildings. 
1.  For multiple dwellings, at least 30 percent of the exterior walls of the front façade level of a building must be constructed with a masonry finish such as fired brick, stone or similar material, not to include concrete blocks and undressed poured concrete. Masonry may include stucco or similar material when used in combination with other masonry finishes. The following trim elements shall be incorporated into the exterior design and construction of the building, with the following recommended dimensions to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis: 
(i)  Window and door trim that is not less than three inches wide. 
(ii)  Corner boards that are not less than three inches wide unless wood clapboards are used and mitered at the corners. 
(iii)  Frieze boards not less than five inches wide, located below the eaves. 
2.  For commercial and mixed-use buildings, street-facing façades shall be comprised of at least 30 percent brick, stone, or terra cotta. These high quality materials should be concentrated on the base of the building. In the C-3 District, on street-facing façades, a minimum of 70 percent of the ground level floor between two and ten feet in height above the adjacent ground level shall consist of clear and transparent storefront windows and doors that allow views into the interior of the store. Exceptions may be allowed for buildings on corner lots where window coverage should be concentrated at the corner, but may be reduced along the secondary street façade. The bottom of storefront windows shall be no more than two feet above the adjacent ground level, except along sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to the extent possible so that views into the interior of the store are maximized and blank walls are avoided. 
3.  Any portion of a building with a side street façade must be constructed using similar materials and similar proportions and design as the front façade. 
4.  Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber materials are prohibited along any façade that faces a street-side lot line (i.e., public street frontage). 
5.  Where an exterior wall material changes along the horizontal plane of a building, the material change must occur on an inside corner of the building. 
6.  For buildings where the exterior wall material on the side of the building is a different material than what is used on the street facing or wall front, the street facing or wall front material must wrap around the corners to the alternate material side of the building at least three additional feet. 
7.  Where an exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band such as a belt course, soldier course, band board or other trim to provide a transition from one material to another. 
(7)  Commercial district. The College Hill neighborhood commercial district is defined by the boundaries of the C-3 Commercial District. The district is made up primarily of commercial buildings and mixed-use buildings. However, some properties are occupied or may be occupied in the future by residential buildings. Residential buildings are to be discouraged due to the limited area available for commercial uses. Standards for residential buildings are set forth below. Dwelling units are permitted on upper floor(s) of mixed-use buildings, as set forth below. Certain uses are considered conditional uses or prohibited uses in the College Hill Neighborhood commercial district, as specified below. 
a.  Residential buildings. Residential buildings are allowable within the district subject to planning and zoning commission and city council review and approval. In general, residential buildings are to be discouraged within the commercial district due to the limited area available for commercial establishments. In those cases where a residential building is permitted, it will be governed by minimum lot area, lot width and building setback requirements as specified in the R-4 Residential Zoning District. In addition, all other applicable requirements pertaining to substantial improvements or new construction of any residential building shall conform to the requirements of this section, including on-site parking, landscaping, and building setbacks, with no vehicular parking allowed in the required front and side yards, said required yards being those as defined within the R-4 Residential District. 
b.  Residential dwelling units within mixed-use buildings. Residential dwelling units are allowed on upper floors of a mixed-use building. No residential dwelling unit may be established on the main floor or street level floor of a mixed-use building within the C-3 Commercial District. To provide safe access for residents of the building, there must be at least one main entrance on the street-facing façade of the building that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units within the building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage or from a rear or side entrance. 
c.  Additional standards for mixed-use and non-residential buildings . To foster active street frontages, non-residential and mixed-use buildings must be placed to the front and corner of lots, and set back a minimum of zero feet and maximum of 15 feet from street-side lot lines. The ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height shall be 14 feet minimum. Entries to individual ground floor tenant spaces and entries to common lobbies accessing upper floor space shall open directly onto public sidewalks or publicly-accessible outdoor plazas. Thresholds at building entries shall match the grade of the adjacent sidewalk or plaza area. Entries on street-facing façades shall be sheltered by awnings or canopies that project a minimum of four feet from the building façade and must be a minimum of eight feet above the adjacent sidewalk. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as a conditional use subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. The proposed use must conform to the prevailing character of the district and such use shall not necessitate the use of outdoor storage areas. In addition such conditional uses must not generate excessive amounts of noise, odor, vibrations, or fumes, or generate excessive amounts of truck traffic. Examples of uses that may be allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit are: 
1.  Printing or publishing facility; 
2.  Limited manufacturing activity that is directly related to the operation of a retail business conducted on the premises; 
3.  Home supply business. 
d.  Prohibited uses. In all cases the following uses will not be allowed within the C-3 Commercial District either as permitted or conditional uses: 
1.  Lumber yards; 
2.  Used or new auto sales lots and displays; 
3.  Auto body shop; 
4.  Storage warehouse or business; 
5.  Mini-storage warehouse; 
6.  Sheet metal shop; 
7.  Outdoor storage yard; 
8.  Billboard signs. 
e.  Signage. 
1.  Typical business signage shall be permitted without mandatory review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council unless a proposed sign projects or extends over the public right-of-way, or a freestanding pole sign is proposed which is out of character with the prevailing height or size of similar signs, in which case planning and zoning commission review and approval by the city council shall be required. All signage within the district shall conform to the general requirements of this zoning chapter, with the exception that excessively tall freestanding signs (i.e., 30 feet or more in height) shall not be allowed. 
2.  Exterior mural wall drawings, painted artwork and exterior painting of any structure within the commercial district shall be subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council for the purpose of considering scale, context, coloration, and appropriateness of the proposal in relation to nearby façades and also in relation to the prevailing character of the commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 2939, 5-6-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2939, adopted May 6, 2019, repealed the former § 26-181, and enacted a new § 26-181 as set out herein. The former § 26-181 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-160), adopted May 7, 2018. 
Sec. 26-182. - MPC Major Thoroughfare Planned Commercial District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The major thoroughfare planned commercial zoning district is intended to provide for the orderly growth and development of land immediately adjacent to University Avenue and other transportation corridors and in similarly situated portions of the city. The district is intended to permit the development of a mixture of residential, institutional, professional office and commercial oriented land uses in a manner that will result in minimal negative impacts upon adjacent low density residential zoning districts or residential uses. It is also intended that development within the district will conform to sound land use planning and building design principles as outlined herein. Specific planning objectives include: 
(1)  To establish uses that do not overburden or conflict with available public infrastructure including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer services, or traffic flow and access patterns. 
(2)  To establish effective and efficient pedestrian and traffic circulation patterns within the development site while also providing sufficient on-site parking areas. 
(3)  To provide minimum standards for open space and landscaping areas within the development site in order to enhance the appearance of the community. 
(b)  Principal permitted uses; prohibited uses. 
(1)  The following land uses may be allowed: 
a.  Multi-unit residences not to exceed a density of ten units per acre. 
b.  Funeral homes. 
c.  Hotels/motels in which retail shops may be operated for the convenience of the occupants of the building. 
d.  Any professional office or professional service activity. 
e.  Any local retail business or service establishment such as: 
1.  Animal hospital or veterinary clinic, provided all phases of the business conducted upon the premises be within a building where noises and odors are not evident to adjacent properties. 
2.  Antique shop. 
3.  Apparel shop. 
4.  Bakery whose products are sold only at retail and only on the premises. 
5.  Financial institution. 
6.  Barbershop or beauty parlor. 
7.  Bicycle shop, sales and repair. 
8.  Bookstore. 
9.  Candy shops, where products are sold only at retail and only on the premises. 
10.  Clothes cleaning and laundry pickup station. 
11.  Collection office of public utility. 
12.  Dairy store, retail. 
13.  Dance or music studio. 
14.  Drapery shop. 
15.  Drugstore. 
16.  Florist and nursery shop, retail. 
17.  Fruit and vegetable market. 
18.  Furniture store. 
19.  Gift shop. 
20.  Delicatessen. 
21.  Hardware store. 
22.  Hobby shop. 
23.  Household appliances, sales and repair. 
24.  Jewelry shop. 
25.  Key shop. 
26.  Launderette. 
27.  Locker plant for storage and retail sales only. 
28.  Music store. 
29.  Paint and wallpaper store. 
30.  Post office substation. 
31.  Photographic studio. 
32.  Radio and television sales and service. 
33.  Restaurant. 
34.  Shoe repair shop. 
35.  Sporting goods store. 
36.  Tailor shop. 
(2)  Expressly prohibited uses: 
a.  Auto repair shops or auto sales lots. 
b.  Storage warehouse. 
c.  Lumberyards. 
d.  Taverns. 
e.  Mobile home parks. 
f.  Any light manufacturing, fabricating or assembly use. 
g.  Gasoline station. 
h.  Off-premises billboard signs. 
(c)  Land use approval guidelines. Specifically permitted land uses may be limited in size upon site plan review by the planning and zoning commission and city council if it is determined that the proposed development will overburden local infrastructure services (i.e., sanitary sewer, storm sewer, utilities) or if the projected traffic demand will conflict or interfere with normal traffic flow patterns on adjacent roadways. 
(d)  Method of approval. Submittal of a request to zone or rezone one or more parcels of land to the major thoroughfare planned commercial district (MPC) shall be accompanied by a detailed development site plan. In addition, site plans shall be accompanied with traffic demand analyses, detailed descriptions of stormwater runoff control measures, and estimated sanitary sewer load estimates. Zoning approval shall coincide with development site plan approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(e)  Site plan revisions. If, in the judgment of the city planner, substantial or major changes are made to the site plan at the time of building permit application the site plan shall be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission in the manner of the original application. Major site plan changes shall include, but not be limited to, building location, building size, reduction in parking area, reduction in building setbacks, or reduction of open space or landscaped areas. Land use changes that require increased parking areas or that generate excessive traffic demand shall also be considered to be a major change. 
(f)  Minimum site development requirements. Development within the MPC district shall be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Building setbacks. 
a.  Front yard setback: 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard setback: Ten feet, unless the development abuts a residential zone or residential use at the time of development, in which case not less than 20 feet. 
c.  Rear yard setback: 20 feet unless the development abuts a residential zoning district or residential use in which case not less than 30 feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 150 feet, except in those situations where a single lot containing less than the minimum required lot width is located between parcels zoned for commercial purposes. 
(3)  Open space requirements. The required yards (i.e., building setbacks) as specified herein shall be maintained as open landscaped areas and shall consist primarily of grass or other vegetative material. No portion of any building or parking area shall be permitted within the required yard area. Accessways or driveways will be permitted across the front yard area but shall not be permitted across the side yard or rear yard area. In addition to the open landscaped space provided by the required yards, those parcels or development sites exceeding one acre in total area shall provide open landscaped areas on at least five percent of the site. The additional five percent area shall be calculated for that portion of the property or development site exclusive of the required yard areas. 
(4)  Landscaping requirement. A minimum of 0.04 points per square foot of total lot area or total development site area must be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubs. The measured compliance table outlines the point schedule. 
(5)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage must be achieved in the city parking area (right-of-way). This point requirement shall be met through the establishment of trees. Planting shall comply with guidelines established by the city park division. 
(6)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
a.  Overstory trees. 
1.  Four inch caliper or greater: 100 points. 
2.  Three inch caliper or greater: 90 points. 
3.  Two inch caliper or greater: 80 points. 
b.  Understory trees. 
1.  Two inch caliper or greater: 40 points. 
2.  11/2 inch caliper or greater: 30 points. 
3.  One inch caliper or greater: 20 points. 
c.  Shrubs. 
1.  Five gallon or greater: Ten points. 
2.  Two gallon or greater: Five points. 
d.  Conifers. 
1.  Ten-foot height or greater: 100 points. 
2.  Eight-foot height or greater: 90 points. 
3.  Six-foot height or greater: 80 points. 
4.  Five-foot height or greater: 40 points. 
5.  Four-foot height or greater: 30 points. 
6.  Three-foot height or greater: 20 points. 
(7)  Building design. The architectural character, building materials and exterior colors of all proposed buildings shall be compatible with adjoining or nearby structures. The planning and zoning commission shall have the authority to review all building design components. 
(8)  Screening requirements. Any permitted use established within the district shall provide an effective visual screen or barrier if the use or property abuts a residential zoning district or residential use property. The screen may consist of vegetative material, brick or wooden wall or fence materials or a dirt berm measuring, at the time of installation, at least eight feet in height. The screen shall be located at the property line. 
(9)  Parking requirements. Any permitted use established within the UPC district shall meet on-site parking requirements as outlined in section 26-220. 
(10)  Building height. Maximum of 30 feet as measured from finished grade to the peak of the roof. However, building height may be increased if building setbacks are increased proportionately. 
(11)  Signage. Uses within the MPC district will be allowed, upon sign permit approval, to install on site signs that do not exceed the following criteria: 
a.  Accessory wall signs not to exceed ten percent of the surface area of any single wall to which the signs are affixed. 
b.  Directional signs limited to one sign per curb cut and limited in size to six square feet in area and no taller than four feet in height. 
c.  Accessory freestanding signs as follows: 
1.  Monument signs no taller than six feet in height nor larger than 40 square feet in area. 
2.  Number of signs limited to one sign per separate principal permitted structure. 
3.  No off-premises signs are permitted. 
(12)  Outdoor storage. No outdoor merchandise displays or storage of materials in an unenclosed outdoor storage area will be permitted. 
(13)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illustrate any sign, parking area, or any portion of the premises shall be situated in such a manner that the light is reflected from adjoining residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-161), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-183. - PO-1 Professional Office District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the following provisions are to promote and facilitate the development of comprehensively planned campus-like office parks with high quality building design, careful site planning, and neighborhood compatibility which are harmoniously designed to complement surrounding areas. 
(b)  Definition and locational criteria. The professional office district is established to promote low intensity business activity areas. Said district may be established within existing high density residential districts, in commercial districts as well as in undeveloped areas of the city that are indicated on the city land use plan as appropriate for professional office uses. 
(c)  Minimum site plan. In order to develop a comprehensively planned office district, a minimum site area of two acres shall be required. Smaller tracts may be applied for if the site is amendable to long-term planning and/or the site is in a location where the surrounding neighborhood dictates the need for careful site planning and building design. 
(d)  Principal permitted use. The following uses or similar uses are permitted: 
(1)  Professional services, administrative offices. 
(2)  Medical offices and facilities. 
(3)  Educational, vocational facilities. 
(4)  Recreational clubs with indoor facilities. 
(5)  Limited retail commercial or food services primarily intended to serve the needs of business tenants, and employees within the identified office district. 
(6)  Telemarketing offices. 
(7)  Financial services. 
(8)  Television, radio studios, not to include attendant transmitting stations or towers exceeding the maximum height allowed within the district. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses or similar uses are prohibited: 
(1)  Commercial uses designed on a scale intended to serve the general community. Examples would be grocery store, movie theatre, larger retail center, service station, furniture store, etc. 
(2)  Funeral homes. 
(3)  Residential uses. 
(4)  Group homes. 
(5)  Warehousing or shipping/transit facilities. 
(6)  Night clubs, taverns. 
(7)  Hotels, lodging facilities. 
(f)  Performance criteria. The uses established within the district will not, in their normal operations, produce noise perceptible from the zoning district boundary line nor will the uses generate smoke, heat, glare or truck traffic. The businesses within the district will not establish outdoor storage or display areas. 
(g)  Maximum building height. Forty-eight feet or four stories, whichever is less. 
(h)  Submittal requirements. Any person seeking approval of development within the district shall submit a detailed development site plan in conjunction with a request to establish the professional office district zoning on the property. Zoning approval cannot be given without an approved development site plan. Said site plan along with other pertinent development information shall be reviewed by the city planning and zoning commission and city council. Said review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture, and building architectural design. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan approve the plan as submitted, or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared plans detailing the following: 
(1)  Building locations. 
(2)  Streets, drives, accessways, sidewalks. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Landscape plan, open space areas. 
(5)  Pedestrian traffic plan. 
(6)  Architectural renderings of all sides of each building. 
(7)  Signage plan. 
(8)  List of expected uses within the development. 
(9)  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
(10)  Topographic features of the site including land and soils capability analysis. 
(11)  Natural drainageways, floodplain areas. 
(12)  Municipal utility locations. 
The plan shall be accompanied by a traffic generation analysis with particular attention to impacts upon surrounding roadways. The plan shall be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that will describe the timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary. 
(i)  Site development requirements. 
(1)  For comprehensively planned sites containing two acres or more, a setback area of 20 feet shall be provided around the perimeter of the development site. Said setback area shall remain in open landscaped green space where no structures or parking areas shall be established. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. 
(2)  For interior streets or principal accessways within the interior of said development site, a 20-foot setback consisting of open landscaped green space area shall be provided adjacent to, and on both sides of, said interior public right-of-way or principal accessway. No structure or parking areas will be allowed within this setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. All signage installed prior to September 19, 2016, shall be considered conforming signs. 
(3)  Structures established within said development site shall provide a minimum separation of 20 feet between other structures on the site. 
(4)  Commercial establishments, including retail and personal services, may be integrated into the principal office park area as a minor component of the overall plan. Said uses shall be viewed as secondary and accessory to the office park development and shall not be established until at least 25 percent of the planned office development is completed. 
(5)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required landscape area shall be ten percent of the total development site area of the district excluding the perimeter setback area as specified herein. It is the intent of this regulation that in larger development sites open space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one area of the site. A minimum of 0.02 points per square foot of total development site area shall be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubs. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission the required number of points result in an excessive number of plantings, up to ten percent of the total required points can be assigned to open green space at the rate of one point for each 500 square feet of open green space. 
(6)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage shall be required. 
(7)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, tree plantings and other vegetative treatments shall be required within and surrounding designated parking areas. The intent of this requirement shall be to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. It is recommended that at least one overstory tree be established for every 15 parking stalls or 2,500 square feet of parking space area. Said trees shall be provided a protected island and adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity. Shrubbery, understory trees, and landscaped berms are to be encouraged around the perimeter of all parking areas. 
(8)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping in all zones and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(j)  Design review. All structures established within the district shall be reviewed for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount in this review will include building materials, exterior materials on all sides, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof-mounted appurtenances, facades and signage. 
(1)  Proportion. The relationship between the width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building; the relationship of width to height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(2)  Roof shape, pitch, and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch, and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(3)  Pattern. Alternating solids and openings (wall to windows and doors) in the front facade and sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solids and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(4)  Materials and texture. The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and textures on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration shall be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
(5)  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(6)  Architectural features. Architectural features, including, but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights, prevailing in the immediate area, shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. 
(k)  Signage. The following signs may be established within the district: 
(1)  Wall signs. Wall signs not to exceed in total sign area ten percent of the surface area of the single wall to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for sign displays. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. 
(2)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  One main entrance sign may be located adjacent to the adjoining thoroughfare. Said sign shall be limited in overall height to 15 feet with a maximum sign area of 150 square feet. 
b.  Individual signs identifying specific uses may be established adjacent to interior accessways or streets. There shall be a minimum separation of 50 feet between said signs. 
1.  Single use signs shall be limited in overall height to eight feet with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet. 
2.  Multiple use signs containing displays of at least three or more uses may be established at a maximum height of 12 feet with a maximum sign area of 60 square feet. 
Particular uses may advertise on one but not on both types of interior freestanding side. 
c.  Directional signs, measuring no more than six feet in height and six square feet in area may be established for traffic management purposes at appropriate locations. One business logo or name will be permitted on each sign. 
d.  Signs may be illuminated with interior or exterior lighting. However, no blinking, flashing or chasing lights will be permitted. Digital message signs will be permitted. 
(3)  Signs not permitted. 
a.  Billboard signs. 
b.  Roof signs. 
c.  Signs as limited within section 26-256. 
(l)  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development plans deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner after city approval of such plans shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major or substantial changes include, but are not limited to: land use changes, building locations, residential densities, street alignments, parking lot arrangements, interior traffic patterns, landscaping plans, signage plan and building design elements. 
(m)  Change in use/reconstruction. No use established within the district shall be removed, altered or replaced by a new use without prior authorization by the city planner. No building or parking area shall be reconstructed or substantially altered in any fashion without preliminary review and approval by the city planner. If, in the judgment of the city planner the proposed change in use, proposed building reconstruction or parking lot alteration represents a substantial change from the originally approved district plan, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-162), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-184. - BR Business/Research Park District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the business/research park district is to provide for the establishment of planned business office and research facility parks. It is the goal of these regulations to encourage the establishment of employment and business centers that promote large scale high technology and other clean, light industries, research facilities and office centers that meet high aesthetic standards. 
(b)  Locational criteria. The business/research park district may be established in existing light industrial zoning districts as well as in undeveloped areas of the city that are indicated on the city land use plan as appropriate for a business/research park. 
(c)  Principle permitted uses. The following uses or similar uses are permitted: 
(1)  Research offices, laboratories and testing facilities provided that such facilities are entirely enclosed. 
(2)  Corporate headquarters, regional headquarters, administrative offices. 
(3)  Local service or professional service offices such as real estate, insurance, lawyers, doctor's office, financial institution. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted within the business/research park district subject to the review and approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said review is intended to determine the compatibility of said users with principal permitted users within the BR district: 
(1)  Light manufacturing where the manufacturing activity occurs entirely within the principal structure with no outdoor storage areas established and when said use is compatible with other uses within the district. 
(2)  Limited commercial/retail uses intended to serve the needs of the business tenants/employees only. Such permitted uses would include: restaurant, health club, convenience store, retail bakery shop, gift shop, post office substation, shoe repair, photographic studio, clothes, cleaning, barbershop, hair stylist. 
(e)  Uses not permitted. 
(1)  Any residential use. 
(2)  Warehouses including mini-storage warehouses. 
(3)  Any uses with physical and operational characteristics or requirements that generate substantial truck traffic, noise, odor, dust, glare, heat or vibrations, or of a character not compatible with the high aesthetic standards of the district. Examples of inappropriate use would include: wholesaling/warehousing, motor freight terminal, auto or truck storage or repair, machine shops, cabinet shop, animal hospitals, junk/iron storage, concrete mixing, sawmill, auto assembly, manufacture of pottery. 
(4)  Transmitting stations/communication towers in excess of the district height limitations. 
(5)  Hotels and motels. 
(f)  Submittal requirements. The owner or option purchaser of a tract of land within the business/research park district shall submit a development site plan to the planning and zoning commission and the city council following approval of business/research park district zoning. Development may occur on individually platted lots or a joint development may occur on common lands. Said development site plan review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture, and building architectural design. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan, approve the plan as submitted, or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared comprehensive plans detailing the following: 
(1)  Building locations. 
(2)  Streets, drives, accessways. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Landscape plan, open space areas. 
(5)  Pedestrian traffic plan, including sidewalks, bicycle paths. 
(6)  Architectural renderings of all sides of each building, including accessory structures. 
(7)  Signage plan. 
(8)  List of expected uses within the development. 
(9)  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
(10)  Topographic features of the site including land and soils capability analysis. 
(11)  Natural drainageways, floodplain areas. 
(12)  Municipal utility locations. 
The plan shall be accompanied by a traffic generation analysis with particular attention to impacts upon surrounding roadways. The plan shall be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that will describe the timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary. 
(g)  Site development standards. 
(1)  Setbacks. The following minimum building and parking lot setbacks shall apply to every building site in the district: 
Front yard 30 feet Side yard 10% of lot width (20 feet maximum) Rear yard 20 feet  
No portion of a principal building, accessory structure or parking lot shall extend into said required setback areas. 
(2)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required landscape area shall be 20 percent of the total development site area as specified herein. It is the intent of this regulation that in larger development sites open space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one area of the site. A minimum of 0.02 points per square foot of total development site area, exclusive of required setback areas, shall be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubs. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission the required number of points result in an excessive number of plantings, up to ten percent of the total required points can be assigned to open green space at the rate of one point for each 500 square feet of open green space. 
(3)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage shall be required. 
(4)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, tree plantings and other landscape treatments shall be required within designated parking areas. The intent of this requirement shall be to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. It is recommended that at least one overstory tree be established for every 15 parking stalls or 2,500 square feet of hard surfaced parking space area. Said landscape trees shall be provided with a protected island and adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity. Shrubbery, understory trees, and landscaped berms are to be required around the perimeter of all parking areas containing ten or more parking stalls. 
(5)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping in all zones and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(h)  Design review. All structures established within the district shall be reviewed for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount in this review will include building materials, exterior materials on all sides, coloration, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof-mounted appurtenances, facades and signage. 
(1)  Proportion. The relationship between the width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building; the relationship of width to height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(2)  Roof shape, pitch, and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch, and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(3)  Pattern. Alternating solids and openings (wall to windows and doors) in the front facade and sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solids and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(4)  Materials and texture. The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and textures on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration shall be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
(5)  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(6)  Architectural features. Architectural features, including, but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights, prevailing in the immediate area, shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. 
(i)  Signage. The following signs may be established within the district: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed in total sign area 20 percent of the surface area of the single wall to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for sign displays. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. 
(2)  Freestanding signs may include the following: 
a.  Single use signs shall be limited in overall height to eight feet with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet. 
b.  Multiple use signs containing displays of at least three or more uses may be established at a maximum height of 12 feet with a maximum sign area of 60 square feet. Individual uses may advertise on one but not on both types of interior freestanding sign. 
c.  Directional signs, measuring no more than six feet in height and six square feet in area may be established for traffic management purposes at appropriate locations. One business logo or name will be permitted on each sign. 
d.  Signs may be illuminated with interior or exterior lighting. However, no blinking, flashing or chasing lights will be permitted. Digital message signs will be permitted. 
(3)  Signs not permitted. 
a.  Billboard signs. 
b.  Roof signs. 
c.  Signs as limited within section 26-256. 
(j)  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development plans deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner after city approval of such plans shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major or substantial changes include, but are not limited to: land use changes, building locations, residential densities, street alignments, parking lot arrangements, interior traffic patterns, landscaping plans, signage plan and building design elements. 
(k)  Change in use/reconstruction. No use established within the district shall be removed, altered or replaced by a new use without prior authorization by the city planner. No building or parking area shall be reconstructed or substantially altered in any fashion without preliminary review and approval by the city planner. If, in the judgment of the city planner the proposed change in use, proposed building reconstruction or parking lot alteration represents a substantial change from the originally approved district plan, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-163), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-185. - MU Mixed Use Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The mixed use residential district is established for the purpose of accommodating integrated residential and neighborhood commercial land uses on larger parcels of land for the purpose of creating viable, self-supporting neighborhood districts. The mixed use residential district strives to encourage innovative development that incorporates high-quality building design, careful site planning, preservation of unique environmental features with an emphasis upon the creation of open spaces and amenities that enhance the quality of life of residents. 
(b)  Locational criteria. Mixed use residential districts may be established in high density residential, commercial zoning districts and in undeveloped areas of the city that are indicated on the city land use plan as appropriate for mixed use residential uses. 
(c)  Permitted uses; prohibited uses. 
(1)  The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Detached single-unit residences including manufactured housing. 
b.  Multiple unit dwellings. 
c.  Group homes. 
d.  Senior citizen centers/retirement communities. 
e.  Boardinghouses. 
f.  Religious institutions. 
g.  Educational facilities. 
h.  Professional offices/professional services. 
i.  Social clubs. 
j.  Recreational facilities (indoor and outdoor). 
k.  Day care facilities. 
l.  Hotels/motels. 
m.  Commercial uses including retail businesses and personal services establishments shall be permitted as limited herein: 
1.  Any use generally characterized as "neighborhood commercial" or commercial uses intended to serve surrounding residential areas. Examples of appropriate uses would include: grocery, drug store, restaurant, retail shops, gasoline station, bookstore, theatre, household appliance store, etc. 
2.  It is intended that this district be developed with a mixture of uses. Therefore, in order to attain this end an approved district development site plan shall indicate a majority of developable land area dedicated to uses other than detached single-unit residential development. Furthermore, no portion of a designated detached single-unit development may begin construction until construction has begun in other areas (i.e., multi-unit, commercial) of the district. 
(2)  Prohibited uses are as follows: 
a.  Billboards. 
b.  Transmitting stations/communication towers. 
c.  Warehousing, storage facilities. 
d.  Industrial uses. 
e.  Intensive commercial uses such as auto dealership, lumberyard, sheet metal, plumbing shops, recycling center, etc. 
(d)  Maximum building height. Principal structures shall be limited to overall height of 35 feet or three stories, whichever is less. Accessory structures shall be limited to 18 feet in overall height. 
(e)  Submittal requirements. The owner or option purchaser of a tract of land may seek approval of a mixed use residential zoning designation with the simultaneous submittal of a comprehensive development site plan. Zoning approval cannot be given without an approved development site plan. Said site plan along with other pertinent development information shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture, and building architectural design. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan, approve the plan as submitted, or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared comprehensive plans detailing the following: 
(1)  Building locations. 
(2)  Streets, drives, accessways. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Landscape plan, open space areas. 
(5)  Pedestrian traffic plan, including sidewalks, bicycle paths. 
(6)  Architectural renderings of all sides of each building, including accessory structures. 
(7)  Signage plan. 
(8)  List of expected uses within the development. 
(9)  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
(10)  Topographic features of the site including land and soils capability analysis. 
(11)  Residential densities. 
(12)  Natural drainageways, floodplain areas. 
(13)  Municipal utility locations. 
(14)  Residential recreation or park areas. 
The plan shall be accompanied by a traffic generation analysis with particular attention to impacts upon surrounding roadways. The plan shall be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that will describe the timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary. 
(f)  Site development criteria. 
(1)  In order to develop a comprehensively planned mixed use district a minimum site area of ten acres shall be required. Smaller tracts may be applied for if the site is amendable to long-term planning and/or the site is in a location where the surrounding neighborhood dictates the need for careful site planning and building design. 
(2)  A minimum setback area consisting of open landscaped green space measuring 30 feet in width shall be established around the perimeter of the development site. No structures or parking areas shall be permitted within said setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. This minimum setback area may be reduced to 20 feet on tracts measuring less than ten acres in area subject to review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(3)  Additional setbacks shall be required within the district immediately adjacent to interior streets and principal accessways. Said minimum setbacks shall be 20 feet and shall consist of open landscape green space in which no structure or parking area shall be established. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. All signage installed prior to September 19, 2016 shall be considered conforming signs. 
(4)  A minimum separation of 20 feet shall be maintained between principal structures established within the district. Accessory structures shall conform to the requirements as specified in section 26-126. No detached accessory structures shall be established in front yard areas. 
(5)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required landscape area shall be ten percent of the total development site area excluding the perimeter setback area as specified herein. It is the intent of this regulation that in larger development sites open space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one area of the site. It is also the intent of this section that for larger residential developments common open space or park areas shall be established for the use and enjoyment of residents. A minimum of 0.02 points per square foot of total development site area shall be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubs. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission the required number of points result in an excessive number of plantings, up to ten percent of the total required points can be assigned to open green space at the rate of one point for each 500 square feet of open green space. 
(6)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage shall be required. 
(7)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, tree plantings and other landscape treatments shall be required within and surrounding designated parking areas. The intent of this requirement shall be to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. It is recommended that at least one overstory tree be established for every 15 parking stalls or every 2,500 square feet of parking space area. Said trees shall be provided a protected island and adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity. Shrubbery, understory trees, and landscaped berms are to be required around the perimeter of all parking areas containing ten or more parking stalls. 
(8)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(9)  Design review. All structures established within the district shall be reviewed for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount in this review will include building materials, exterior materials on all sides, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof-mounted appurtenances, facades and signage. 
a.  Proportion. The relationship between the width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building; the relationship of width to height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
b.  Roof shape, pitch, and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch, and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
c.  Pattern. Alternating solids and openings (wall to windows and doors) in the front facade and sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solids and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
d.  Materials and texture. The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and textures on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration shall be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
e.  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
f.  Architectural feature. Architectural features, including, but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights, prevailing in the immediate area, shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. 
(g)  Signage. Advertising or entrance signage shall be permitted for the various uses allowed within the district. Residential uses shall be permitted to establish signage in conformance with the general sign regulations for R-3 Residential Districts as specified in section 26-259. Signage for commercial, professional office or institutional uses shall be allowed with the following limitations: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed in total sign area 20 percent of the surface area of the single wall to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for sign displays. No wall sign shall extend more than four feet above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. 
(2)  Freestanding signs may include the following: 
a.  One main entrance sign may be located adjacent to the adjoining major thoroughfare. Said sign shall be limited in overall height to 20 feet with a maximum sign area of 200 square feet. 
b.  Individual signs identifying specific uses may be established adjacent to interior accessways or streets. There shall be a minimum separation of 150 feet between said signs. 
1.  Single use signs shall be limited in overall height to eight feet with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet. 
2.  Multiple use signs containing displays of at least three or more uses may be established at a maximum height of 12 feet with a maximum sign area of 60 square feet. 
Particular uses may advertise on one but not on both types of interior freestanding sign. 
c.  Directional signs, measuring no more than six feet in height and six square feet in area may be established for traffic management purposes at appropriate locations. One business logo or name will be permitted on each sign. 
d.  Signs may be illuminated with interior or exterior lighting. However, no blinking flashing or chasing lights will be permitted. Digital message signs will be permitted. 
(3)  Signs not permitted. 
a.  Billboard signs. 
b.  Roof signs. 
c.  Signs as limited within section 26-256. 
(h)  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development plans deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner after city approval of such plans shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major or substantial changes include, but are not limited to: land use changes, building locations, residential densities, street alignments, parking lot arrangements, interior traffic patterns, landscaping plans, signage plan and building design elements. 
(i)  Change in use/reconstruction. No use established within the district shall be removed, altered or replaced by a new use without prior authorization by the city planner. No building or parking area shall be reconstructed or substantially altered in any fashion without preliminary review and approval by the city planner. If, in the judgment of the city planner the proposed change in use or proposed building reconstruction or parking lot alteration represents a substantial change from the originally approved district plan, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-164), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-186. - HWY-1 Highway Commercial District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the following provisions are to promote and facilitate comprehensively planned commercial developments located adjacent to major transportation corridors and interchanges. It is further the purpose of these regulations to encourage high standards of building architecture and site planning which will foster commercial development that maximizes pedestrian convenience, comfort and pleasure. 
(b)  Definition and locational criteria. A highway commercial district is a commercial project containing general service facilities on larger tracts of land intended to serve the traveling public or for the establishment of regional commercial service centers. Said districts can be established adjacent to state or interstate highway corridors at sites best suited to serve the traveling public. 
(c)  Minimum site plan. A highway commercial zoning district designation may be applied to tracts of land measuring at least two acres in area and in locations clearly intended to service an adjacent highway. 
(d)  Permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Regional shopping centers. 
(2)  Hotels, motels. 
(3)  Restaurants. 
(4)  Truck stop. 
(5)  Motor vehicle sales and display. 
(6)  Mobile home/travel trailer sales and display. 
(7)  Service stations with auto repair as a secondary use. 
(8)  Any commercial or retail use intended to serve the traveling public or a regional customer base. 
(9)  Auto repair shops. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses and similar uses will not be permitted within the district: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(2)  Manufacturing or fabricating facilities. 
(3)  Warehousing facilities. 
(4)  Billboards. 
(5)  Transmitting station/communication towers. 
(6)  Religious or educational institutions that serve primarily the local population. 
(7)  Auto body shops as a principal use. 
(8)  Any use with physical and operational characteristics or requirements that generate substantial noise, odor, dust, glare, heat or vibrations, or of a character not compatible with the high aesthetic standards of a regional commercial service district. Examples of uses that would be considered unacceptable would include: motor freight terminal, machine shop, cabinet shop, animal hospital and small engine repair. 
(9)  Junkyards or vehicle parts yards. 
(f)  Outdoor storage or display. Outdoor storage or display areas generally oriented towards a public view shall be prohibited. Temporary or seasonal displays may be permitted on a limited basis only upon approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Auto dealership, travel trailer or mobile home display plans must also be reviewed by the commission and city council. 
(g)  Submittal requirements. The owner or option purchaser of a tract of land may seek approval of a highway commercial district zoning designation with the simultaneous submittal of a comprehensive development site plan. Zoning approval cannot be given without an approved development site plan. Said site plan along with other pertinent development information shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture, and building architectural design. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan, approve the plan as submitted, or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared comprehensive plans detailing the following: 
(1)  Building locations. 
(2)  Streets, drives, accessways. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Landscape plan, open space areas. 
(5)  Pedestrian traffic plan, including sidewalks. 
(6)  Architectural renderings of all sides of each building, including accessory structures. 
(7)  Signage plan. 
(8)  List of expected uses within the development. 
(9)  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
(10)  Topographic features of the site including land and soils capability analysis. 
(11)  Natural drainageways, floodplain areas. 
(12)  Municipal utility locations. 
The plan shall be accompanied by a traffic generation analysis with particular attention to impacts upon surrounding roadways. The plan shall be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that will describe the timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary. 
(h)  Site development requirements. 
(1)  Setbacks. A 20-foot setback consisting of landscape material shall be established around the perimeter of the district. No structure or parking areas will be allowed within this setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. 
(2)  If the development site includes internal streets or principal accessways a 20-foot setback consisting of landscape material shall be provided adjacent to said street right-of-way or principal accessway. No structure or parking areas will be allowed within this setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. All signage installed prior to September 19, 2016, shall be considered conforming signs. 
(3)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required landscape area shall be ten percent of the total development site area of the required district excluding the perimeter setback area as specified herein. It is the intent of this regulation that in larger development sites open space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one area of the site. A minimum of 0.02 points per square foot of total development site area shall be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubbery. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission the required number of points result in an excessive number of plantings, up to ten percent of the total required points can be assigned to open green space at the rate of one point for each 500 square feet of open green space. 
(4)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage shall be required. 
(5)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, tree plantings and other landscape treatments shall be required within designated parking areas. The intent of this requirement shall be to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. It is recommended that at least one overstory tree be established for every 15 parking stalls or 2,500 square feet of hard surfaced parking space area. Said trees shall be provided with a protected island and adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity. Shrubbery, understory trees, or landscape berms are to be required around the perimeter of all parking areas containing ten or more parking stalls. 
(6)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping in all zones and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(7)  Design review. All structures established within the district shall be reviewed for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount in this review will include building materials, exterior materials on all sides, coloration, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof-mounted appurtenances, facades and signage. 
a.  Proportion. The relationship between the width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building; the relationship of width to height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
b.  Roof shape, pitch, and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch, and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
c.  Pattern. Alternating solids and openings (wall to windows and doors) in the front facade and sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solids and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
d.  Materials and texture. The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and textures on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration shall be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
e.  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
f.  Architectural features. Architectural features, including, but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights, prevailing in the immediate area, shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. 
(i)  Signage. The following signs may be established within the district (HWY-1 Commercial District): 
(1)  Walls signs not to exceed in total area 20 percent of the surface area of the single wall to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for sign displays. No wall sign shall extend more than four feet above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. 
(2)  Freestanding signs including "pole signs" and monument signs are to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the commission and city council. It is the intent of this subsection to limit the size, height and number of on-premises signs for each permitted use with the objective of discouraging sign clutter and to encourage the highest aesthetic standards for the development site. The following guidelines and/or limitations shall be followed when evaluating proposed on site signage: 
a.  The maximum allowable sign height of any single freestanding sign is 40 feet. No single use is permitted more than one 40-foot tall sign. The maximum allowable square footage for all freestanding signs combined is 250 square feet for each separately developed and platted parcel. 
b.  It is recommended, though not required, that signs located in the yard area nearest the adjacent major roadway be limited to a maximum height of 25 feet above the surface of the roadway or 40 feet, whichever is less. The commission and council may deviate from this recommended standard in consideration of the following circumstances: unusually large site; ten acres or more; unusual topographic circumstances that limit visibility of signage. In no case, however, shall signs be taller than 40 feet be permitted. 
c.  It is the intent of this subsection that signage permits and allowances pertaining to height and area be consistent throughout the district so that all uses are treated equally. 
(3)  Directional signs, measuring no more than six feet in height and six square feet in area may be established for traffic management purposes at appropriate locations. One business logo or name will be permitted on each sign. 
(4)  Signs may be illuminated with interior or exterior lighting. However, no blinking, flashing, or chasing lights will be permitted. Digital message signs will be permitted. 
(5)  Signs not permitted are as follows: 
a.  Billboard signs. 
b.  Roof signs. 
c.  Signs as limited with section 26-256. 
(j)  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development plans deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner after city approval of such plans shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major or substantial changes include, but are not limited to: land use changes, building locations, residential densities, street alignments, parking lot arrangements, interior traffic patterns, landscaping plans, signage plan and building design elements. 
(k)  Change in use/reconstruction. No use established within the district shall be removed, altered or replaced by a new use without prior authorization by the city planner. No building or parking area shall be reconstructed or substantially altered in any fashion without preliminary review and approval by the city planner. If, in the judgment of the city planner the proposed change in use, proposed building reconstruction or parking lot alteration represents a substantial change from the originally approved district plan, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-165), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-187. - PC-2 Planned Commercial District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the following provisions are to promote and facilitate imaginative and comprehensively planned commercial developments which are harmoniously designed to complement the surrounding community. It is further the purpose of these regulations to encourage high standards of building architecture and site planning which will foster commercial development that maximizes pedestrian convenience, comfort and pleasure. 
(b)  Definition and locational criteria. A planned community commercial district is a predominantly commercial project containing retail and general services facilities on larger tracts of land that is designed and improved in accordance with a comprehensive project plan. Said district can be established within any existing commercial zoning district or in undeveloped areas of the city that are indicated on the city land use plan as appropriate for community commercial uses. 
(c)  Minimum site plan. A planned community commercial district may be applied to tracts measuring at least ten acres in area. Smaller tracts may be applied for if the site is amenable to long-term planning and/or the site is in a location where the surrounding neighborhood dictates the need for careful site planning and building design. 
(d)  Permitted uses. Principal permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted within commercial zoning districts unless herein limited. 
(2)  Multi-unit residential uses shall be permitted subject to site plan review. No more than 20 percent of the district may be devoted to residential uses; however, a greater percentage may be allowed if the residential development is clearly intended to serve as a buffer between the commercial development and adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  Professional offices. 
(4)  Hotels, lodging facilities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. The following uses and similar uses will not be permitted within the district: 
(1)  Any use with physical and operational characteristics or requirements that generate substantial truck traffic, noise, odor, dust, glare, heat or vibrations, or of a character not compatible with the high aesthetic standards of the district. Examples of uses that would be considered to be unacceptable would include: wholesaling/warehousing motor freight terminal, auto or truck repair shops, machine shops, cabinet shop, animal hospital, monument sales, recycling center, small engine repair shop, funeral parlor, mobile home sales. 
(2)  Billboards. 
(3)  Single- and two-unit residences. 
(f)  Outdoor storage or display. Outdoor storage or display areas generally oriented towards a public view shall be prohibited. Temporary or seasonal displays may be permitted on a limited basis only upon approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Auto dealership display plans must also be reviewed by the commission and city council. 
(g)  Submittal requirements. The owner or option purchaser of a tract of land may seek approval of a planned community commercial zoning designation with the simultaneous submittal of a comprehensive development site plan. Zoning approval cannot be given without an approved development site plan. Said site plan along with other pertinent development information shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture, and building architectural design. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan, approve the plan as submitted, or, before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared comprehensive plans detailing the following: 
(1)  Building locations. 
(2)  Streets, drives, accessways. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Landscape plan, open space areas. 
(5)  Pedestrian traffic plan, including sidewalks, bicycle paths. 
(6)  Architectural renderings of all sides of each building, including accessory structures. 
(7)  Signage plan. 
(8)  List of expected uses within the development. 
(9)  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
(10)  Topographic features of the site including land and soils capability analysis. 
(11)  Natural drainageways, floodplain areas. 
(12)  Municipal utility locations. 
(13)  Residential densities. 
The plan shall be accompanied by a traffic generation analysis with particular attention to impacts upon surrounding roadways. The plan shall be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that will describe the timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary. 
(h)  Site development requirements. 
(1)  Setbacks. A 30-foot setback consisting of landscape material shall be established around the perimeter of the district. No structure or parking areas will be allowed within this setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. This minimum setback area may be reduced to 20 feet on tracts measuring less than ten acres in area subject to review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(2)  If the development site includes internal streets or principal accessways, a 20-foot setback consisting of landscape material shall be provided adjacent to said street right-of-way or principal accessway. No structure or parking areas will be allowed within this setback area. All signage shall provide a ten-foot setback from the property line along all public rights-of-way and principal accessways. All signage installed prior to September 19, 2016 shall be considered conforming signs. 
(3)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required landscape area shall be ten percent of the total development site area of the required district excluding the perimeter setback area as specified herein. 
a.  It is the intent of this regulation that in larger development sites open space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one area of the site. 
b.  A minimum of 0.02 points per square foot of total development site area shall be achieved with planting of a combination of trees and shrubbery. If, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission the required number of points result in an excessive number of plantings, up to ten percent of the total required points can be assigned to open green space at the rate of one point for each 500 square feet of open green space. 
(4)  Street tree planting. A minimum of 0.75 points per linear foot of street frontage shall be required. 
(5)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, tree plantings and other landscape treatments shall be required within designated parking areas. The intent of this requirement shall be to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. It is recommended that at least one overstory tree be established for every 15 parking stalls or 2,500 square feet of hard surfaced parking space area. Said trees shall be provided with a protected island and adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity. Shrubbery, understory trees, or landscape berms are to be required around the perimeter of all parking areas containing ten or more parking stalls. 
(6)  Measured compliance. The following point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping in all zones and shall be used in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(7)  Design review. All structures established within the district shall be reviewed for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount in this review will include building materials, exterior materials on all sides, coloration, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof-mounted appurtenances, facades and signage. 
a.  Proportion. The relationship between the width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building; the relationship of width to height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
b.  Roof shape, pitch, and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch, and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
c.  Pattern. Alternating solids and openings (wall to windows and doors) in the front facade and sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solids and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
d.  Materials and texture. The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and textures on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration shall be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
e.  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
f.  Architectural features. Architectural features including, but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights, prevailing in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. 
(8)  Residential component. If the development plan contains a residential/multi-unit component, at least 30 percent of the area devoted to said uses shall be open landscape area with the intention to reserve said area for common residential uses. Said residential structures shall be provided at least a 20-foot separation from other residential structures and at least 100-foot separation from any commercial building, accessory structure or parking lot serving the commercial facility. Furthermore, a solid screen measuring at least eight feet in height and consisting of a combination of landscape materials and fence or wall material shall be established between the commercial area and the residential area. 
(i)  Signage. The following signs may be established within the district: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed in total sign area 20 percent of the surface area of the single wall to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for sign displays. No wall sign shall extend more than four feet above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. 
(2)  Freestanding signs may include the following: 
a.  One main entrance sign may be located adjacent to the adjoining major thoroughfare. Said sign shall be limited in overall height to 20 feet with a maximum sign area of 200 square feet. 
b.  Individual signs identifying specific uses may be established adjacent to interior accessways or streets. There shall be a minimum separation of 150 feet between said signs. 
1.  Single use signs shall be limited in overall height to eight feet with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet. 
2.  Multiple use signs containing displays of at least three or more uses may be established at a maximum height of 12 feet with a maximum sign area of 60 square feet. 
Particular uses may advertise on one but not on both types of interior freestanding sign. 
c.  Directional signs, measuring no more than six feet in height and six square feet in area may be established for traffic management purposes at appropriate locations. One business logo or name will be permitted on each sign. 
d.  Signs may be illuminated with interior or exterior lighting. However, no blinking, flashing or chasing lights will be permitted. Digital message signs will be permitted. 
(3)  Signs not permitted are as follows: 
a.  Billboard signs. 
b.  Roof signs. 
c.  Signs as limited within section 26-256. 
(j)  Site plan revisions/amendments. All changes, modifications, revisions and amendments made to development plans deemed to be major or substantial by the city planner after city approval of such plans shall be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally required. Examples of major or substantial changes include, but are not limited to: land use changes, building locations, residential densities, street alignments, parking lot arrangements, interior traffic patterns, landscaping plans, signage plan and building design elements. 
(k)  Change in use/reconstruction. No use established within the district shall be removed, altered or replaced by a new use without prior authorization by the city planner. No building or parking area shall be reconstructed or substantially altered in any fashion without preliminary review and approval by the city planner If, in the judgment of the city planner the proposed change in use, proposed building reconstruction or parking lot alteration represents a substantial change from the originally approved district plan, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-166), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-188. - HWY-20 Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District is intended to provide enhanced development guidelines for commercial uses established in the roadway corridor situated on property located a specified distance north of Ridgeway Avenue extending southward to state Highway 20 and also extending from the east city limits to the westerly city limits. The Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District regulations strive to encourage high quality commercial development at key "entry points" into the city that will incorporate adequate open green space areas, on site landscaping, high quality building architectural design and adequate visual screening of outdoor storage or display areas. The Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District regulations will be applied in addition to the underlying zoning district regulations. 
(b)  Boundaries. The HWY-20 Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District boundaries are legally described in attachment A to this chapter (Said attachment is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk). 
(c)  Permitted uses. The following uses or similar uses are permitted: Any commercial use permitted in the underlying zoning districts (generally anticipated to be either HWY-1 or PC-2 commercial districts). Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Regional shopping centers. 
(2)  Hotels, motels. 
(3)  Restaurants. 
(4)  Recreation vehicle/travel trailer sales, display and service; not to include manufactured housing or mobile home sales and displays. 
(5)  Vehicular service/auto repair centers. 
(6)  Any commercial or retail use intended to serve the traveling public or a regional commercial customer base unless herein limited. 
(7)  Any commercial use, including office uses, permitted in other commercial zoning districts unless herein limited. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses or similar uses are prohibited: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(2)  Manufacturing or fabricating facilities. 
(3)  Billboards. 
(4)  Transmitting station/communication towers. 
(5)  Warehousing facilities including mini-storage warehouses. 
(6)  Religious or educational institutions. 
(7)  Junkyards/vehicle parts yards. 
(8)  Manufactured housing/mobile home sales and display areas. 
(9)  Agricultural implement, equipment or tractor sales and display lots. 
(10)  Landscaping sales/materials storage lot as a principal permitted use. However, landscaping sales/materials lots may be established in conjunction with and accessory to a permitted commercial retail use. 
(11)  Any use with physical or operational characteristics that generate substantial noise, odor, dust, glare, heat or vibrations or of a character not compatible with the high aesthetic standards of a regional commercial service district. Examples of uses that would be considered unacceptable would include motor freight terminal, machine shop, cabinet shop, animal hospital, small engine repair, recycling center, auto body shop. 
(e)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted within the Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Factors to be evaluated in consideration of allowance of the following uses will involve proposed site location relative to key entry points into the city (i.e., in the vicinity of the Hudson Road and Highway 58 intersections with Ridgeway Avenue). It is recommended that the following uses be located on properties at least 300 feet from the Hudson Road and Highway 58 right-of-way lines. 
(1)  Truck stop. 
(2)  Automobile/truck sales and display. 
(3)  Service stations with auto repair as a secondary use. 
(4)  Religious facilities may be permitted if incorporated into a principal permitted commercial use where said religious component comprises less than 20 percent of the gross floor area of the permitted commercial building. Said religious uses incorporated within a permitted commercial use need not abide by the separation requirements specified herein (i.e., 300 feet from Hudson Road and Highway 58). 
(5)  Limited fabricating or manufacturing of products may occur on a limited basis within a principal permitted commercial building where said fabricating activity comprises less than ten percent of the gross floor area of the permitted commercial building. Said limited fabricating or manufacturing activities that are incorporated within a permitted commercial use need not abide by the separation requirements specified herein (i.e., 300 feet from Hudson Road and Highway 58). 
(f)  Minimum building standards. All allowable uses, including permitted and conditional uses specified herein, with the exception of restaurants, must establish minimum size building structures on the property/development site at the time of building construction following initial development site plan approval. The minimum size principal building structure, as measured in gross floor area, including all principal permitted structures, but excluding accessory structures, shall be at least 5,000 square feet gross floor area for the first acre of the proposed development site (or 11.47 percent of the first acre) and 3,500 square feet gross floor area (eight percent of each acre) for each additional acre over one acre in area. For those development sites less than one acre in area at the time of initial development site plan review at least ten percent of the development site shall be utilized in gross floor building area excluding accessory structures. 
(g)  Development site plan submittals. 
(1)  Prior to development or in conjunction with rezoning of any parcel of land within the Highway 20 Commercial Corridor Overlay District a detailed development site plan must be submitted for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Said development site plan review shall evaluate whether or not the proposed development plan conforms to the standards of the comprehensive plan, recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, landscape architecture and building architectural design. It is the intent of this section to encourage the highest standards of development at key entry points and along major roadway corridors of the city. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may: deny the plan, approve the plan as submitted, or before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan to the end that the plan preserves the intent and purpose of this section to promote the public health/safety and general welfare. All development plans must satisfy the minimum requirements specified herein. In addition, the planning and zoning commission and city council will have discretion in recommending revisions to submitted plans for those elements other than those specifically required herein. 
(3)  The petitioner shall submit at least five copies of professionally prepared comprehensive plans detailing the following information: 
a.  Building locations and size of buildings. 
b.  Streets, drives, access ways. 
c.  Parking lots with parking stall/driveway dimensions. 
d.  Landscape plan, open space plan, professionally prepared. 
e.  Pedestrian traffic/access plan, including sidewalks. 
f.  Color architectural renderings of each building facade, including accessory structures. 
g.  Signage plan. 
h.  List of expected uses within the development. 
i.  Stormwater detention and erosion control plans. 
j.  Topographic features of the site including soils information. 
k.  Existing vegetation with indication of which on site trees are to be removed or preserved. 
l.  Natural drainageways, floodplain. 
m.  Municipal utility locations. 
(4)  The development plan must be accompanied by a developmental procedures agreement that describes the proposed use, timing and phasing of the project and outline other development details as necessary, such as platting details or schedule, signage plans, conformance with landscaping, building design standards, establishment of outdoor storage areas, if permitted, etc. 
(h)  Site development requirements. 
(1)  Setbacks. A 20-foot setback consisting of permeable open green space/landscape material shall be established around the perimeter of the zoning district where the development site is located. If multiple lots or development sites are established within the established zoning district a 20-foot setback must be established adjacent to street right-of-ways or principal access ways. Zero setbacks are permitted between abutting development sites within the established zoning district. No structure, sign or parking areas will be allowed in the minimum required setback area. Sidewalks/trails and driveways/access points can cross the minimum required setback area subject to site plan review and approval. Said driveways/access points or sidewalks must be oriented generally perpendicular to the required setback area to the end that a minimum amount of open green space area within the required setback is encumbered with hard surface material. 
(2)  Landscaping/open space requirements. The minimum required open space/landscape area shall be 15 percent of the total development site. It is the intent of this section that on larger development sites open space and landscape areas are to be distributed throughout the development site rather than isolated in one or a few areas of the site. "Berming" features are encouraged as part of landscaping plans for the purpose of providing effective visual screens for large paved areas or storage areas. Berm features cannot substitute for minimum required landscaping points as specified herein. 
(3)  The landscaped area shall be planted with a combination of trees, shrubbery and similar vegetation to achieve a minimum of 0.02 landscaping points per square foot of total lot area. 
(4)  In conjunction with development site plan submittal existing vegetation and trees on the site must be identified. No existing trees on a development site at the time of site plan submittal may be removed without prior approval of a specific tree preservation plan by the planning and zoning commission and city council. The purpose of this provision is to protect natural attractiveness of sites in the vicinity of natural drainageways or pedestrian paths/trails or in other areas of the site. Existing on site landscaping/trees may be calculated into the required on site landscaping planting up to a total of 15 percent of the required on site landscaping requirement. Existing vegetation that is clustered in one or more portions of the development site can be considered in a portion of the landscaping plan, up to a maximum of 15 percent of the requirement. However, existing landscaping that is situated outside of or beyond the primary development/building site cannot substitute entirely for appropriate landscaping immediately adjacent to proposed building/parking lot areas or other improved areas or in the required yard areas. 
(5)  Street trees. In addition to the above requirement, a minimum of 0.75 landscaping points per linear foot of public street frontage shall be required in tree plantings. 
(6)  Parking areas. In addition to the open space and landscaping requirements specified herein, including street tree plantings, additional tree plantings and other landscape treatments shall be required within designated parking areas. It is the intent of this regulation to provide shade and visual relief in large parking areas. Landscaped islands within parking areas are encouraged. At least one tree must be established for every 15 parking stalls or 2,500 square feet of hard surface parking area. Shrubbery, landscape berms and trees must be established around the perimeter of all parking areas containing ten or more parking stalls. In certain circumstances parking lot landscape points may be counted towards the overall landscaping point requirement for the entire site subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(7)  Outdoor display and sales areas. Where permitted, larger outdoor sales or display areas will not be required to landscape the interior of the display/sales area. However, said sales or display area must be provided with an effective visual screen consisting of landscape plantings and/or berming around the perimeter of said area. 
(8)  Measured compliance. The following landscaping point schedule and conditions apply to required landscaping as specified herein and shall be utilized in determining achieved points for required planting: 
Overstory Trees 4 inch caliper or greater 100 points 3 inch caliper or greater 90 points 2 inch caliper or greater 80 points Understory Trees 2 inch caliper or greater 40 points 11/2 inch caliper or greater 30 points 1 inch caliper or greater 20 points Shrubs 5 gallon or greater 10 points 2 gallon or greater 5 points Conifers 10 foot height or greater 100 points 8 foot height or greater 90 points 6 foot height or greater 80 points 5 foot height or greater 40 points 4 foot height or greater 30 points 3 foot height or greater 20 points  
(i)  Signage. 
(1)  Wall signs are not to exceed in total area 20 percent of the surface area of the single wall face to which it is affixed. No more than two wall surfaces of any single structure may be utilized for wall sign displays. No wall sign shall extend more than four feet above the top of the wall face to which it is attached. Multiple signs may be placed on a single wall face; however, not to exceed the specified sign area limitation. 
(2)  Roof signs are prohibited. 
(3)  Freestanding signs including "pole signs" and monument signs are to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. It is the intent of this section to limit the size, height, and number of on-premises signs with the objective of discouraging sign clutter and to encourage the highest aesthetic standards for the district. All signage plans must be approved by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(4)  The maximum allowable height and size of any single freestanding sign is 25 feet height, 200 square feet in area. The maximum sign area may be achieved with the placement of multiple sign faces on the sign structure. No more than one 25-foot-tall sign will be allowed per parcel. Smaller monument signs, measuring no more than 15 feet in overall height and 150 square feet in sign area are also permitted, with a maximum of two such signs per parcel. Directional signage, limited to six feet in height and eight square feet in area may be allowed with a maximum of four directional signs allowed per parcel. 
(5)  In addition, no banner signs or pennant/flag signs or other temporary signs, including balloon or inflatable signs shall be permitted with the following exception: no more than two banner signs may be affixed to two wall faces (one banner per wall face) of the principal permitted building for a period not to exceed 60 days per year. This restriction does not pertain to displays of the American flag or similar state and national flags. Said flag displays, however, must be kept outside of the minimum required setback area of the site. 
(j)  Building design review. 
(1)  All structures proposed to be established within the district shall be subject to architectural review. The principal area of review is exterior building materials, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, colors of materials, roof-mounted appurtenances, architectural style, facade, signage and general compatibility with existing commercial structures on adjoining properties. Standards relating to architectural conformance or compatibility with nearby existing structures as outlined in the HWY-1 Highway Commercial District must be observed. 
(2)  All development site plans shall include submittal of professionally prepared architectural renderings/elevations of all sides of all proposed structures. Specific building materials and colors of said materials must be provided. 
(3)  The predominant external building materials of all structures shall be of masonry/stone/brick or similar material. Concrete materials shall be minimal. Stucco materials and/or E.I.F.S. materials are also acceptable if complemented with masonry materials. Glass materials including large window and doorway areas are encouraged. The prime "public view" wall faces of the structure (at least two wall faces), comprising at least 90 percent of said wall areas, must be made up of at least one or more of these specified preferred building materials. Sheet metal or steel sheeting wall materials are to be discouraged unless this is a minor component of the wall surface area of no more than one wall face of the building. Interior metal, steel or concrete structural building components are permitted. 
(4)  Metal roof systems are permitted provided that an appropriate color scheme complementing or accenting the rest of the structure coloration is maintained. 
(5)  Roof-mounted facilities or service appliances (i.e., heating/cooling/communication facilities) must be adequately screened or disguised from public view. 
(6)  Pole buildings, whether of metal construction or other external material, or similar structures are prohibited. 
(k)  Reconstruction/replacement of structures. 
(1)  All approved building sites and structures that are substantially altered, reconstructed or replaced are subject to site plan review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council as specified herein. The term "substantial or major alteration or replacement" means an expansion of an existing parking area of more than 25 percent of the originally approved area. Similar 25 percent or more expansions of other approved outdoor service, storage or display areas shall be considered "substantial." Said outdoor expansions, including parking areas, will not be allowed to reduce the minimum required on site open green space area or landscaping requirement. 
(2)  The term also relates to building renovations where a previously approved structure is being enlarged or repaired/reconstructed affecting at least 25 percent of the originally approved building area (either 25 percent or more expansion of the originally approved structure or repair/reconstruction of 25 percent or more of the original building). In addition, any roof repair or replacement that involves the use of new roofing material or a change in color of said roofing material will be considered a "substantial alteration" subject to review and approval. Any revisions to the exterior facade or wall face of any structure, regardless of percentage of wall area, for example, changing the predominant color of the structure or replacing/changing originally approved building materials, such as removing glassed areas, window areas, or replacing masonry materials with new and different materials are subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-167), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-189. - CBD Central Business District Overlay Zoning District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent . The purpose of the CBD, central business district overlay zoning district (hereinafter the "overlay district") is to provide guidance for future development in the specified area and to encourage continued successful business development in the downtown Cedar Falls area. The overlay district is intended to allow land uses and to encourage appropriate building design standards in a manner that complements and strengthens the downtown retail and service business sector. Originally developed as a compact, multi-functional, walkable environment, the overlay is intended to support pedestrian access and use. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to any other zoning district regulations and requirements in which the land may be classified. In case of conflict, the more specific standard shall apply. 
(b)  Boundaries. The CBD, central business district overlay boundaries are generally outlined in the image below. The legal description and official zoning map of the overlay is on file in the office of the city clerk. 

Figure 1 - CBD boundary map 
(c)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Allowable uses within the overlay district include typical commercial, professional office and service oriented businesses, uses or facilities, including hotels and lodging facilities, all such uses currently allowed in the C-1 commercial, C-2 commercial and C-3 commercial districts unless herein limited. If the underlying zoning district is more restrictive than the C-3 commercial district, then only those uses permitted in the more restrictive district shall be allowed. 
(2)  Residential uses are allowable subject to planning and zoning commission and city council review and approval. No residential use may be established on the ground floor of any building within the commercial area bounded by First Street south to Sixth Street from Washington Street east to State Street. Residential uses are encouraged to be established in upper levels of downtown commercial buildings (hereinafter referred to as "mixed-use buildings"). 
(d)  Conditional uses. Where some question arises whether a particular commercial use is appropriate within the overlay district, the use may be allowed subject to planning and zoning commission and city council review and approval, provided that the proposed use conforms to the prevailing character of the downtown area and provided that the use will not necessitate the use of outdoor storage areas. In addition, such uses must not generate excessive amounts of noise, odor, vibrations or fumes, or truck traffic. If the underlying zoning district is more restrictive than the C-3 commercial district, allowable conditional uses will be those generally compatible with the more restrictive standards of the underlying zoning district. Examples of uses that may be allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit are: 
(1)  Auto repair shop. 
(2)  Printing or publishing facility. 
(3)  Limited manufacturing activity that is directly related to the operation of a retail business conducted on the premises. 
(4)  Plumbing and heating shop. 
(5)  Sign painting shop. 
(6)  Appliance repair shop. 
(7)  Home supply business. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. In all cases the following uses will not be allowed within the overlay district either as permitted or conditional uses: 
(1)  Lumber yards. 
(2)  Used or new auto sales lots and displays. 
(3)  Auto body shop. 
(4)  Storage warehouse or business. 
(5)  Mini-storage warehouse. 
(6)  Sheet metal shop. 
(7)  Outdoor storage yard. 
(f)  Site plan review. Any proposed substantially improved or new building structure or development, including proposed residential facilities, must submit a detailed site plan and building plans for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to consult with Community Main Street's Design Guidelines and Design Committee as a design resource. Elements to be considered in this review process are proposed use, proposed building improvements or new structural elements, with particular attention to exterior building design elements, parking provision (see section 26-220 parking regulations), and how the proposed improvement or development will complement existing nearby uses and building design elements. 
"Substantial improvement" includes any new building construction within the overlay district or any renovation of an existing structure that involves any modification of the exterior appearance of the structure by virtue of adding or removing exterior windows or doors or altering the color or exterior materials of existing walls. All facade improvements, changes, alterations, modifications or replacement of existing facade materials will be considered a substantial improvement. Included in this definition are any new, modified or replacement awning structures or similar material extensions over the public sidewalk area. A substantial improvement also includes any increase or decrease in existing building height and/or alteration of the existing roof pitch or appearance. 
The following shall be exempt from site plan review: 
(1)  Existing detached single-unit and multi-unit dwellings containing less than seven units; not including mixed-use buildings. 
(2)  Routine repair or replacement of existing roof materials, awnings, or other minor façade elements that do not materially change the appearance, shape or configuration of the existing building will not be considered a "substantial improvement." 
(3)  Emergency repairs needed as the result of unanticipated building or facade damages due to events such as fire, vandalism, or weather related damages, provided that the needed repairs do not alter the appearance of the structure prior to the event causing the unanticipated damages. 
(g)  Parking. On-site parking in the downtown area will not be required for principal permitted commercial, professional office or service business uses or facilities. Any proposed residential use established within the overlay district must conform to the parking regulations described in section 26-220. 
(h)  Front setbacks . 
(1)  New commercial and mixed-use buildings shall be placed to the front and corner of lots, and set back a minimum of zero feet and maximum of ten feet from any street-side lot line. 
(2)  New residential or expansions of residential buildings shall be setback a minimum of ten feet. 
(i)  Building design review. All substantially improved or new building structures within the overlay district shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council for architectural compatibility with surrounding structures. Paramount to this review will be consideration of building materials, exterior building materials on all sides, coloration of materials, building height, roof line, size and location of windows and doors, roof mounted appurtenances, and facades. For the purposes of this section, when a building is located on a corner lot the primary street shall be the north-south street, with other streets being considered secondary. In addition to consideration of typical physical structural improvements to structures, review is also required of any wall painting, mural wall signs or painted artwork or other similar applications to exterior walls. The purpose of review of said exterior wall paintings or drawings is to ensure that said applications are consistent with the prevailing standards and character of the downtown area. The following design elements will be reviewed: 
(1)  Proportion. The relationship of width and height of the front elevations of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. An effort should be made to generally align horizontal elements along a street frontage, such as cornice lines, windows, awnings and canopies. The relationship of width and height of windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. Particular attention must be given to the scale of street level doors, walls and windows. Blank walls at the street level are to be discouraged. Elements such as windows, doors, columns, pilasters, and changes in materials, artwork, or other architectural details that provide visual interest must be distributed across the façade in a manner consistent with the overall design of the building. 
(2)  Roof shape, pitch and direction. The similarity or compatibility of the shape, pitch and direction of roofs in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. Routine repair and maintenance or replacement of existing roof materials will not be subject to review provided that the existing roof line and configuration is not altered during the course of said repairs or maintenance. 
(3)  Pattern. Alternating solid surfaces and openings (wall surface versus doors and windows) in the front facade, sides and rear of a building create a rhythm observable to viewers. This pattern of solid surfaces and openings shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. 
(4)  Building composition (See Figure 2). 
a.  To create visual interest and visually break up long building walls, facades on buildings greater than 50 feet in length shall be divided vertically into bays. Façade bays shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and a maximum 40 feet wide. The bays shall be distinctive but tied visually together by a rhythm of repeating vertical elements, such as window groupings, pilasters, window bays, balconies, changes in building materials and textures, and/or by varying the wall plane of the façade. 
b.  To avoid flat, continuous, and overly long upper floor facades, the maximum length of a wall plane of the façade is 60 feet. Articulation between continuous upper floor façade sections shall be accomplished by recessing the façade one-foot minimum for a distance of at least ten feet. This recessed section would count as a façade bay per paragraph (i), even if the width is less than 20 feet. 
c.  Storefronts in mixed-use buildings shall be distinguished from the upper floors by a horizontal element, such as a cornice, band board, or soldier course to create a distinctive base to the building. 
d.  For all mixed-use and commercial buildings, the minimum ground floor, floor-to-structural ceiling height is 14 feet. 

Figure 2 - Building composition example 
(5)  Windows and transparency : The size, proportion, and type of windows need to be compatible with existing neighboring buildings. For storefronts, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  A minimum of 70 percent of the storefront area between two and ten feet in height above the adjacent ground level shall consist of clear and transparent storefront windows and doors that allow views into the interior of the store. The bottom of storefront windows shall be no more than two feet above the adjacent ground level, except along sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to the extent possible so that views into the interior of the store are maximized and blank walls are avoided. Exceptions may be allowed for buildings on corner lots where window coverage should be concentrated at the corner, but may be reduced along the secondary street façade, and for repurposing of buildings not originally designed as storefront buildings (e.g. re-purposing of an industrial or institutional building). 
b.  Transom windows are encouraged above storefront display windows. Residential window types, reflective (mirrored), or colored glass are not allowed for storefronts. 
c.  Glazing should be clear and highly transparent to maximize views into the store. Low-E or tinted glazing will reduce transparency, so is discouraged for storefront windows, but if used, the glass chosen should have a high visible light transmittance and low reflectivity. 
d.  Removing storefront windows or reducing storefront window coverage is discouraged and will require planning and zoning commission and city council approval. 
(6)  Materials and texture: The similarity or compatibility of existing materials and texture on the exterior walls and roofs of the buildings in the immediate area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. A building or alteration will be considered compatible if the materials and texture used are appropriate in the context of other buildings in the immediate area. 
Street-facing façades shall be comprised of at least 50 percent brick, stone, or terra cotta. Side and rear walls shall be comprised of at least 25 percent brick, stone, or terra cotta. These high quality materials should be concentrated on the base of the building. 
The following materials may be used in limited amounts: 
a.  Fiber cement, aluminum, metal, pre-formed panels, painted wood, or anything similar-Up to 35 percent of any one siding material may be used on the street-facing façade and up to 40 percent of any other sides. These materials are not generally allowed for storefronts. Fiber cement board should be high quality and smooth-faced. Metal shall be heavy gauge and non-reflective. Durability and maintenance of the metal shall be carefully considered if used in high use areas. 
b.  Concrete and precast concrete-This includes site-poured or preformed concrete items. Use is limited to architectural elements such as window hoods, cornices, columns, capitals, etc. Architectural CMU may be used in combination with other materials such as brick, stone or terra cotta. Except for burnished/polished or glazed units, CMU is not generally allowed on the storefront level, however, architectural CMU, such as split-face, ground-face, and rock-face, may be used as an accent material on the storefront level. 
c.  EFIS may only be used for architectural detailing above the ground floor. 
d.  In the case of an unenclosed rear or roof deck, stained wood is permitted. 
(7)  Color. The similarity or compatibility of existing colors of exterior walls and roofs of buildings in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. Buildings in the CBD utilize earth and neutral tones; however, other colors can highlight the architectural features of a building and are acceptable as accents. Accents generally include trim areas and comprise up to 15 percent of the façade. Painting unpainted brick or stone is discouraged. 
(8)  Architectural features. Architectural features including but not limited to cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, fanlights and other elements prevailing in the area shall be considered in the construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features shall be suggestive of the extent, nature and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or associated with building alterations. 
(9)  Building entries. This section applies to new mixed use and commercial buildings. 
a.  Primary entries to ground floor building space and to common lobbies accessing upper floor building space shall be located along street-facing facades. For buildings with more than one street-facing façade, entries along facades facing primary streets are preferred. Building entries along rear and side facades or from parking garages may not serve as principal building entries. Buildings with more than three street-facing facades shall have building entries on at least two street-facing sides. 
b.  For buildings that contain residential dwelling units, there must be at least one main entrance on the street-facing façade or façade facing a prominent residential courtyard that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units within the building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage or from a rear or side entrance. 
c.  For storefronts with frontage of 100 feet or more, a visible entryway shall be provided a minimum of every 50 feet. 
d.  Entryways into a storefront will be at grade with the fronting sidewalks. 
e.  Entryways shall be designed to be a prominent feature of the building. The use of architectural features such as awnings, canopies, and recessed entries are encouraged. 
(10)  Exterior mural wall drawings, painted artwork, exterior painting. These elements shall be reviewed to consider the scale, context, coloration and appropriateness of the proposal in relation to nearby facades and also in relation to the prevailing character of the downtown area. Exterior painting of detached single unit and two-unit residential structures within the district shall be exempt from this provision. Other multi-unit dwelling structures will be subject to this review. 
(j)  Signage . All signage shall conform to requirements of the 6edar Falls sign regulations outlined in the Zoning Ordinance Section 29-259, except as provided for below: 
(1)  Freestanding signs: 
a.  When located adjacent to any street other than First Street, shall not exceed 15 feet in height and 40 square feet in surface area. 
b.  When located adjacent to First Street, shall not exceed 25 feet in height and 60 square feet in surface area. 
c.  One freestanding or monument sign shall be allowed per lot provided all components are entirely on private property. In the case of a double frontage lot, a second sign may be considered. 
d.  Monumental signs. Shall not exceed eight feet in height and 40 square feet in surface area. 
(2)  Projecting signs. One projecting sign per business is permitted on the primary façade. Signs which are permitted to encroach over or upon public rights-of-way shall meet the following standards and clearance height: 
a.  Vehicular ways: 14 feet clear above the vehicular way, unless public services necessitate higher clearance. 
b.  Pedestrian ways: Ten feet clear above the pedestrian way. For blade signs and awnings, the minimum clearance height shall be eight feet. 
c.  Blade signs are limited to an area of four square feet and a projection of 2.5 feet from an exterior wall. 
d.  All projecting signs, excluding blade signs, shall project no further than half the width of the sidewalk that the storefront is located on or five feet, whichever is less. 
e.  All projecting signs, excluding blade signs, shall be no larger in size than one square foot for each linear foot of the side of the building to which the sign is attached, not to exceed 40 square feet per sign face. 
f.  Corner projecting signs are those that are visible from two or more intersecting streets, and shall be allowed as long as they do not exceed 40 square feet per sign face. 
(3)  Window signs and film. Permanent or adhered window signage and film shall not exceed 25 percent of glazing of the first 15 vertical feet of wall area and shall not be placed in a manner that prevents views into a storefront. 
(4)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed ten percent of the total wall area, and in no case shall exceed ten percent of the area of the storefront. Wall signs on storefronts shall not extend beyond or above an existing sign band or extend over or detract from the architectural features of the building facade, such as cornices, pilasters, transoms, window trim, and similar. 
(5)  Billboards. Prohibited. 
(6)  Roof signs. Prohibited. 
(7)  Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs are permitted. External illumination should be provided by a continuous light source directed onto the sign. The use of internally lit signs (back-lit plastic) is acceptable for monument and freestanding signs. The use of internally lit wall and projecting signs (back-lit plastic) are permitted when the background is opaque at night. 
(k)  Removal or demolition of building structures. Removal or demolition of structures within the overlay district is allowable, subject to securing a demolition permit with the city inspection services division. If no immediate building reconstruction plans are proposed within 30 days following building removal or demolition, the site shall be filled and graded to a topographic elevation equal to or level with surrounding adjacent property natural grade levels. All drainage shall be directed away from existing buildings. Within 30 days of final grading of the site or at the earliest opportunity during the growing season conducive to plant germination, the site shall be seeded with grass. Reasonable efforts shall be taken by the property owner to ensure proper germination of the vegetation and the property owner must maintain the property in accordance with city ordinances. 
(l)  Exceptions: The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve deviations from the standards if there are characteristics of the site or building that makes it difficult or infeasible to meet the requirements outlined in this section, such as buildings located on a corner lot, sloping sites, reuse of an existing building that was not originally designed as a storefront building, or other similar situation. To be granted an exception the applicant must provide: 
(1)  A detailed explanation of why the specific standard cannot be met; 
(2)  The proposed building is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, is consistent with the purpose and intent of the CBD, Central Business District Overlay, and will not detract from or be injurious to other properties in the vicinity; 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission or city council may require an alternative design solution that is consistent with the intent of the standard being modified. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-168), 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2931, § 1B, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 26-190. - P Public Zoning District. 
    The P Public Zoning District is reserved exclusively for structures and uses of land owned by the federal government, the state, the county, the city, and the Cedar Falls Community School District. Although such publicly-owned property is generally exempt from city zoning regulations and requirements, it is expected that such governmental authorities shall cooperate with the city's department of community services to encourage structures on and uses of public land which shall be compatible with the general character of the area in which such public property is located. The public zoning district classification also serves as notice to those owning or purchasing land in proximity to publicly-owned land, which is not generally subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-169), 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2943, § 7, 6-3-2019) 
Secs. 26-191-26-218. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE AND PARKING AREA REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-219. - Off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  In any district, except the C-3 Commercial District, in connection with every building or part thereof erected having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, a retail store, a wholesale store, a market, a hotel, a hospital, a mortuary, a laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space, plus one additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
(b)  Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length. 
(c)  Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court space or such space as specifically provided for in the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-176), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-220. - Off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  Required, number. In all districts, and in connection with every industrial, commercial, trade, institutional, recreational or dwelling use and similar uses, space for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided on the same lot or property where said permitted use is established, except as follows: 
(1)  For a principal permitted commercial use in the C-3 Commercial District; and 
(2)  For a residential use established as a permitted secondary, incidental or accessory use to a principal permitted commercial use in the C-3 Commercial District, such as for a dwelling unit or units located on the second or higher floor of a building, the first or lower floor of which comprises the principal permitted commercial use, subject, however, to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Such review and approval shall include consideration of whether the proposed residential use is indeed secondary, incidental or accessory to a principal permitted commercial use of the structure or property. 
a.  Review by the planning and zoning commission and city council shall include consideration of traffic patterns, both pedestrian and vehicular, adequacy of screening, compatibility with adjacent land uses and construction of fixtures in accordance with the aesthetics of the neighborhood and accepted civic design principles. All off-premises parking areas or parking lots shall be located within a reasonable distance from the principal use in question. During the course of review of off-premises parking areas or parking lots, the commission may recommend and the city council may require any improvements or fixtures to the parking area or lot, including hard surfacing, landscaping, screening, lighting, stormwater detention, etc., that will help to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
b.  In addition, space for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule. If the off-street parking requirement as specified herein is to be satisfied with open, surface parking or garage parking, or a combination of these options, parking must be made available for parking use by the occupants: 
1.  Animal hospitals, kennels and animal grooming shops. One parking space per doctor, plus one parking space for every two employees and one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area excluding dog confinement areas. 
2.  Automatic carwash. Five stacking spaces for each washing bay, one stacking space for each vacuuming unit, plus one parking space for every two employees. 
3.  Automobile, machinery or equipment sales. One parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus two parking spaces for each service stall and one parking space for every two employees. 
4.  Banks, businesses and professional offices. Not less than one parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than five parking spaces. Each drive-up window shall provide three stacking spaces per teller. 
5.  Barbershops and beauty parlors. Two parking spaces per operator. 
6.  Boardinghouse and roominghouses. Not less than one parking space per guestroom and/or sleeping room. 
7.  Bowling alleys. Five parking spaces for each bowling lane. 
8.  Church or temple. One parking space for every eight lineal feet of pew seating or for every four potential occupants in the principal auditorium or, where no auditorium is provided, one parking space for every 80 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Community center, museum or art gallery. One parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area, or one parking space for every five potential occupants in the building, whichever is greater. 
10.  Convenience store. One space for every 100 square feet of retail floor space plus one space for every two employees. If fuel dispensing pumps or car wash is established in conjunction with said use the stacking space requirements for each use as specified in this division shall apply. 
11.  Dance, assembly, skating rink or exhibition halls without fixed seats, including auction houses. One parking space for every four potential occupants in the building as determined by the uniform building code for maximum occupancy load plus one space for every two employees with a minimum of five spaces for employee parking. 
12.  Dwelling, single-unit, including mobile home units. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
(i)  Dwelling, single-unit, renter-occupied, including renter-occupied mobile home units. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit, plus one additional parking stall for each bedroom in excess of two bedrooms. 
(ii)  Dwelling, two-unit, including single-unit bi-attached dwellings, multi-unit dwellings including condominiums and apartments, but not including nursing homes, convalescent homes, elderly housing or housing for handicapped. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit, plus one additional parking space for each bedroom in each dwelling unit in excess of two bedrooms. One additional stall shall be provided for every five units in excess of five units for visitor parking. 
13.  Fraternity house, sorority house or dormitories. Not less than five parking spaces, plus one stall for every two residents in excess of four residents. 
14.  Fuel service station. Two parking spaces for each service stall, plus three stacking spaces for each fuel dispensing pump. 
15.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. One parking space for every three potential occupants in the principal auditorium, or, where no auditorium is provided, one parking space for every 50 square feet of gross floor area or five parking spaces for each parlor, whichever is greater. 
16.  Furniture, appliance, hardware and household equipment stores. One parking space for every 750 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for every two employees. 
17.  Game rooms, pool halls and billiard parlors. One and one-half parking spaces for every 100 square feet of gross floor area for any establishment other than one with a liquor license or beer permit. 
18.  Golf courses. Four parking spaces per hole. All other commercial or recreational land uses established in conjunction with a golf course, not incidental to the sport of golf, shall be subject to the parking regulations regarding that use. 
19.  Hospitals. One parking space for every five beds, plus one parking space for every two employees and one parking space for every two staff doctors. 
20.  Hotels, motels or lodginghouses. Not less than one parking space for each guestroom, plus one parking space for every 200 square feet of commercial, assembly or meeting area, and one parking space for every 150 square feet of lounge, coffee shop or restaurant gross floor area, plus one stall for every two employees. 
21.  Housing for elderly or handicapped. One and one-half parking spaces for every dwelling unit, plus one stall for every two employees. 
22.  Junkyard. Two parking spaces per acre, plus one space for every two employees. 
23.  Libraries. One parking space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area in public use, plus one parking space for every two employees. 
24.  Manufacturing, research and industrial plants. Four parking spaces for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for every three employees. 
25.  Medical or dental clinics. Five parking spaces, plus one additional parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area over 1,000 square feet. 
26.  Mini-centers, retail stores, shops, etc., under 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. One parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than five parking spaces. 
27.  Miniwarehouse. One parking space for every ten storage units, stalls or lockers equally distributed throughout the storage area, plus two parking spaces located at or near the project office for use by prospective customers. A minimum of 35 feet between warehouse buildings for driveway, parking and fire lane purposes is required. When storage units within warehouses do not front one another, a minimum 25-foot drive for driveway, parking and fire lane purposes is also required. 
28.  Nursing care, retirement or convalescent homes. One parking space for every five beds, plus one parking space for every two nonresident employees and one parking space for every one resident staff. 
29.  Printing, plumbing shop, heating shop or other similar service establishments. One parking space for every two employees therein, plus one parking space for each service vehicle. If retail trade is carried on in the establishment, one additional parking space shall be provided for every 200 square feet of retail floor area. 
30.  Restaurant, fast food, drive-in or carryout. One parking space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for every two employees with a minimum of five parking spaces for employee parking. Where drive-up window facilities are proposed, five stacking spaces shall be provided per window. 
31.  Restaurant (standard eat in). One parking space for every 150 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for every two employees, with a minimum of five parking spaces for employee parking. 
32.  School, college or high school. Each separate building requires one parking space for every five potential occupants in the main auditorium or one parking space for every five students and one parking space for every staff member, whichever is greater. 
33.  School, daycare, preschool, elementary or junior high school. One parking space for every ten potential occupants in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one parking space for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
34.  Seasonal camp or cabins. One parking space for every cabin, sleeping unit, campsite lot or two beds, whichever is greater. 
35.  Shopping centers or retail stores, shops or supermarkets over 2,000 square feet in gross floor area; 41/2 parking stalls per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
36.  Sports arena, stadium, gymnasium, theater or auditorium for other than schools. One parking space for every four potential occupants plus one space for every two employees with a minimum of five spaces for employee parking. 
37.  Taverns, bars and nightclubs. One parking space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for every two employees with a minimum of five parking spaces for employee parking. 
38.  Telemarketing office. Not less than one parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than five spaces. 
39.  Tennis and racquetball courts. Two parking spaces per court. 
40.  Union headquarters, private clubs or lodges. One parking space for every five potential occupants of the building. 
41.  Wholesale establishments or warehouses. One parking space for every two employees, but in no case less than one parking space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Rules for computation of required parking spaces. In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Gross floor area. Gross floor area shall mean the floor area of the specific use and its associated incidental uses within the exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts, open air courts and any portion of a structure above or below ground used for off-street parking, loading areas or mechanical equipment not incidental to the specific use such as furnaces, air conditioners, elevators, etc. In addition, other nonessential areas of the gross floor area may be deducted including storage areas, closets, bathrooms, etc., to a maximum of ten percent of the total gross floor area. 
(2)  Fractional number of spaces. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the next higher whole number. 
(3)  Uses not specifically provided for. Where the parking space requirement for a use is not specifically mentioned in this section, the required number of spaces shall be that of a similar use as determined by the city planner. 
(4)  Joint or mixed uses. In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements for each use computed separately. 
(5)  Determination of seating capacity. When the unit of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces is based upon the seating capacity of a structure or use, each 24 inches of a pew, bleacher or bench or other seating shall count as one seat. 
(6)  Determination of number of employees. When the unit of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces is based on the number of employees, the maximum shift or employment period during which the greatest number of employees are present at the structure or use shall be used in the computation. 
(7)  Unknown uses. Where new buildings are proposed but the owner or developer does not wish to designate the type of use that will occupy the building, the most intensive use possible with relation to parking in the zoning district shall determine the parking requirements. 
(8)  Potential occupants. The maximum number of potential occupants shall be based upon the assumption that 15 square feet of gross floor area is required per occupant, as documented within the Life Safety Code for places of assembly. 
(9)  Stacking space. All stacking spaces shall be nine feet in width and 19 feet in length and shall not prohibit ingress or egress to any driveway, public street, access aisle or parking space at any time. Stacking spaces may include the vehicular space situated at the point of service. 
(10)  Tandem parking. Vehicles may be parked in tandem, or one directly behind the other, in conjunction with single-unit, duplex and mobile home residences. Parking spaces inside carports or garages may be counted as part of the space requirement and may be used in tandem. Tandem stalls shall mean no more than two stalls arranged one in front of the other. 
(c)  Access. Access to all parking areas and lots from streets, alleys and other adjacent areas shall be provided by an access drive not less than ten feet in width for single-unit dwellings or one-directional traffic flow and not less than 18 feet in width in all other cases. 
(d)  Applicability of section. Whenever a building or use existing prior to September 26, 1983, is enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, the building or use in its entirety shall then and thereafter comply with all the requirements set forth in this section. All new buildings or uses constructed or established after September 26, 1983, shall comply with the requirements of this section prior to occupancy. A change in use shall mean any change where the new use established requires a greater number of on-site parking spaces than was required for the prior use. However, if the prior use did not provide minimum off-street parking, then parking spaces shall be provided as specified herein before the new use is established. 
(e)  General development standards. Every parcel of land used as a public or private parking area, parking space or parking lot, including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  With the exception of parking garages or structures and driveways serving residential uses, all parking lots containing three or more parking spaces shall provide minimum setbacks and landscaping as specified herein. Parking structures or ramps (above or below ground) located on a parcel as a principal permitted use shall meet the minimum building setback requirement of other principal permitted structures within the zoning district where located. When parking spaces are provided within accessory structures, the setbacks for accessory structures shall apply. 
(2)  All parking lot setback areas, as specified herein, shall be an open, permeable area consisting of landscaping, natural vegetation ground cover or other type of natural ground cover. No vehicle parked in an adjacent parking space shall be permitted to encroach into any portion of said required setback area. 
(3)  Parking lots shall be hard surfaced. Their design shall be based on the amount, type and weight (axle loads) of anticipated traffic, the quality of the surfacing to be used and the supporting strength and character of the subgrade, all applied to a parking lot layout as selected by the designer and approved by the city engineering division. 
(4)  Any portion of property that is graded or improved in any fashion to accommodate vehicular parking or is intended or commonly used for vehicular parking shall meet parking lot design standards as specified herein. Any existing parking lot or parking area that does not meet existing standards as specified herein shall not be enlarged or expanded unless the entire parking lot area or parking area meets parking lot design standards as specified herein. 
(5)  All accessways or driveways to parking areas or parking lots shall be hard surfaced. Unimproved driveways or accessways in existence at the time of enactment of this division shall be hard surfaced only in the event that the on-site parking lot is expanded, hard surfaced or otherwise upgraded. 
(6)  All parking lots shall be arranged and marked in a manner which provide safe and orderly loading, unloading, maneuvering, parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles. Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Parking spaces shall not be less than nine feet in width and 19 feet in length for all nonresidential uses including hotels and other temporary lodging facilities. All residential uses, including multiple unit residences, shall provide parking stalls measuring not less than eight feet in width and 18 feet in length. Compact car spaces shall not be less than eight feet wide and 16 feet in length. Fifteen percent of the parking space requirement may consist of compact car parking spaces in lots which have more than ten stalls. All compact car spaces shall be clearly identified by signs. Where fractional spaces result, the number of permitted compact car spaces shall be rounded to the next higher number. 
b.  Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the state in Iowa Code ch. 321L. 
c.  Buildings and facilities required to provide handicapped parking spaces shall set aside at least one such space. Each space shall be clearly designated as a handicapped parking space by the display of the international symbol of accessibility both in front and within the stall. Parking spaces for handicapped persons and accessible loading zones that serve a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route to an entrance to the building. Federal ADA requirements, if more restrictive, shall apply. 
d.  The property owner shall be responsible for the continued maintenance of the parking lot, including fences, landscaping, all signs, surface material, surface markings and other forms of traffic control. 
e.  Maneuvering space required to permit safe and convenient parking of motor vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements of table 1 for a nine-foot by 19-foot stall. 
TABLE 1 
Parking 
Angle Stall 
Width Stall Length 
(including 2 foot 0 inch overhang if applicable) 
19 feet long Aisle 
Width Curb 
Length 
per Car 0 degrees 9'0" 19.0 12.0 23.0 30 degrees 9'0" 17.3 11.0 18.0 45 degrees 9'0" 19.8 13.0 12.7 60 degrees 9'0" 21.0 18.0 10.4 90 degrees 9'0" 19.0 24.0 9.0  
(7)  When an accessway or driveway intersects a public right-of-way or when a parking lot, area or space abuts any public right-of-way, screening or landscaping shall not exceed three feet in height above the driveway surface and no structure, sign or vehicle shall be allowed in the triangular area formed by: 
a.  The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two public rights-of-way, excluding alleys, with two sides of the triangle being 30 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines measured from their point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two lines. (See figure 2.) 

Figure 2-30-Foot Vision Triangle
b.  The areas of property on both sides of an accessway, driveway or alley formed by an intersection with a public right-of-way, with two sides of each triangle being formed by lines a distance of ten feet in length from the point of intersection and with the third side being a line connecting the ends of the ten-foot sides. (See figure 3.) 

Figure 3-10-Foot Vision Triangle
(8)  All parking spaces shall be designed to prohibit any vehicle from backing into a public right-of-way to obtain ingress or egress, except when the space is used in conjunction with a single-unit or duplex dwelling unit. 
(9)  Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot, shall be provided on private property and shall reflect the light away from adjoining residential premises or from any R district. 
(10)  Accessways or driveways shall be situated no closer than three feet from any private property line. 
(11)  Curbing. With the exception of driveways or garages that meet the parking requirements for residential uses, all newly constructed parking lots containing ten or more parking spaces shall provide continuous concrete curbing measuring at least six inches in height around the entire perimeter of said parking lot except at points of ingress, egress and drainage locations. Said continuous curbing shall be established at that portion of the parking space to serve as a wheel block or barrier in order to prevent the vehicle from overhanging into the required setback area. Vehicular overhang as measured from the front tires shall be considered to be two feet. Continuous curbing can be substituted with individual wheel blocks or wheel barriers only in the following situations: 
a.  A parking lot is designed to contain fewer than ten parking stalls. 
b.  A parking lot containing ten or more parking stalls provides a setback area on all sides at least double the minimum required setback. 
(12)  Prior to the installation, enlargement, resurfacing or other improvement of any parking lot a plan shall be submitted for review and approved by the city engineering division and the Cedar Falls Utilities. 
(f)  Standards for lots in C or M districts. 
(1)  In any C commercial or M industrial zoning district abutting an R residence district, off-street parking lots will be permitted in accordance with the following requirements: A six-foot-high screen consisting of a fence, wall or plant material of mature height shall be installed and continually maintained when a parking lot or area abuts an R residential zoning district, except in any required front yard or along any street or alley, where the screen shall be no more than four feet in height. All screening shall comply with the landscaping provisions found in this division. 
(2)  All parking lots in C or M zoning districts containing three or more parking spaces shall be hard surfaced, shall meet stormwater detention requirements, shall provide a continuous curb (six inches or more) around the perimeter of the parking lot, and shall be marked properly to indicate the location of parking spaces and driveway aisles. 
(g)  Standards for R districts. In any R residence district, off-street parking lots shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  An off-street parking lot located in an R residence district shall provide the front yard and the required side yards in accordance with the district in which it is located. Furthermore, the minimum rear yard setback shall be five feet. The front yard, the required front yard and the required side yards may be used for vehicular access to the parking lot, for fences, walks, or landscaping only. No vehicular parking is permitted in the front yard, in the required front yard or in the required side yard. Where a contiguous development of lots is used for parking purposes under one ownership, no side or rear yards shall be required for abutting parking lots on the common lot line. 
(2)  Off-street parking lots in any R residence district shall provide screening on all yards of the abutting lots. The screen shall be six feet high and consist of a fence, wall or plant material of mature height, except that, when the screen is in the front yard or when the screen is maintained along an alley or street right-of-way line, then the screen shall be no more than four feet in height. All screening shall comply with the landscaping provisions found in this division. 
(3)  All parking lots containing three or more parking spaces shall be hard surfaced, shall meet stormwater detention requirements, shall provide continuous curbing or wheel blocks for each parking space, and shall be marked properly to indicate the location of parking spaces and driveway aisles. 
(4)  Every parking area or parking lot must have a connecting driveway that meets the regulations of this zoning chapter. 
(5)  Any new parking areas, parking lots or paved surfaces in R-1, R-2, R-3 1, R-4, RP, MU zoning districts that are converted to parking, must meet all requirements specified in this section, prior to use for parking. 
(6)  Parking areas or parking lots in rear yards shall meet the following requirements: 
Zoning 
District Number of 
Units Maximum 
Rear Yard 
Coverage 
for Parking R-1, R-2, RP 1 , MU 1 1 30% R-3 1 , R-4 1 1 50% R-2, R-3 1 , R-4 1 , RP 1 , MU 1 2 50%  
1 For all single- and two-unit dwellings. 
(7)  In the case a parking area or parking lot cannot meet the provisions of section 26-220(g)(6), then review and approval by the city council after recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission is required. The criteria for which additional rear yard parking coverage could be considered include the following: 
a.  The request serves the existing building use, not an expansion; 
b.  The maximum rear yard coverage shall not be increased by more than five percentage points above the percentage listed in the table in subsection (g)(6) of this section; 
c.  Determination that the character of the neighborhood surrounding the property would not be diminished by the increase in parking area and corresponding reduction of open space; 
d.  The lot width and lot area of the property are sufficient to accommodate the density of occupants and vehicles that would result from the parking lot or area; 
e.  Whether buffering of parking meets code; and 
f.  All other city codes are met, including, but not limited to, the housing, property maintenance, nuisance, rental housing, building, and fire codes. 
(h)  Parking lot setbacks. Where setbacks required by this section impose a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(1)  Residential districts. Required setbacks for parking lots in residential zoning districts are as follows: 
a.  The required setback is three feet along any alley, five feet along any street right-of-way line, and five feet along any adjacent property line. 
b.  The front yard and the required side yards shall be provided in accordance with the underlying zoning district. The front yard, the required front yard and the required side yards may be used for access to the parking lots, for fences, walks or landscaping only. No vehicular parking is permitted in the front yard, in the required front yard or in the required side yard. 
c.  Individual driveways intended for exclusive use by one-unit dwellings, duplexes, mobile homes, townhouses or multi-unit dwelling units shall not be classified as parking lots and shall not be required to restrict vehicular parking in the front yard, in the required front yard or in the required side yard upon said driveway as described herein. However, said driveways serving detached residential structures, detached garages, or parking lots shall provide a minimum three-foot setback from adjacent property lines and shall meet the provisions of section 26-222, unless the driveway is an existing shared drive where the minimum driveway width can only be met by encroaching into said three-foot setback area. 
d.  All yards and required yards as described herein shall consist of permeable material (grass, wood chips, loose rock, or other ground cover material) and be screened in accordance with the landscaping requirements found within this section, and with the exception of driveways, parking lots and patios, no yard area shall be hard surfaced. 
(2)  Commercial and manufacturing districts. Required setbacks in commercial and manufacturing districts are as follows: All parking lots in C or M districts shall provide a minimum setback as measured from the private property line to the edge of the hard surface parking area with no vehicular overhang allowed within said setback area. The minimum setbacks shall be: 
a.  Five feet when adjacent to a public right-of-way, with the exception when adjacent to a public alleyway, in which case no less than three feet setback shall be required. 
b.  Three feet when adjacent to an abutting commercial use or commercial property including an adjacent commercial parking lot. 
c.  Five feet when adjacent to a residential use in a commercial or industrial district. 
d.  Ten feet when adjacent to an R, residential zoning district. 
e.  Residential uses established in a C or M district as a principal use shall provide minimum front yard and side yard setbacks as specified in the R-4 zoning district with no vehicular parking permitted in said required yard areas. 
f.  All setback areas shall consist of permeable material (grass, wood chips, loose rock or other ground cover material) and be screened in accordance with the peripheral landscaping requirements as stated herein. 

Figure 4
(i)  General landscaping of parking within districts. Landscaped off-street parking lots shall be required within all districts in order to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of the surrounding neighborhoods, to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise and the glare of vehicular lights, to act as a natural drainage system and ameliorate stormwater drainage problems, to provide shade and to otherwise facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community. 
(1)  Applicability of landscaping requirements. Landscaping requirements contained within this section shall apply to: 
a.  New off-street parking lots containing three or more parking spaces. 
b.  Existing off-street parking lots containing three or more parking spaces which are effectively altered or enlarged, in whole or in part, other than normal maintenance, repairs, or resurfacing of an existing lot. 
(2)  No parking lot containing three or more parking spaces shall be constructed or enlarged in the city until a landscape plan for the parking lot has been approved by the city planner and the city arborist or their designees. Landscape plans submitted pursuant to this section shall not be approved unless they conform to the requirements of this section and, where appropriate, may be submitted as part of the site plan submittal required within other sections of this division. Landscape plans shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces or other vehicular use areas, access aisles, driveways, and the location, size and description of all landscape materials. 
(3)  The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material may be used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping. Effective use of earth berms and existing topography is also encouraged as a component of the landscape plan. In those instances where plant material exists on a parking lot site prior to its development, such landscape material may be used if approved as meeting the requirements of this division. 
(4)  Landscaping shall be classified as either internal or peripheral. The following coverage requirements shall pertain to each classification: 
a.  Peripheral landscaping. All parking lots containing three or more parking spaces shall provide peripheral landscaping. Peripheral landscaping shall consist of a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width, exclusive of vehicular obstruction, and shall be located between the parking area and the abutting property lines. One tree for each 50 lineal feet of such landscaping barrier or fractional part thereof shall be planted in the landscaping strip. At least one tree shall be planted for every parking lot (such as a three-stall parking lot) regardless of the lineal feet calculation. In addition to tree plantings, the perimeter of the parking lot shall be screened with shrubbery or similar plantings at least three feet in height as measured from the finished grade of the parking lot at the time of planting for purposes of vehicular screening. The vegetative screen should present a continuous, effective visual screen adjacent to the parking lot for purposes of partially obscuring vehicles and also deflecting glare from headlights. If landscaped berms are utilized, the berm and vegetative screening must achieve at least a three-foot-tall screen at time of installation as measured from the grade of the finished parking lot. Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material excluding paving, gravel, crushed asphalt or similar materials, in addition to the required trees, shrubbery, hedges or other planting material. Existing landscaping upon abutting property shall not be used to satisfy the requirements for said parking lot screening requirements unless the abutting land use is a parking lot. Exceptions: 
1.  Peripheral landscaping shall not be required for single-unit or two-unit residential structures where the primary parking area is designed around a standard front entrance driveway and/or attached or detached residential garage. However, if an open surface parking lot containing three or more parking stalls is established in the rear yard of a two-unit residential structure, the perimeter landscaping/screening requirements as specified herein shall apply. 
2.  Peripheral landscaping shall not be required for parking lots that are established behind building structures where the parking lots do not have any public street or alley frontage or is not adjacent to any open properties such as private yards, parks or similar open areas. Examples of such a parking lot would be one designed with a multiple unit apartment facility where the parking lot is encircled with building structures within the project site and where the parking lot is completely obscured from public view by building structures. 
3.  Underground or under-building parking lots. 
4.  Aboveground parking ramps shall provide perimeter screening as specified herein around the ground level perimeter of the parking structure. 
b.  Internal landscaping. All parking lots measuring 21 parking stalls or more shall be required to landscape the interior of such parking lot. At least one overstory tree shall be established for every 21 parking stalls. Each tree shall be provided sufficient open planting area necessary to sustain full growth of the tree. Not less than five percent of the interior of the parking lot shall be provided as open space, including the tree planting areas. These additional open space areas must be planted with bushes, grasses or similar vegetative materials. Each separate open green space area shall contain a minimum of 40 square feet and shall have a minimum width dimension of a least five feet. 
c.  Exceptions. Interior landscaping shall not be required for vehicular storage lots, trucking/warehousing lots or for automobile sales lots. However, perimeter landscaping/screening provisions, as specified herein, shall be required for all such parking areas when they are installed or enlarged in area. 
d.  Parking garages or parking ramps. All such facilities where one or more levels are established for parking either below ground or above ground and where structural walls provide for general screening of parked vehicles, internal landscaping shall not be provided. 
It is the intent of this regulation that in parking development sites open green space and landscape areas should be distributed throughout the parking development site rather than isolated in one area or around the perimeter of the parking lot. Trees and shrubs planted within parking areas shall be protected by concrete curbs and provide adequate permeable surface area to promote growth and full maturity of said vegetation. 
(5)  No materials shall be approved for use in any parking lot landscaping plan unless approved by the city planner and city arborist. A list of generally permissible plants is on file in the office of the city planner and the city arborist. Landscaping plant materials found unsuitable by the city planner and the city arborist for planting in the city shall not be permitted. 
(6)  All required screening shall be in place, inspected and approved by the city planner and the city arborist or their staff designees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. However, installation prior to occupancy may be waived by the city planner and the city arborist if inclement weather conditions or the planting and growing season prohibit installation. In such cases, the owner may be issued a temporary certificate of occupancy by the city planner if the owner enters into a contract with the city to ensure completion of the screening during the next planting season. The performance of such contract shall be secured by the filing of a bond or cash in escrow in an amount not less than the approximate cost of the screening, as estimated by the owner's landscape architect, landscape contractor or nurseryman and approved by the city planner and the city arborist. 
(j)  Definitions pertaining to landscape requirements. When computing the type and amount of landscaping required, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Tree means any self-supporting woody plant which usually produces one main trunk and a more or less distinct head with many branches that establishes a mature height in excess of 30 feet. 
a.  Deciduous trees shall measure a minimum of 11/2 inches in trunk diameter for shade type cultivars and one inch in trunk diameter for ornamental type cultivars. 
b.  Coniferous trees shall measure a minimum of three feet in height. 
(2)  Screening means natural or manmade materials consisting of one or a combination of the following: 
a.  Wood or masonry walls or fences when constructed of materials which provide openings of less than 50 percent in area of the vertical surface of the wall or fence. 
b.  Plant materials consisting of coniferous material or deciduous materials, or a combination of both. In all cases, plant materials shall measure, at a minimum, as follows: 
1.  Deciduous plants. 
(i)  Shade trees: 11/2-inch trunk diameter. 
(ii)  Ornamentals: One-inch trunk diameter. 
(iii)  Shrubs: 18 inches in height. 
2.  Coniferous plants. 
(i)  Large evergreens: Three feet in height. 
(ii)  Small evergreens: 12- to 15-inch spread. 
Materials shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken visual screen. 
(3)  Earthen berms. When earthen berms are provided and the finished elevation of the property is lower at the property line, or within eight feet inside the property line, than an abutting elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of or in combination with additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements for the district. 
(4)  Shrub means a woody plant that usually remains low and produces shoots or trunks from the base; it is not usually tree-like or single stemmed. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-177), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-221. - Filling stations; public garages and parking lots. 
(a)  Location of entrances and exits. No gasoline filling station or commercial customer or employee parking lot for 25 or more motor vehicles, or parking garage or automobile repair shop, shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 200 feet along the same side of a street of any school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for dependents or for children, except where such property is in another block or on another street which the lot in question does not abut. 
(b)  Oil draining pits and fuel pumps. No gasoline filling station or public garage shall be permitted where any oil draining pit or fuel filling appliance is located within 12 feet of any street line or within 25 feet from any R district, except where such appliance or pit is within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-178), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-222. - Residential driveways; criteria for design and location in front yards and side yards in residential districts. 
    Allowable residential driveways are set forth below. 
(1)  An access from the public street, maintaining a three-foot setback from the property line (see section 19-223), that is established to provide vehicular parking at a single-unit or two-unit residential dwelling. It may also provide access to an attached residential garage, or to a detached residential garage in the rear yard area of the property. Refer to figure 5. In the situation in which the existing driveway does not meet the three-foot setback, and if strictly enforced would cause the driveway width to be less than ten feet, a reduced driveway setback may be permitted if approved by the zoning administrator. 

Figure 5
(2)  All second curb cuts and second accesses from the public street that extend across the front or side yard are allowed if approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  The maximum width, towards the interior of the lot, of a driveway accessing an attached or detached garage shall be proportional to the width of the garage doorways for accommodating the normal width of the vehicles, utilizing a ten-foot driving width of a vehicle. In the case of a one car garage, the driveway may be up to 18 feet wide, provided a three-foot setback from the property line is maintained. 
(4)  A driveway may have a flare out in the front yard or side yard area of the property only if the entire flare out portion meets all of the following requirements (refer to figure 6): 
a.  Accommodates no more than one vehicle, with a stall dimension no larger than 12 feet in width by 25 feet in length (not including the flare). 
b.  Has a taper slope ratio of no more than one to one, so as to create a 45 degree angle (refer to figure 6). 
c.  Is parallel to the driveway. 
d.  Is hard surfaced. 
e.  No encroachment into the required side yard shall be allowed, including into the required side yard as extended into the front yard, unless it is a corner lot on which the garage accesses from the longer street side as shown in figure 7. In the case of a one car garage, the flare out may have up to a three-foot setback. 
f.  Not located toward or in the interior of the lot (i.e., area in front of residence). Flare outs are not allowed on both sides of a driveway unless one common driveway is serving both units of a duplex residence. 
g.  If a turn out exists, then a flare out is prohibited in the front and side yards. 

Figure 6
    

Figure 7
(5)  A driveway may have one turn out in order for vehicles to maneuver in the driveway such that a driveway could be exited face-forward, provided the turn out meets the following requirements (refer to figure 8): 
a.  The street is an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, in accordance with the comprehensive plan, that is two or more lanes. 
b.  Its maximum width is proportional to the driveway width, as follows: 
1.  A ten to 15-foot wide driveway is allowed up to 18 feet beyond the driveway. 
2.  A 15-foot or wider driveway is allowed up to nine feet beyond the driveway. 
c.  It is a maximum of ten feet long, parallel to the driveway. 
d.  If located to the side yard, it is a minimum of three feet from the closest property line. 
e.  It shall not be used for storage. 
f.  It is located back from the right-of-way, no less than the required front yard setback. 
g.  It is not located toward or in the interior of the lot (i.e., area in front of residence). Turn outs are not allowed on both sides of a driveway unless one common driveway is serving both units of a duplex residence. 
h.  If a flare out exists, then a turn out is prohibited in the front and side yards. 

Figure 8
(6)  Termination of a driveway in the side yard, with no access to a garage or parking lot in the rear yard shall only be permitted if the driveway meets all of the following requirements: 
a.  The extension is a maximum of 12 feet wide. 
b.  The extension is a maximum length not to exceed the length of the building along which it is located. In no case shall this driveway extension exceed 30 feet in length. 
c.  The extension is hard surfaced. 
d.  The extension does not occupy any portion of the required side yard and no portion of the vehicle shall be allowed to encroach into the required side yard. 
e.  No more than one vehicle, including, but not limited to, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats or similar vehicles, which must be currently and legally licensed, shall be parked in the side yard area. 
f.  Only one side yard may be used for vehicular parking. 
g.  Side yard parking shall only be allowed in the side yard nearest the established driveway on the property. Refer to figure 9. 

Figure 9
(7)  A driveway may be located in the rear yard or in the required rear yard if it accesses a permitted garage, shed or other accessory structure. Furthermore, the following may be permitted (refer to Figures 10 and 11): 
a.  One flare out, provided: 
1.  It accommodates no more than one vehicle, with a stall dimension no larger than 12 feet in width by 25 feet in length. 
2.  It is parallel to the driveway. 
3.  It is hard surfaced. 
b.  An extension along the side of the accessory structure, provided: 
1.  The extension is a maximum of 12 feet wide. 
2.  The extension is a maximum length not to exceed the length of the building along which it is located. In no case shall this driveway extension exceed 30 feet in length. 
3.  The extension is hard surfaced. 
4.  No more than one vehicle, including, but not limited to, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats or similar vehicles, which must be currently and legally licensed, shall be parked in said extension. 
5.  The extension is located only on one side of the building along which it is located. 

Figure 10
    

Figure 11
(8)  A secondary driveway, connected to the primary driveway, may be installed for purposes of accessing a detached accessory structure provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  The accessory structure is intended for vehicular use and has at least one overhead garage door. 
b.  The driveway will be no less than three feet from adjacent property lines. 
c.  The driveway is a minimum ten feet wide. 
d.  The secondary driveway is hard surfaced. 
e.  The overall yard open space requirement and yard open space requirement for the yard where said driveway is proposed is met. 
f.  In the case of a corner lot, the driveway shall only be permitted on the interior side yard. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-179), 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 26-223-26-252. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGNS 

Sec. 26-253. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the sign regulations set out in this article are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communications in the city, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-196), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-254. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sign means an identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign relating only to uses of the premises on which the sign is located or products sold or services offered on the premises on which the sign is located, or indicating the name or address of a building or the occupants or management of a building of the premises where the sign is located. (See Off-premises signs. ) 
    Sign, banner, means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. 
    Sign, billboard, means a sign structure designed for the posting of changeable graphics or reading matter advertising a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, directional, means a sign designed for the purpose of assisting traffic control, which is located on private property and limited to no more than four feet in height and no more than six square feet in area. 
    Sign, flag, means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights, columns, pylons or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or wall. The term "sign, freestanding," shall also apply to those signs having their framework permanently embedded in the ground. 
    Sign, home occupation, means a sign or nameplate limited to the display of the occupant and the name of the home occupation. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be nonilluminated, shall be affixed to the main structure or visible through a window, and shall be limited to one in number per home. 
    Sign, monumental, means an identification device permanently embedded in the ground, upon which is affixed only the name or symbol of a particular neighborhood, subdivision, commercial or industrial development. 
    Sign, off-premises, means a sign displaying or drawing attention to a product, place, activity, person, profession, service, institution or business located upon property other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, pennant, means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Sign, portable, means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to "A" or "T" frames, menu and sandwich board signs, umbrellas used for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. Portable signs are not permitted unless specifically authorized for temporary use by the city council. 
    Sign, roof, means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by the building. 
    Sign, temporary, means a sign or advertising device intended to be displayed for a limited time period typically identifying construction, community or civic projects, show homes or other special events on a temporary basis. Such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. 
    Sign, wall, means a sign, other than a roof sign, which is supported by a building or wall. Such a sign shall not project beyond the peak of the building or wall more than one-third of the sign's longest dimension. Signs surpassing this peak projection shall be designated as roof signs. 
a.  Canopy wall sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. 
b.  Fascia wall sign means a single-faced building or wall sign which is parallel to its supporting wall and does not extend more than 18 inches from a building or wall. 
c.  Mural wall sign means a one-dimensional graphic illustration or presentation that is painted or otherwise applied to a building, wall or facade. 
d.  Projecting wall sign means a sign which is attached to and projects more than 18 inches from the face or wall of a building. 
    Sign area means that area within a line including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characteristics or delineations, or within a line including the outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign, whichever line includes the larger area. When the irregularity of a sign shape warrants, such area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign. The support for the sign background, whether it be columns, pylons or a building or part thereof, shall not be included in the sign area. Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of sign area. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-197), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-255. - Signs permitted in all zones. 
(a)  The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to city council approval: 
(1)  Traffic and other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing and danger signs, and other such necessary, temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city council. 
(2)  Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, unless specifically prohibited in this article. 
(3)  Portable signs, banners, pennants and other temporary advertising devices identifying public events, special promotions, holidays and like events, provided that specific approval is granted under regulations established by the city council. 
(4)  Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical markers and the like. 
(5)  Monumental signs intended to identify residential, commercial or industrial developments, in accordance with this article. 
(6)  Mural wall signs, company logo signs, hand-painted art or any similar sign which is intended to be painted directly on the existing building facade or wall. 
(7)  In special circumstances, such as road construction, a limited number of temporary directional signs may be placed in the public right-of-way in conformance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Maximum of two signs per use. 
b.  Each sign shall be no larger than six square feet nor more than three feet in overall height. 
c.  Signs shall be installed by a bonded contractor and shall be sited in cooperation with Cedar Falls Utilities and city department of public works officials. 
d.  In those situations where at least three users wish to share common sign space, only two signs will be permitted with a maximum area of 12 square feet and a maximum height of three feet. Only one individual sign will be permitted for each user, if that user is also utilizing common sign space. 
e.  All such permitted signs shall be removed from the public right-of-way within five days following the end of the special circumstances that stimulated the original request. 
(b)  The following signs are permissible for display without city council approval. Permits must be secured as required by chapter 3. 
(1)  Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. One such nonilluminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in size, shall be permitted on each premises. 
(2)  Signs advertising the architects, engineers, contractors, occupants or other individuals involved in the construction, reconstruction or remodeling of a building or development project, and such signs announcing the character or purpose of the site. One such nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 100 square feet in size, shall be permitted on each premises. Such signs shall be erected no sooner than 30 days prior to site development, and shall not continue to be displayed longer than 30 days following project completion. Such signs shall be sited in accordance with the regulations found in this article. 
(3)  Signs announcing candidates seeking public political office or pertinent political issues. Such signs shall be confined to private property and shall be subject to applicable state and local regulations. 
(4)  Address signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes showing only the numerical address and occupants of the premises upon which the sign is situated. One such nonilluminated sign shall be permitted per address. 
(5)  Home occupation signs. 
(6)  Accessory signs identifying hospitals or civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations. All signs must comply with the general regulations found in section 26-259. All freestanding, monumental and roof signs exceeding 40 square feet in size must be approved by the city council. 
(7)  Signs which primarily consist of banners, balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving devices. Such signs shall be permitted for 60 days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(8)  Flag signs; provided, however, that no owner or occupant of any premises shall erect more than one official flag of the institution or business which is situated or located upon the premises where the flag sign is erected. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-198), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-256. - Signs prohibited in all zones. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Signs that advertise a product, place, activity, person, service, institution or business no longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located. Such signs shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3. 
(2)  Signs and poles which contain or consist of reflectors or lights which flash, strobe or chase one another, or appear to display these characteristics. This prohibition does not preclude all electronic message signs. 
(3)  Signs that are not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground. 
(4)  Signs erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of streets, alleys or driveways, or erected, designed or positioned so as to interfere with, obstruct or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device or which may mislead or confuse traffic. 
(5)  Signs posted on public property, including utility poles, lighting fixtures, street signs, benches and the like. 
(6)  Off-premises signs, with the exception of billboard signs. 
(7)  Signs placed within the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized by the city council as limited herein. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-199), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-257. - Location of signs; lighting. 
(a)  All signs permitted in this article shall be contained entirely upon private property and set back from the existing and proposed public right-of-way, except as permitted by chapter 3. 
(b)  No sign shall be permitted within the ten-foot sight triangles formed at the intersection of a public right-of-way with an accessway, driveway or alley, nor shall any sign be permitted within the 30-foot sight triangles formed at the intersection of two public rights-of-way, with two sides of the respective triangles being measured in length along the stated boundaries from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two sides already established. 
(c)  No billboard, freestanding sign or roof sign shall be permitted which faces the front or side lot line of any lot in an R district used for residential purposes within 100 feet of such lot lines, unless the subject sign is also permitted within the adjacent R district. 
(d)  Any light, exclusive of the sign area itself, used to illuminate any sign shall be situated and arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-200), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-258. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Lawful signs, other than portable signs, existing at the effective date of Ordinance No. 1934 which do not meet the terms of this chapter shall be classified as legal nonconforming signs and may be maintained as such, but shall not, except when required by law, be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, unless altered in a manner to conform with the terms of this article. Any sign in existence at the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived which was not an authorized nonconforming sign under previous zoning chapters shall not be authorized to continue as a nonconforming sign pursuant to this article or amendments thereto. If a nonconforming sign is removed, replaced or destroyed, new signs shall thereafter conform to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-201), 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 26-259. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, the following signs are hereby permitted in the various zoning districts, as follows: 
(1)  A-1 Agricultural District. Permitted signs in the A-1 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Fascia and mural wall signs used to identify the given name, symbol and occupants of a farmstead located upon the premises. Sign area shall not exceed one-fourth of the surface area of the single wall to which the sign is affixed. 
c.  Accessory signs, subject to approval by the zoning administrator, appertaining to any material that is mined, grown or treated upon the premises; provided, however, that such signs shall be located upon or immediately adjacent to the building or in the area in which such materials are treated, grown, processed or stored. Such sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 40 square feet in area. No more than one such sign shall be permitted per parcel. 
(2)  R-1 Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-1 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Accessory signs identifying principal permitted uses, other than single- and two-unit residential dwellings, shall be allowed a maximum of three signs per parcel in the following combination: one wall sign not to exceed ten percent of the surface area of the wall to which it is affixed and two freestanding signs, each freestanding sign not to exceed 30 square feet in area and five feet overall height, or two wall signs not to exceed ten percent of the surface area of the wall to which affixed. Said wall signs may utilize no more than two wall surfaces, and one freestanding sign not to exceed 30 square feet in area and five feet overall height. 
(3)  R-2 Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-2 district are any sign permitted in the R-1 district. 
(4)  R-3 Multiple Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-3 district are any sign permitted in the R-2 district. 
(5)  R-4 Multiple Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-4 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Accessory wall signs having a total sign area not to exceed one-third of the surface area of the single wall to which affixed. 
c.  Accessory freestanding signs, as follows: 
1.  Signs are permitted upon parcels containing a street frontage along any one public street of at least 150 linear feet. 
2.  Signs shall be no taller than 20 feet in height and no larger than 40 square feet. 
3.  Number of signs is limited to one sign per separate principal permitted structure. 
(6)  R-5 Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-5 district are any sign permitted in the R-1 district. 
(7)  R-P Planned Residence District. Permitted signs in the R-P district are any sign permitted in the R-4 district. 
(8)  C-1 Commercial District. Permitted signs in the C-1 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Accessory wall signs not to exceed one-third of the surface area of any single wall to which the signs are affixed. 
c.  Directional signs, limited to one sign per curb cut. 
d.  Accessory freestanding signs, as follows: 
1.  Signs shall be no taller than 30 feet in height and no larger than 40 square feet in area. 
2.  Number of signs is limited to one sign per separate principal permitted structure. 
(9)  C-2 Commercial District. Permitted signs in the C-2 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Wall signs not to exceed one-third of the surface area of any single wall to which the signs are affixed. 
c.  Directional signs, limited to one sign per curb cut. 
d.  Freestanding and roof signs, as follows: 
1.  The combined total area of such signs shall not exceed two square feet per lineal foot of street frontage. Land uses situated on corner lots may use their longer street frontage only for purposes of determining the permissible area of signs. 
2.  In no case shall the area of any one sign exceed 300 square feet in area, nor shall signs be taller than 40 feet in height. Roof signs shall not project more than 15 feet above the roof line. 
3.  Regardless of lineal street frontage, all parcels shall be permitted at least one such sign, not to exceed 60 square feet in area or 40 feet in height. 
4.  Billboards shall have a prime message area not to exceed 672 square feet and an embellishment, trim and skirting area not to exceed an additional 250 square feet. The maximum allowable height as measured from natural grade at the base of the sign to the top of the structure is 40 feet. All billboard sign structures, including the outermost edge of the sign panel, must be set back from the immediately abutting street right-of-way line a minimum of 25 feet. Billboard structures shall not be permitted within 600 feet of another billboard structure measured in either direction along both sides of the street which adjoins the billboard structure, measured from the point of intersection of the face of the sign panel, as extended, and either side of the right-of-way line of the adjoining street. Furthermore, no billboard structure shall be permitted closer than 200 feet from a residential zoning district or from the property boundaries of any property which has a principal residential use located thereon, nor closer than 200 feet from the property boundaries of a public park, church, school, including the University of Northern Iowa main campus area, cemetery, hospital, the property boundaries of any historic district established by state law or local ordinance, or the property boundaries of any certified structure listed on the national register of historic places. In addition, vertical stacking of separate sign panels on a billboard structure shall be prohibited. 
(10)  C-3 Commercial District. Permitted signs in the C-3 district are any sign permitted in the C-2 district, except for billboard signs, which shall not be permitted. 
(11)  S-1 Shopping Center District. Permitted signs in the S-1 district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Accessory wall signs not to exceed one-third of the surface area of any store wall to which the sign is affixed. 
c.  Directional signs, limited to one sign per curb cut. 
d.  Accessory freestanding signs, as follows: 
1.  In keeping with the intent of the S-1 zone, individual freestanding signs should be limited in number and designed to identify the shopping center and the stores contained therein. Individual business identification signs are to be discouraged. 
2.  To meet this end, one such sign structure shall be permitted for each 500 linear feet, or fractional part thereof, of frontage on a public street. Such signs shall be no larger than 200 square feet and no taller than 40 feet. When separate principal uses are situated on parcels containing less than 500 feet of street frontage, one freestanding sign may be permitted. Such a sign shall be no larger than 100 square feet, and no taller than 30 feet. 
e.  All signs shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the S-1 zoning district provisions, regulations and restrictions. 
(12)  M-1 Light Industrial District. Permitted signs in the M-1 district are any sign permitted in the C-2 district, except for billboard signs, which shall not be permitted. 
(13)  M-2 Heavy Industrial District. Permitted signs in the M-2 district are any sign permitted in the M-1 district. 
(14)  M-P Planned Industrial District. Permitted signs in the M-P district are as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted and limited as provided in section 26-255. 
b.  Accessory wall signs not to exceed one-third of the surface area of any single wall to which the sign is affixed. 
c.  Directional signs, limited to one per curb cut. 
d.  Accessory freestanding signs, as follows: 
1.  Signs shall be no taller than 40 feet in height, and no larger than 200 square feet. 
2.  Number of signs shall be limited to one sign per separate principal permitted structure. 

Examples of Various Sign Types
Zoning District
Zoning District Sign Type A-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-P C-1 C-2 C-3 S-1 M-1 M-2 M-P Billboard X X X X X X X X X X Wall fascia; wall-mural Not to Exceed1/4 of Surface wall 1 per parcel (excluding dwellings) not to exceed 20 square feet Not to Exceed 1/2 of Surface wall See R-1 See R-4 Not to Exceed1/2 of Surface wall See text for sign options, size, 
number, etc. Wall-projecting X X X X X Directional Limited to 1 per curb cut, 4 feet in height, not more than 6 
square feet Freestanding See 
Restrictions X X X See 
Restrictions X See 
Restrictions See 
Restrictions Off-premises X X X X X X X X X X Roof X X X X X X X X X X Accessory Traffic/city governmental Political/educational/religious Public events/holidays Permitted in all zones Memorial/monumental For sale/rent/etc. Temporary/construction Home occupation/window Portables* See Restrictions  
? = Sign type permitted within the designated zoning district. 
X = Sign type not permitted within the designated zoning district. 
Note: Some restrictions pertain to individual sign types within certain zoning districts. Reader is cautioned to confirm permissible signs with the text. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1(29-202), 5-7-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE TO 2017 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those sections of the 1971 Code, as updated through August 12, 1991. 
1971 Code 
Section 2017 Code 

Section 1-1-1-9 1-1-1-9 2-1, 2-2 2-1, 2-2 2-2.1 2-3 2-6-2-15 2-4-2-13 2-23, 2-24 2-41, 2-42 2-25, 2-26 2-61, 2-62 2-27 2-64 2-28 2-63 2-29 2-65 2-30-2-33 2-103-2-106 2-34 2-81 2-35 2-92 2-36-2-38 2-82-2-84 2-39-2-42 2-86-2-89 2-43 2-93 2-44 2-91 2-45 2-90 2-46 2-85 2-47 2-107 2-48 2-94 2-49, 2-50 2-95 2-51-2-56 2-96-2-101 2-57, 2-58 2-102 2-59 2-108 2-60 2-109 2-63, 2-64 2-151, 2-152 2-65-2-68 2-155 2-69, 2-70 2-153, 2-154 2-73 2-126 2-74 2-128 2-75 2-127 2-77, 2-78 2-129, 2-130 2-79-2-81 2-131 2-82 2-132 2-88-2-93 2-306-2-311 2-101-2-104 2-331-2-334 2-111-2-114 2-416-2-419 2-120-2-122 2-391-2-393 2-123 2-395 2-124 2-394 2-125 2-396 2-137-2-140 2-351-2-354 2-165-2-168 2-371-2-374 2-180, 2-181 2-171, 2-172 2-220 2-212 2-221 2-211 2-226-2-233 2-231-2-238 2-234, 2-235 2-239 2-275-2-280 2-436-2-441 2-285 2-256 2-291-2-294 2-481-2-484 2-298-2-300 2-276-2-278 2-301(1)-(3) 2-279-2-281 2-302-2-306 2-282-2-286 2-311-2-314 2-501-2-504 2-321-2-324 2-521-2-524 2-336-2-339 2-461-2-464 2-350 2-656 2-351, 2-352 2-657 2-353, 2-354 2-658, 2-659 2-375-2-379 2-676-2-680 2-390-2-395 2-541-2-546 2-410-2-415 2-566-2-571 2-421-2-424 2-636-2-639 2-431-2-434 2-616-2-619 2-243-2-247 4-26-4-30 2-248 4-32 2-249 4-31 2-260 8-26 2-261-2-269 8-28-8-36 2-270 8-27 2-471-2-473 2-192-2-194 2-475 2-191 3-1-3-3 3-1 3-4-3-7 3-2-3-5 3-21-3-23 3-31-3-33 3-24 3-35 3-25 3-60 3-26 3-36 3-27 3-50 3-28, 3-29 3-37, 3-38 3-30 3-51 3-31-3-34 3-39-3-42 3-35 3-43 6-43 3-36 3-44 6-43 3-37 3-45 3-38 3-34 3-39-3-41 3-46 3-42-3-44 3-47-3-49 3-45 3-52 3-46 3-55 3-47 3-53 3-48, 3-49 3-56, 3-57 3-51 3-54 3-52 3-58 3-58, 3-59 3-62, 3-63 3-65 3-61 3-66 3-59 3-67, 3-68 3-64, 3-65 4-1 5-1 4-2 5-4 4-3 5-2 4-4-4-12 5-5-5-13 4-13 5-16 4-14 5-15 4-15 5-18 4-16 5-14 4-17 5-17 4-18 5-21 4-19, 4-20 5-19, 5-20 4-21-4-24 5-22-5-25 4-25 5-3 4-51-4-53 5-51-5-53 4-54 5-56 4-55, 4-56 5-54, 5-55 4-57-4-60 5-57-5-60 4-70, 4-71 5-76, 5-77 4-72, 4-73 5-80, 5-81 4-74 5-79 4-75 5-78 6-1 6-2 6-3-6-6 6-3-6-6 6-7 6-6 6-8-6-13 6-7 6-14 6-1 6-15 6-8 6-16 6-7 6-17-6-21 6-9-6-13 6-33, 6-34 6-41, 6-42 6-37 6-44 6-38-6-40 6-45 6-41, 6-42 6-46 6-43, 6-44 6-47 6-45 6-48 6-46 6-44 6-48 6-49 6-49, 6-50 6-56, 6-57 6-51, 6-52 6-50 6-53 6-53 6-54 6-52 6-55 6-51 6-56, 6-57 6-54, 6-55 6-58 6-2 6-59-6-61 6-86 6-62 6-90 6-62.1(a)-6-62.1(c) 6-87-6-89 6-63 6-58 6-64, 6-65 6-60, 6-61 6-66 6-59 6-67-6-71 6-62-6-66 6-72 6-1 6-75-6-78 6-106-6-109 6-79-6-81 6-110 6-82, 6-83 6-111, 6-112 7-1 26-482 7-2 26-481 7-3, 7-4 26-483, 26-484 7-15-7-23 26-496-26-504 7-34-7-42 26-516-26-524 7-43(a), 7-43(b) 26-525, 26-526 7-54-7-56 26-536-26-538 8-21 7-26 8-22-8-54 7-27 8-101 7-411 8-102 7-415 8-103 7-446 8-104 7-426 7-471 8-105-8-111 7-472-7-478 8-112 7-413 8-113 7-425 8-114 7-416 8-115-8-119 7-447-7-451 8-120 7-414 8-121-8-123 7-417-7-419 8-124-8-127 7-421-7-424 8-128 7-424 8-129 7-420 8-130 7-424 8-131 7-412 9-1, 9-2 9-2, 9-3 9-16, 9-17 9-26, 9-27 9-18 9-1 9-19 9-28 9-19.1 9-29 9-20-9-30 9-30-9-40 101/2-1-101/2-4 15-1-15-4 101/2-5 15-31 101/2-6-101/2-12 15-32-15-38 101/2-13(a), 101/2-13(b) 15-171, 15-172 101/2-13.1 15-91 101/2-13.2 15-111, 15-112 101/2-14(1)-101/2-14(3) 15-131-15-133 101/2-15(a), 101/2-15(b) 15-151, 15-152 101/2-16-101/2-25 15-56-15-65 101/2-26-101/2-31 15-66-15-71 11-01 10-1 11-1 10-4 11-2 10-3 11-3-11-5 10-5-10-7 11-7 10-8 11-18 10-2 12-5-12-10 7-96-7-101 12-20(a), 12-20(b) 7-171, 7-172 12-21 7-174 12-22 7-173 12-30(a)-12-30(d) 7-55-7-58 12-31 7-50 12-32(a) 7-52 12-32(b) 7-54 12-33 7-53 12-40, 12-41 7-46, 7-47 12-42 7-51 12-50(a)-(c) 7-76 12-50(d)-(g) 7-77 12-51, 12-52 7-78, 7-79 12-60-12-62 7-121-7-123 12-63 7-129 12-64, 12-65 7-124, 7-125 12-66 7-128 12-67, 12-68 7-126, 7-127 12-80-12-84 7-146-7-150 12-85-12-87 7-150-7-152 12-100 7-48 12-101-12-106 7-49 12-109-12-114 7-49 12-116-12-119 7-49 12-121-12-133 7-49 12-135-12-159 7-49 14-16 11-26 14-16.1-14-17 11-26 14-19, 14-20 11-27 14-20.2-14-20.4 11-27 14-21, 14-22 11-28, 11-29 14-23 11-27 14-24, 14-25 11-1 14-26 11-30 14-27 11-27 14-28 11-31 14-34 11-51 14-35, 14-36 11-58, 11-59 14-37-14-39 11-55-11-57 14-40 11-54 14-41 11-53 14-42 11-52 14-50-14-54 11-76-11-80 151/2-26-151/2-34 8-56-8-64 151/2-35-151/2-45 8-65-8-75 151/2-46-151/2-54 8-76-8-84 151/2-55-151/2-61 8-85-8-91 151/2-76-151/2-78 8-111-8-113 16-1, 16-2 12-1, 12-2 16-3(a) 2-591 16-3(b) 2-592, 2-593 16-3(c), (d) 2-594, 2-595 16-4 2-596 16-6 12-3 16-7 12-9 16-8-16-12 12-4-12-8 16-13, 16-14 12-10, 12-11 16-23, 16-24 12-41, 12-42 16-25 12-44 16-26 12-43 16-27 12-12 16-38-16-40 12-61-12-63 16-43 12-64 17-1, 17-2 7-191, 7-192 17-3, 17-4 7-194, 7-195 17-5 7-237 17-6 7-196 17-7 7-236 17-8 7-240 17-9, 17-10 7-238, 7-239 17-11, 17-12 7-197, 7-198 17-13 7-200 17-14 7-199 17-15-17-33 7-201-7-219 17-34 7-193 7-220 18-1-18-3 13-1-13-3 18-39-18-44 27-26-27-31 18-75-18-77 27-96-27-98 18-100, 18-101 27-51, 27-52 18-102-18-121 27-57-27-76 18-122 27-56 18-123 27-55 18-124 27-54 18-126 27-77 18-128 27-53 181/2-1, 181/2-2 14-2, 14-3 183/4-1-183/4-3 20-156-20-158 183/4-4(a)-183/4-4(c) 20-159-20-161 183/4-5 20-162 183/4-6, 183/4-7 20-163, 20-164 183/4-17-183/4-23 20-186-20-191 183/4-39-183/4-45 20-26-20-32 183/4-56-183/4-59 20-76-20-79 183/4-71-183/4-74 20-61-20-64 183/4-86-183/4-89 20-46-20-49 183/4-101 20-211 183/4-102, 183/4-103 20-213 183/4-104, 183/4-105 20-214, 20-215 183/4-106-183/4-112 20-216-20-222 183/4-113-183/4-117 20-212 183/4-118 20-223 183/4-130, 183/4-131 20-109, 20-110 183/4-132 20-113 183/4-133, 183/4-134 20-106, 20-107 183/4-135 20-112 183/4-135.1 20-111 183/4-136 20-108 183/4-137, 183/4-138 20-114 183/4-139 20-115 183/4-140-183/4-146 20-116 183/4-147-183/4 -149 20-117 183/4-150-183/4-153 20-118-20-121 183/4-154-183/4-160 20-122 183/4-161 20-125 183/4-162, 183/4-163 20-124 183/4-164, 183/4-165 20-126, 20-127 183/4-166-183/4-169 20-128-20-131 183/4-174 20-123 183/4-175 20-132 183/4-185 20-91 183/4-186(a), 
183/4-186(b) 20-92, 20-93 183/4-187 20-94 183/4-188 20-257 183/4-199 20-246 183/4-221, 183/4-222 20-248 183/4-223, 183/4-224 20-249, 20-250 183/4-225 20-249 183/4-226 20-249 183/4-227, 183/4-228 20-253, 20-254 183/4-229 20-252 183/4-230 20-251 183/4-231 20-256 183/4-232 20-255 183/4-233, 183/4-234 20-257, 20-258 183/4-235-183/4-237 20-259-20-261 183/4-238, 183/4-239 20-261, 20-262 183/4-240-183/4-242 20-263 183/4-243 20-247 19-1, 19-2 16-1, 16-2 19-3 16-5 19-4 16-3 19-5, 19-6 16-6, 16-7 19-7 16-4 19-20-19-22 16-31-16-33 19-43, 19-44 16-51, 16-52 19-45-19-48 16-52-16-55 19-49 16-57 19-51 16-58 19-61 16-77 19-62 16-76 19-63-19-66 16-78-16-81 19-74(a)-19-74(c) 16-101-16-103 19-84, 19-85 16-131, 16-132 19-86 16-134 19-87 16-133 19-88 16-136 19-89 16-135 19-90-19-96 16-137-16-143 19-104-19-108 16-161-16-165 19-120 16-184 19-121 16-181 19-122-19-125 16-185-16-188 19-126(a), 19-126(b) 16-189, 16-190 19-127 16-189 19-128-19-130 16-191-16-193 19-131 16-183 19-132, 19-133 16-194, 16-195 19-134 16-182 19-139-19-148 16-211-16-220 19-160 16-236 19-161-19-164 16-237 19-165, 19-166 16-238 19-167(a), 19-167(b) 16-239, 16-240 19-167(c) 16-239 19-168-19-170 16-241-16-243 19-171-19-175 16-243-16-247 19-175.1 16-247 19-176-19-178 16-248-16-250 20-1 17-1 20-2-20-4 17-3-17-5 20-5-20-7 17-7 20-8 17-36 20-9, 20-10 17-8, 17-9 20-11 17-13 20-12 17-10 20-13 17-39 20-14 17-42 20-15 17-12 20-16 17-38 20-17 17-14 20-18 17-11 20-19 17-40 20-20 17-47 20-21 17-41 20-22, 20-23 17-15, 17-16 20-24-20-27 17-43-17-46 20-28 17-6 20-29, 20-30 17-17, 17-18 20-31 17-37 20-32 17-2 20-33 17-66 20-34, 20-35 17-8, 17-9 20-36 17-13 20-37 17-10 20-38 17-68 20-39 17-71 20-40 17-12 20-41 17-67 20-42 17-14 20-43 17-11 20-44 17-69 20-45 17-76 20-46 17-70 20-47, 20-48 17-15, 17-16 20-49-20-52 17-72-17-75 20-53 17-6 20-54 17-18 20-55 17-17 22-1-22-7 18-2-18-8 22-8 18-1 22-25 18-66 22-26-22-30 18-74-18-78 22-31 18-72 22-32 18-69 22-33-22-37 18-79-18-83 22-38 18-71 22-39, 22-40 18-67, 18-68 22-41, 22-42 18-72 22-43 18-70 22-44 18-73 23-1, 23-2 19-12 23-3 19-2 23-4 19-1 23-5 19-10 23-5.1 19-11 23-6(b) 19-4 23-7 19-7 23-8 18-36 19-5 23-9, 23-10 19-14, 19-15 23-12 19-16 23-14 19-17 23-18-23-20 19-3 23-21 19-6 23-22 19-5 23-25 19-13 23-29 19-18 23-30 19-9 23-31 19-5 23-32 19-4 23-33 19-5 19-7 23-34, 23-35 19-5 23-39 19-19 23-42 19-20 23-43 19-8 23-50 19-41 23-51-23-53 19-43-19-45 23-54 19-42 23-65-23-68 19-66-19-69 23-82-23-86 18-40-18-44 23-87, 23-88 18-38, 18-39 23-89 18-37 23-100-23-103 19-92-19-95 23-104 19-91 23-111-23-115 19-116-19-120 25-6-25-11 7-306-7-311 25-20(a), 25-20(b) 7-391, 7-392 25-21, 25-22 7-393, 7-394 25-30 7-259 25-31, 25-32 7-366, 7-367 25-33 7-258 25-34, 25-35 7-261, 7-262 25-41 7-260 25-50(a)-(c) 7-281 25-50(d)-(g) 7-282 25-51-25-54 7-283-7-286 25-60 7-331 25-61 7-335 25-62(a), 25-62(b) 7-332, 7-333 25-63 7-334 25-64-25-71 7-336-7-343 25-78-25-82 7-361-7-365 25-83, 25-84 7-365, 7-366 25-85 7-368 25-86(a)-25-86(c) 7-369-7-371 25-86(d)-25-86(f) 7-369 25-98 7-256 25-99-25-118 7-257 25-118.1 7-262 25-119-25-121 7-257 25-123-25-132 7-257 26-16-26-18 22-26-22-28 26-19, 26-20 22-31, 22-32 26-21, 26-22 22-29, 22-30 26-37-26-42 22-46-22-51 26-58-26-62 22-61-22-65 27-1-27-10 23-1-23-10 27-11-27-13 23-10-23-12 27-24-27-27 23-36-23-39 27-38 23-61 27-39 23-63 27-40 23-62 27-41, 27-42 23-64, 23-65 27-54, 27-55 23-86, 23-87 27-56, 27-57 23-87, 23-88 27-58, 27-59 23-90, 23-91 27-60 23-89 27-61-27-67 23-92-23-98 27-81, 27-82 23-121, 23-122 27-83-27-93 23-124-23-134 27-94-27-96 23-135 27-97 23-123 27-121-27-125 23-156-23-160 27-126 23-160 27-127 23-165 27-128-27-130 23-162-23-164 27-131 23-161 27-143-27-147 23-186-23-190 27-148-27-150 23-191 27-151 23-192 27-152 23-194 27-153 23-193 27-154-27-159 23-195-23-200 27-171 23-221 27-172 23-224 27-173 23-222 27-174-27-176 23-227-23-229 27-177, 27-178 23-225, 23-226 27-179 23-223 27-191 23-251 27-192 23-253 27-193 23-252 27-194-27-198 23-255-23-259 27-199 23-254 28-1, 28-2 24-2 28-3 24-3 28-16-28-19 24-41-24-44 28-27-28-30 24-56-24-59 28-38-28-40 24-71-24-73 28-53-28-70 24-96-24-113 28-71, 28-72 24-4, 24-5 281/2-1 25-1 281/2-31-281/2-34 25-36-25-39 281/2-35-281/2-40 25-40-25-45 29-1-29-7 27-1 32-1, 32-2 21-26, 21-27 32-3(a), 32-3(b) 21-28 32-3(c) 21-29 32-4 21-30 32-22 29-1 32-23 29-3 32-24 29-2 32-25, 32-26 29-106, 29-107 32-26.1, 32-26.2 29-108, 29-109 32-27 29-110 32-28(a) 29-111 32-28(b)-32-28(e) 29-112 32-28(f), 32-28(g) 29-114, 29-115 32-28(h)-32-28(j) 29-116 32-28(k)-32-28(m) 29-117-29-119 32-28(n) 29-113 32-28(o) 29-121 32-28(p) 29-120 32-29 29-141 32-29.1 29-142 32-30-32-33 29-143-29-146 32-33.1 29-147 32-34-32-40 29-148-29-154 32-41.1-32-41.3 29-155-29-157 32-42 29-158 32-43-32-45 29-176-29-178 32-46 29-196 32-46(A)-32-46(C) 29-197-29-199 32-46(D)(1)- 
32-46(D)(4) 29-200 32-46(D)(5) 29-201 32-46(E) 29-202 32-47 29-76 32-47(a)-32-47(c) 29-78-29-80 32-47(d) 29-82 32-47(e) 29-81 32-47(f) 29-83, 29-84 32-47(g) 29-85 32-47(h) 29-77 32-47(j), 32-47(k) 29-86, 29-87 32-47.1(1)- 
32-47.1(4) 29-34-29-37 32-48(a)-32-48(d) 29-56-29-59 32-49 29-33 32-50 29-4 32-51 29-32 32-52 29-31 32-54 29-38 32-65 4-51 32-76-32-87 4-52 32-98-32-101 4-116-4-119 32-110-32-114 4-136-4-140 32-121, 32-122 4-156, 4-157 32-131 4-71, 4-72 32-132 4-73 32-133, 32-134 4-75, 4-76 32-135 4-74 32-136-32-138 4-77-4-79 32-143, 32-144 4-96, 4-97 32-151 4-98  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2017 CODE-2019 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2019 Code of those sections of the 2017 Code, as updated through December 18, 2017. 
2017 Code 
Section 2019 Code 

Section 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-3 2-4 2-4 2-5 2-5 2-6 2-6 2-7 2-7 2-8 2-8 2-9 2-9 2-10 2-10 - 2-125 2-11 2-11 2-12 2-12 2-13 2-13 2-41 2-45 2-42 2-46 2-43 2-47 2-61 2-68 2-62 2-69 2-63 2-70 2-64 2-71 2-65 2-72 2-81 2-103 2-82 2-104 2-83 2-105 2-84 2-106 2-85 2-107 2-86 2-108 2-87 2-109 2-88 2-110 2-89 2-111 2-90 2-112 2-91 2-113 2-92 2-114 2-93 2-115 2-94 2-116 2-95 2-117 2-96 2-118 2-97 2-119 2-98 2-120 2-99 2-121 2-100 2-122 2-101 2-123 2-102 2-124 2-105 2-127 2-107 2-128 2-108 2-129 2-109 2-130 2-126 2-159 2-127 2-160 2-128 2-161 2-129 2-162 2-130 2-163 2-131 2-164 2-132 2-165 2-151 2-184 2-153 2-185 2-154 2-186 2-155 2-187 2-171 2-213 2-172 2-214 2-173 2-215 2-174 2-216 2-175 2-217 2-176 2-218 2-177 2-219 2-178 2-220 2-179 2-221 2-180 2-222 2-181 2-223 2-191 2-255 2-192 2-256 2-211 2-276 2-212 2-277 2-231 2-303 2-232 2-304 2-233 2-305 2-234 2-306 2-235 2-307 2-236 2-308 2-237 2-309 2-238 2-310 2-239 2-311 2-256 2-341 2-257 2-342 2-258 2-343 2-259 2-344 2-260 2-362 2-261 2-363 2-262 2-364 2-263 2-365 2-264 2-366 2-265 2-367 2-266 2-368 2-267 2-369 2-268 2-370 2-269 2-371 2-270 2-372 2-271 2-373 2-276 2-405 2-277 2-406 2-278 2-407 2-279 2-408 2-280 2-409 2-281 2-410 2-282 2-411 2-283 2-412 2-284 2-413 2-285 2-414 2-286 2-415 2-287 2-416 2-295 2-446 2-296 2-447 2-297 2-448 2-298 2-449 2-299 2-450 2-300 2-451 2-301 2-452 2-306 2-473 2-307 2-474 2-308 2-475 2-309 2-476 2-310 2-477 2-311 2-478 2-331 2-510 2-332 2-511 2-333 2-512 2-334 2-513 2-351 2-535 2-352 2-536 2-353 2-537 2-354 2-538 2-371 2-570 2-372 2-571 2-373 2-572 2-374 2-573 2-375 2-574 2-391 2-597 2-392 2-598 2-393 2-599 2-394 2-600 2-395 2-601 2-396 2-602 2-416 2-623 2-417 2-624 2-436 2-652 2-437 2-653 2-438 2-654 2-439 2-655 2-440 2-656 2-441 2-657 2-461 2-688 2-462 2-689 2-463 2-690 2-464 2-691 2-481 2-711 2-482 2-712 2-483 2-713 2-484 2-714 2-501 2-742 2-502 2-743 2-503 2-744 2-504 2-745 2-521 2-774 2-522 2-775 2-523 2-776 2-524 2-777 2-541 2-808 2-542 2-809 2-543 2-810 2-544 2-811 2-545 2-812 2-546 2-813 2-566 2-835 2-567 2-836 2-568 2-837 2-569 2-838 2-570 2-839 2-571 2-840 2-581 2-859 2-582 2-860 2-583 2-861 2-584 2-862 2-601 2-888 2-602 2-889 2-603 2-890 2-604 2-891 2-626 2-916 2-627 2-917 2-628 2-918 2-629 2-919 2-630 2-920 2-631 2-921 2-641 2-946 2-642 2-947 2-643 2-948 2-644 2-949 2-645 2-950 2-646 2-951 2-651 2-976 2-652 2-977 2-653 2-978 2-654 2-979 2-655 2-980 2-661 2-1004 2-662 2-1005 2-663 2-1006 2-664 2-1007 2-685 2-1085 2-686 2-1086 2-687 2-1087 2-688 2-1088 2-689 2-1089 2-690 2-1090 2-691 2-1091 2-692 2-1092 3-1 3-1 3-2 3-2 3-3 3-3 3-4 3-4 3-5 3-5 3-6 3-6 3-31 3-31 3-32 3-32 3-33 3-33 3-34 3-34 3-35 3-35 3-36 3-36 3-37 3-37 3-38 3-38 3-39 3-39 3-40 3-40 3-41 3-41 3-42 3-42 3-43 3-43 3-44 3-44 3-45 3-45 3-46 3-46 3-48 3-47 3-49 3-48 3-50 3-49 3-51 3-50 3-52 3-51 3-53 3-52 3-54 3-53 3-55 3-54 3-56 3-55 3-57 3-56 3-58 3-57 3-59 3-58 3-60 3-59 3-61 3-60 3-62 3-61 3-63 3-62 3-64 3-63 3-65 3-64 5-1 5-1 5-3 5-2 5-4 5-3 5-5 5-4 5-6 5-5 5-15 5-6 5-19 5-7 5-20 5-8 5-22 5-9 5-23 5-10 5-24 5-11 5-25 5-12 5-26 5-13 5-27 5-14 5-51 5-34 5-52 5-35 5-53 5-36 5-54 5-37 5-55 5-38 5-56 5-39 5-57 5-40 5-58 5-41 5-59 5-42 5-60 5-43 5-61 5-44 5-62 5-45 5-76 5-63 5-77 5-64 5-78 5-65 5-79 5-66 5-80 5-67 5-81 5-68 6-1 6-1 6-2 6-2 6-2.1 6-3 6-3 6-4 6-4 6-5 6-6 6-6 6-7 6-7 6-8 6-8 6-10 6-10 6-13 6-11 6-41 6-43 6-42 6-44 6-43 6-45 6-44 6-46 6-45 6-47 6-46 6-48 6-47 6-49 6-48 6-50 6-49 6-51 6-50 6-52 6-51 6-53 6-52 6-54 6-53 6-55 6-54 6-56 6-55 6-57 6-56 6-58 6-57 6-59 6-58 6-60 6-59 6-61 6-60 6-62 6-61 6-63 6-62 6-64 6-63 6-65 6-64 6-66 6-65 6-67 6-66 6-68 6-67 6-69 6-68 6-70 6-86 6-99 6-87 6-100 6-88 6-101 6-106 6-131 6-107 6-132 6-108 6-133 6-109 6-134 6-110 6-135 6-111 6-136 6-112 6-137 6-113 6-158 6-114 6-159 6-115 6-160 7-26 7-19 7-27 7-20 7-28 7-21 7-46 7-46 7-47 7-47 7-48 7-48 7-51 7-51 7-53 7-52 7-54 7-53 7-55 7-54 7-56 7-55 7-57 7-56 7-58 7-57 7-191 7-88 7-192 7-89 7-193 7-90 7-194 7-91 7-195 7-92 7-196 7-93 7-197 7-94 7-198 7-95 7-199 7-96 7-200 7-97 7-201 7-98 7-202 7-99 7-203 7-100 7-204 7-101 7-205 7-102 7-206 7-103 7-207 7-104 7-208 7-105 7-209 7-106 7-210 7-107 7-211 7-108 7-212 7-109 7-213 7-110 7-214 7-111 7-215 7-112 7-216 7-113 7-217 7-114 7-218 7-115 7-219 7-116 7-236 7-146 7-237 7-147 7-238 7-148 7-239 7-149 7-240 7-150 7-256 7-169 7-257 7-170 7-258 7-171 7-259 7-196 7-260 7-197 7-261 7-198 7-262 7-199 7-263 7-200 7-264 7-201 7-265 7-202 7-266 7-203 7-267 7-204 7-411 7-232 7-412 7-233 7-413 7-234 7-414 7-235 7-415 7-236 7-416 7-237 7-417 7-238 7-418 7-239 7-419 7-240 7-420 7-241 7-421 7-242 7-422 7-243 7-423 7-244 7-424 7-245 7-425 7-246 7-426 7-247 7-446 7-273 7-447 7-274 7-448 7-275 7-449 7-276 7-450 7-277 7-451 7-278 7-471 7-305 7-472 7-306 7-473 7-307 7-474 7-308 7-475 7-309 7-476 7-310 7-477 7-311 7-478 7-312 7-479 7-343 7-480 7-344 7-481 7-345 7-482 7-346 7-483 7-347 7-484 7-348 7-485 7-349 7-486 7-350 7-487 7-351 7-488 7-352 7-500 7-378 7-501 7-379 7-502 7-380 7-503 7-381 7-504 7-382 7-505 7-383 7-506 7-384 7-507 7-385 7-508 7-386 7-509 7-387 7-510 7-388 7-511 7-389 7-512 7-390 7-513 7-391 7-550 7-411 7-551 7-412 7-552 7-413 7-553 7-414 7-554 7-415 7-560 7-444 7-561 7-445 7-562 7-446 7-563 7-447 7-564 7-448 7-565 7-480 7-566 7-481 7-567 7-482 7-568 7-483 7-569 7-484 8-1 22-1 8-2 22-2 8-3 22-3 9-40 17-369 10-2 8-1 10-4 8-2 10-5 8-3 10-6 8-4 10-8 8-5 11-26 9-19 11-27 9-20 11-28 9-21 11-29 9-22 11-30 9-23 11-31 9-24 11-32 9-25 11-33 9-26 11-51 9-54 11-52 9-55 11-53 9-56 11-54 9-57 11-55 9-58 11-56 9-59 11-57 9-60 11-58 9-61 11-59 9-62 11-61 9-63 11-76 9-85 11-77 9-86 11-79 9-87 11-81 9-106 11-82 9-107 12-1 10-1 12-2 10-2 12-3 10-3 12-4 10-4 12-5 10-5 12-6 10-6 12-7 10-7 12-8 10-8 12-9 10-9 12-10 10-10 12-11 10-11 12-12 10-12 12-13 10-13 12-41 10-45 12-42 10-46 12-43 10-47 12-44 10-48 12-45 10-49 12-61 10-72 12-64 10-73 13-2 16-38 13-3 19-281 14-1 11-1 14-2 11-2 14-3 11-3 14-4 11-4 14-51 11-51 14-52 11-52 14-71 11-78 14-72 11-79 14-73 11-80 14-74 11-81 14-75 11-82 14-76 11-83 14-77 11-84 14-78 11-85 14-91 11-114 14-92 11-115 14-93 11-116 14-94 11-117 14-95 11-118 14-96 11-119 14-97 11-120 14-98 11-121 14-99 11-122 14-100 11-123 14-101 11-124 14-102 11-125 14-103 11-126 14-104 11-127 14-105 11-128 14-106 11-129 14-126 11-157 14-127 11-158 14-128 11-159 14-129 11-160 14-130 11-161 14-131 11-162 14-132 11-163 14-133 11-164 14-134 11-165 14-135 11-166 14-136 11-167 14-137 11-168 14-138 11-169 14-139 11-170 14-140 11-171 14-141 11-172 14-142 11-173 14-143 11-174 14-144 11-175 14-146 11-176 14-147 11-177 14-148 11-178 14-149 11-179 14-166 11-197 14-167 11-198 14-168 11-199 14-169 11-200 14-170 11-201 14-171 11-202 14-172 11-203 14-191 11-230 14-192 11-231 14-193 11-232 14-194 11-233 14-195 11-234 14-196 11-235 14-197 11-236 14-198 11-237 14-199 11-238 14-200 11-239 14-201 11-240 14-202 11-241 14-203 11-242 14-204 11-243 14-205 11-265 14-206 11-294 14-207 11-295 14-208 11-296 14-209 11-297 14-210 11-298 14-211 11-299 14-212 11-300 14-213 11-301 14-214 11-302 14-215 11-303 14-216 11-304 14-217 11-305 14-218 11-306 14-219 11-307 14-226 11-339 15-1 12-1 15-2 12-2 15-3 12-3 15-4 12-4 15-31 12-27 15-32 12-28 15-33 12-29 15-34 12-30 15-35 12-31 15-36 12-32 15-37 12-33 15-38 12-34 15-56 12-57 15-57 12-58 15-58 12-59 15-59 12-60 15-60 12-61 15-61 12-62 15-62 12-63 15-65 12-64 15-66 12-65 15-67 12-66 15-68 12-67 15-69 12-68 15-70 12-69 15-71 12-70 15-91 12-99 15-111 12-127 15-131 12-153 15-132 12-154 15-133 12-155 15-151 12-179 15-152 12-180 15-153 12-181 15-155 12-182 15-156 12-183 15-171 12-205 15-172 12-206 16-1 13-1 16-2 13-2 16-3 13-3 16-4 13-4 16-5 13-5 16-6 13-6 16-7 13-7 16-181 13-97 16-182 13-98 16-183 13-99 16-184 13-100 16-185 13-101 16-186 13-102 16-187 13-103 16-188 13-104 16-189 13-105 16-190 13-106 16-191 13-107 16-192 13-108 16-193 13-109 16-194 13-110 16-195 13-111 16-236 13-136 16-237 13-137 16-238 13-138 16-239 13-139 16-240 13-140 16-260 13-164 16-261 13-165 16-262 13-166 16-263 13-167 16-264 13-168 16-266 13-169 17-1 14-1 17-2 14-2 17-3 14-3 17-4 14-4 17-5 14-5 17-7 14-6 17-8 14-7 17-9 14-8 17-10 14-9 17-11 14-10 17-12 14-11 17-13 14-12 17-17 14-13 17-18 14-14 17-36 14-32 17-37 14-33 17-38 14-34 17-39 14-35 17-40 14-36 17-41 14-37 17-42 14-38 17-43 14-39 17-44 14-40 17-45 14-41 17-46 14-42 17-47 14-43 17-66 14-75 17-67 14-76 17-68 14-77 17-69 14-78 17-70 14-79 17-71 14-80 17-72 14-81 17-73 14-82 17-74 14-83 17-75 14-84 17-76 14-85 18-1 15-1 18-2 15-2 18-3 15-3 18-4 15-4 18-5 15-5 18-6 15-6 18-7 15-7 18-36 15-33 18-37 15-34 18-38 15-35 18-39 15-36 18-40 15-37 18-41 15-38 18-42 15-39 18-43 15-40 18-44 15-41 18-45 15-42 18-46 15-43 18-66 15-75 18-67 15-76 18-68 15-77 18-69 15-78 18-70 15-79 18-71 15-80 18-72 15-81 18-73 15-82 18-74 15-83 18-75 15-84 18-76 15-85 18-77 15-86 18-78 15-87 18-79 15-88 18-80 15-89 18-81 15-90 18-82 15-91 18-83 15-92 19-1 16-1 19-2 16-2 19-5 16-4 19-6 16-5 19-7 16-6 19-8 16-7 19-9 16-8 19-10 16-9 19-11 16-10 19-12 16-11 19-12A 16-12 19-13 16-13 19-14 16-14 19-15 16-15 19-16 16-16 19-17 16-17 19-18 16-18 19-19 16-19 19-20 16-20 19-21 16-21 19-22 16-22 19-23 16-23 19-24 16-24 19-25 16-25 19-26 16-26 19-27 16-27 19-28 16-28 19-29 16-29 19-30 16-30 19-31 16-31 19-32 16-32 19-33 16-33 19-34 16-34 19-35 16-35 19-36 16-36 19-37 16-37 19-38 16-39 19-41 16-65 19-42 16-66 19-43 16-67 19-44 16-68 19-45 16-69 19-66 16-97 19-67 16-98 19-68 16-99 19-69 16-100 19-91 16-129 19-92 16-130 19-93 16-131 19-94 16-132 19-95 16-133 19-116 16-166 19-117 16-166 19-118 16-166 19-119 16-166 19-120 16-167 20-91 17-40 20-92 17-41 20-93 17-42 20-94 17-43 20-106 17-75 20-107 17-76 20-108 17-77 20-109 17-78 20-110 17-79 20-111 17-80 20-112 17-81 20-113 17-82 20-114 17-83 20-115 17-84 20-116 17-85 20-117 17-86 20-118 17-87 20-119 17-88 20-120 17-89 20-121 17-90 20-122 17-91 20-123 17-92 20-124 17-93 20-125 17-94 20-126 17-95 20-127 17-96 20-128 17-97 20-129 17-98 20-129A 17-99 20-130 17-100 20-131 17-101 20-132 17-102 20-156 17-133 20-157 17-134 20-158 17-135 20-159 17-136 20-160 17-137 20-161 17-138 20-162 17-139 20-163 17-140 20-164 17-141 20-186 17-166 20-187 17-167 20-188 17-168 20-189 17-169 20-190 17-170 20-191 17-171 20-211 17-196 20-212 17-197 20-213 17-198 20-214 17-199 20-216 17-201 20-217 17-202 20-218 17-203 20-219 17-204 20-220 17-205 20-221 17-206 20-222 17-207 20-223 17-208 20-224 17-209 20-225 17-210 20-246 17-229 20-247 17-230 20-248 17-231 20-249 17-232 20-250 17-233 20-251 17-234 20-252 17-235 20-253 17-236 20-254 17-237 20-255 17-238 20-256 17-239 20-257 17-240 20-257.1 17-241 20-258 17-242 20-259 17-243 20-260 17-244 20-261 17-245 20-262 17-246 20-263 17-247 20-277 17-273 20-278 17-274 20-279 17-275 20-321 17-299 20-322 17-300 20-323 17-301 20-324 17-302 20-325 17-303 20-326 17-304 20-327 17-305 20-328 17-306 20-329 17-331 20-330 17-332 20-331 17-333 20-332 17-334 20-333 17-335 20-334 17-336 20-335 17-337 20-336 17-338 20-351 17-365 20-352 17-366 20-353 17-367 20-354 17-368 21-26 18-19 21-27 18-20 21-28 18-21 21-29 18-22 21-30 18-23 23-1 19-1 23-3 19-2 23-4 19-3 23-5 19-4 23-7 19-5 23-8 19-6 23-9 19-7 23-10 19-8 23-11 19-9 23-12 19-10 23-13 19-11 23-14 19-12 23-15 19-13 23-36 19-45 23-37 19-46 23-38 19-47 23-39 19-48 23-61 19-70 23-62 19-71 23-63 19-72 23-64 19-73 23-65 19-74 23-66 19-92 23-67 19-93 23-68 19-94 23-69 19-95 23-70 19-96 23-71 19-97 23-72 19-98 23-73 19-99 23-74 19-100 23-75 19-101 23-86 19-131 23-87 19-132 23-88 19-133 23-89 19-134 23-90 19-135 23-91 19-136 23-92 19-137 23-93 19-138 23-94 19-139 23-95 19-140 23-96 19-141 23-97 19-142 23-98 19-143 23-99 19-144 23-121 19-172 23-122 19-173 23-123 19-174 23-124 19-175 23-125 19-176 23-126 19-177 23-127 19-178 23-128 19-179 23-129 19-180 23-130 19-181 23-131 19-182 23-132 19-183 23-133 19-184 23-134 19-185 23-135 19-186 23-156 19-211 23-157 19-212 23-158 19-213 23-159 19-214 23-160 19-215 23-161 19-216 23-162 19-217 23-163 19-218 23-164 19-219 23-165 19-220 23-166 19-221 23-167 19-222 23-168 19-223 23-169 19-224 23-170 19-225 23-171 19-226 23-221 19-246 23-222 19-247 23-223 19-248 23-224 19-249 23-225 19-250 23-226 19-251 23-227 19-252 23-228 19-253 23-229 19-254 23-251 19-272 23-252 19-273 23-253 19-274 23-254 19-275 23-255 19-276 23-256 19-277 23-257 19-278 23-258 19-279 23-259 19-280 24-1 20-1 24-2 20-2 24-3 20-3 24-4 20-4 24-5 20-5 24-6 20-6 24-16 20-31 24-17 20-32 24-18 20-33 24-19 20-34 24-27 20-57 24-28 20-58 24-29 20-59 24-30 20-60 24-31 20-61 24-38 20-100 24-39 20-101 24-40 20-102 24-41 20-103 24-42 20-104 24-43 20-105 24-53 20-124 24-54 20-125 24-55 20-126 24-56 20-127 24-57 20-128 24-58 20-129 24-59 20-130 24-60 20-131 24-61 20-132 24-62 20-133 24-63 20-134 24-64 20-135 24-65 20-136 24-66 20-137 24-67 20-138 24-68 20-139 24-69 20-140 24-70 20-141 24-71 20-142 24-72 20-143 24-73 20-144 24-74 20-145 24-76 20-165 24-77 20-166 24-78 20-167 25-1 21-1 25-2 21-2 25-36 21-48 25-37 21-49 25-38 21-50 25-39 21-51 25-40 21-52 25-41 21-53 25-42 21-54 25-43 21-55 25-44 21-56 25-45 21-57 26-2 23-1 26-3 23-2 26-31 23-23 26-32 23-24 26-33 23-25 26-34 23-26 26-35 23-27 26-36 23-28 26-37 23-29 26-38 23-30 26-39 23-31 26-40 23-32 26-41 23-33 26-42 23-34 26-43 23-35 26-44 23-36 26-45 23-37 26-46 23-38 26-47 23-39 26-48 23-40 26-49 23-41 26-62 23-71 26-63 23-72 26-64 23-73 26-65 23-74 26-66 23-75 26-67 23-76 26-68 23-77 26-69 23-78 26-70 23-79 26-71 23-80 26-72 23-81 26-73 23-82 26-74 23-83 26-96 23-110 26-97 23-111 26-98 23-112 26-99 23-113 26-100 23-114 26-100A 23-115 26-100B 23-116 26-101 23-117 26-102 23-118 26-103 23-119 26-104 23-120 26-105 23-121 26-106 23-122 26-107 23-123 26-108 23-124 26-109 23-125 26-110 23-126 26-111 23-127 26-112 23-128 26-113 23-129 26-114 23-130 26-115 23-131 26-116 23-132 26-117 23-133 26-118 23-134 26-119 23-135 26-121 23-136 26-122 23-137 26-123 23-138 26-124 23-139 26-125 23-140 26-126 23-141 26-127 23-142 26-128 23-143 26-129 23-144 26-130 23-145 26-130A 23-146 26-131 23-147 26-132 23-148 26-133 23-149 26-134 23-150 26-135 23-151 26-136 23-152 26-137 23-153 26-138 23-154 26-139 23-155 26-140 23-156 26-141 23-157 26-142 23-158 26-143 23-159 26-146 23-187 26-147 23-188 26-148 23-189 26-149 23-190 26-150 23-191 26-161 23-221 26-162 23-222 26-163 23-223 26-164 23-224 26-165 23-226 26-166 23-227 26-167 23-228 26-168 23-229 26-169 23-230 26-170 23-231 26-171 23-232 26-172 23-233 26-173 23-234 26-174 23-235 26-186 23-264 26-187 23-265 26-201 23-294 26-202 23-295 26-203 23-296 26-204 23-297 26-205 23-298 26-206 23-299 26-207 23-300 26-221 23-319 26-222 23-320 26-223 23-321 26-224 23-322 26-225 23-323 26-226 23-324 26-227 23-325 26-228 23-326 26-251 23-356 26-252 23-357 26-253 23-358 26-254 23-359 26-255 23-360 26-256 23-361 26-257 23-362 26-258 23-363 26-259 23-364 26-260 23-365 26-261 23-366 26-262 23-367 26-263 23-368 26-264 23-369 26-265 23-370 26-266 23-371 26-267 23-372 26-268 23-373 26-269 23-374 26-270 23-375 26-271 23-376 26-272 23-377 26-272.1 23-378 26-273 23-379 26-273.1 23-380 26-274 23-381 26-275 23-382 26-276 23-383 26-277 23-384 26-278 23-385 26-279 23-386 26-280 23-387 26-281 23-388 26-282 23-389 26-291 23-407 26-294 23-409 26-296 23-410 26-297 23-411 26-298 23-412 26-299 23-413 26-300 23-414 26-301 23-415 26-302 23-416 26-303 23-417 26-304 23-418 26-305 23-419 26-306 23-420 26-307 23-421 26-308 23-422 26-309 23-423 26-310 23-424 26-311 23-425 26-312 23-426 26-313 23-427 26-314 23-428 26-315 23-429 26-316 23-430 26-331 23-459 26-332 23-460 26-333 23-461 26-334 23-462 26-335 23-463 26-336 23-464 26-337 23-465 26-338 23-466 26-361 23-486 26-362 23-487 26-363 23-488 26-371 23-515 26-372 23-516 26-373 23-517 26-374 23-518 26-375 23-519 26-376 23-520 26-377 23-521 26-378 23-522 26-379 23-523 26-380 23-524 26-381 23-525 26-382 23-526 26-383 23-527 26-384 23-528 26-385 23-529 26-386 23-530 26-387 23-531 26-388 23-532 26-389 23-533 26-390 23-534 26-411 23-562 26-412 23-563 26-413 23-564 26-414 23-565 26-415 23-566 26-416 23-567 26-417 23-568 26-418 23-569 26-419 23-570 26-420 23-571 26-421 23-572 26-446 23-593 26-447 23-594 26-448 23-595 26-449 23-596 26-450 23-597 26-451 23-598 26-452 23-599 26-453 23-600 26-454 23-601 26-455 23-602 26-456 23-603 26-457 23-604 26-458 23-605 26-481 23-629 26-482 23-630 26-483 23-631 26-484 23-632 26-496 23-653 26-497 23-654 26-498 23-655 26-499 23-656 26-500 23-657 26-501 23-658 26-502 23-659 26-503 23-660 26-504 23-661 26-516 23-681 26-517 23-682 26-518 23-683 26-519 23-684 26-520 23-685 26-521 23-686 26-522 23-687 26-523 23-688 26-524 23-689 26-525 23-690 26-526 23-691 26-536 23-711 26-537 23-712 26-538 23-713 26-561 23-740 26-562 23-741 26-563 23-742 26-564 23-743 26-565 23-744 26-566 23-745 26-567 23-746 26-568 23-747 27-1 24-1 27-2 24-2 27-3 24-3 27-4 24-4 27-5 24-5 27-6 24-6 27-7 24-7 27-8 24-8 27-9 24-9 27-51 24-73 27-52 24-74 27-53 24-75 27-54 24-76 27-55 24-77 27-56 24-78 27-57 24-79 27-58 24-80 27-59 24-81 27-60 24-82 27-61 24-83 27-62 24-84 27-63 24-85 27-64 24-86 27-65 24-87 27-66 24-88 27-67 24-89 27-68 24-90 27-69 24-91 27-70 24-92 27-71 24-93 27-72 24-94 27-73 24-95 27-74 24-96 27-75 24-97 27-76 24-98 27-77 24-99 27-96 24-127 27-97 24-128 27-98 24-129 27-99 24-157 27-100 24-158 27-101 24-159 27-102 24-160 27-103 24-161 27-111 24-191 27-112 24-192 27-201 24-262 27-202 24-263 27-203 24-264 27-204 24-265 27-205 24-266 27-206 24-267 27-207 24-268 27-208 24-269 27-209 24-270 27-210 24-271 27-211 24-272 27-212 24-273 27-213 24-274 27-214 24-275 27-215 24-276 27-216 24-277 27-217 24-278 27-218 24-279 27-219 24-280 27-220 24-281 27-221 24-282 27-222 24-283 27-223 24-284 27-225 24-285 27-301 24-304 27-302 24-305 27-303 24-306 27-304 24-307 27-305 24-308 27-306 24-309 27-307 24-310 27-308 24-311 27-309 24-312 27-310 24-313 27-311 24-314 27-312 24-315 27-401 24-334 27-402 24-335 27-403 24-336 27-404 24-337 27-405 24-338 27-406 24-339 27-407 24-340 27-408 24-341 27-409 24-342 27-410 24-343 27-411 24-344 27-412 24-345 27-413 24-346 27-414 24-347 27-415 24-348 28-1 25-1 28-25 25-21 28-26 25-22 28-27 25-23 28-28 25-24 28-29 25-25 28-30 25-26 28-31 25-27 28-32 25-28 28-33 25-29 28-34 25-30 28-35 25-31 28-36 25-32 28-37 25-33 28-38 25-34 28-39 25-35 28-40 25-36 28-41 25-37 28-42 25-38 28-43 25-39 28-44 25-40 28-45 25-41 28-46 25-42 28-47 25-43 28-48 25-44 28-49 25-45 28-50 25-46 28-51 25-47 28-52 25-48 28-53 25-49 28-54 25-50 28-55 25-51 28-56 25-52 28-57 25-53 28-58 25-54  
COMPARATIVE TABLE - TRAFFIC CODE (1971)-2017 CODE 
    This table gives the location of the 1971 Municipal Traffic Code (which were never codified into the 1971 Code of Ordinances) in the 2017 Code. 
Traffic Code 1971 
Section 2017 Code 

Section 1-3 26-1-26-3 4-7 26-561-26-564 10-12 26-565-26-567 24-31 26-31-26-38 32-40 26-40-26-48 42-55 26-61-26-74 56 26-49 57-66 26-96-26-105 68-71 26-107-26-110 72, 73 26-161, 26-162 74-78 26-111-26-115 79 26-384 80 26-380 81 26-202 82 26-163 83 26-116 84 26-164 85-88 26-117-26-120 89 26-385 90 26-121 91 26-186 91.1 26-187 92 26-568 93 26-122 95 26-201 96 26-203 97 26-206 98, 99 26-204, 26-205 100 26-207 101 26-123 102-104 26-146-26-148 104A 26-221 105, 106 26-149, 26-150 108, 109 26-124, 26-125 112-117 26-222-26-227 117A 26-165 118 26-166 119 26-228 121-127 26-167-26-173 128 26-126 129 26-174 130, 131 26-127, 26-128 133 26-129 133.1 26-130 135 26-175 137-139 26-131-26-133 149 26-266 150 26-255 152 26-39 153 26-254 155 26-257 156 26-261 157 26-271 157.1, 157.2 26-272, 26-273 157.4 26-274 158 26-277 158.1 26-278 159 26-276 160 26-269 161 26-268 162, 163 26-262, 26-263 165 26-267 166 26-256 167-169 26-258-26-260 170 26-270 171 26-275 172 26-264 173, 174 26-251, 26-252 175 26-265 182-189 26-291-26-298 191-193 26-299-26-301 195-200 26-302-26-307 201, 202 26-311 203-205 26-308-26-310 211-218 26-331-26-338 234-238 26-371-26-375 240, 241 26-376, 26-377 242 26-379 243 26-378 244, 245 26-381, 26-382 246-252 26-384-26-390 262-273 26-411-26-422 285 26-446 287-297 26-447-26-457  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1971 Code, as updated through August 12, 1991. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section 2017 Code 
Section 5179(Res.) 10-24-72 1-8 14-1 5774(Res.) 10-11-76 1, 2 14-1 1754  8-27-84 1(ch. I, A)- 14-31-14-33 1(ch. I, C) 1(ch. II) 14-34 1(ch. III, A), 14-51, 14-52 1(ch. III, B) 1(ch. IV, A)- 14-91-14-106 1(ch. IV, P) 1(ch. V, A)- 14-71-14-73 1(ch. V, C) 1(ch. VI) 14-126 1(ch. VI, A)- 14-127-14-146 1(ch. VI, T) 1(ch. VI, J)- 14-136-14-146 1(ch. VI, T) 1(ch. VII, A)- 14-166-14-171 1(ch. VII, F) 1(ch. VIII, A(1))- 14-191-14-204 1(ch. VIII, A(14)) 1(ch. IX) 14-35 1863  2-22-88 1 14-96 1922 11-26-90 1, 2 26-272 3, 4 26-274 5 26-251 6 26-307 7 26-310 1926  1- 2-91 1 26-271 2 26-274 3, 4 26-298 1928  1- 2-91 1, 2 25-2 1929  1- 2-91 1 26-171 1935  2-25-91 2, 3 26-207 1939  4-22-91 1 26-271 1943  5-13-91 1 26-3 2, 3 26-565, 26-566 4-6 26-97-26-99 8 26-102 9 26-104 10 26-148 11 26-173 12 26-267 13, 14 26-331, 26-332 15 26-335 16 26-337 17-20 26-371-26-374 21 26-385 22 26-387 23 26-31 25 26-49 26 26-99 26-254 27 26-119 28 26-168 29 26-36 1953  9- 9-91 1       Added 27-111 2       Added 27-112 1956 10-14-91 1 26-125 1957 10-28-91 1 2-154 1960 11-25-91 1, 2 26-272, 26-273 1961 11-25-91 1 6-56 1962 11-11-91 1 27-112 1963  1-13-92 1 29-2 2 29-122 1965  2-11-92 1 7-258 2 7-331 3, 4 7-335 6 7-337 7 7-365 8 7-256 1966  2-11-92 1, 3 26-277 1967  2-11-92 1 1-9 2 6-2 3 6-2.1 1968  3-30-92 1       Rpld 2-676-2-680       Added 2-676-2-681 1971  3- 9-92 1 7-256 1972  3-23-92 1, 2 26-271 1973  5-11-92 1 26-170 1975  6- 8-92 1 29-119.1 1976  6-22-92 1 5-24(d) 1977  6-22-92 1 5-24(a) 1980  7-13-92 1 16-213 2 16-214(d) 3 16-216(d) 1981  7-13-92 1-5 26-207(7), (9) 6 26-271 1982  7-13-92 1 26-207(9) 1983  8-10-92 1 14-3(c) 1984  8-24-92 1 23-86-23-99 1985  8-24-92 1 23-156-23-171 1988  9-14-92 1 29-2 2 29-150(1)aa. 1989  9-14-92 1       Rpld 24-1-24-6, 24-41-24-44, 24-56-24-59, 24-71-24-73, 24-96-24-113       Added 24-1-24-6, 24-16-24-19, 24-27-24-29, 24-38-24-42, 24-53-24-75 1990  9-28-92 Adopting Ordinance, p. cix 1991  9-28-92 1(158.2) 26-279 1992  9-28-92 1 27-30(a), (c)-(e) 1994 10-12-92 1 27-30(f)-(k) 2 27-30(l) 1995  9-28-92 1(243A) 26-280 1997 10-19-92 1       Rpld 26-109       Added 26-109 2 26-170 3 26-271 2000  1-11-93 1 29-159 2001 12-14-92 1 26-271 2002  1-11-93 1 26-207(7) 2 26-207(9) 3 26-271 4 26-277 2004  2- 8-93 1-3 26-271 4 26-277 5 26-278 2005  2-22-93 1 26-207(9) 2 26-207(7) 2006  3- 1-93 1 5-22(d) 2 5-23(a), (b) 3 6-44(a) 4 6-45(c) 5 16-54 6       Rpld 19-3       Added 19-3 7       Rpld 19-4       Added 19-4 8       Rpld 19-14       Added 19-14 9 26-265 10 26-274 11 26-29(a)(2) 12 26-303(2)a 13 26-307(a) 2008  4-12-93 1 26-271 2010  5-10-93 1 12-5(a) 2011  4-12-93 1 26-297 2 26-274 3 26-271 4 26-277 2012  4-26-93 1 26-271 2013  5-24-93 1 7-257(1101(a)) 2 7-257(1103(d)) 2015  7-12-93 1 26-271 2016  6-14-93 1       Rpld 2-171, 2-172       Added 2-171, 2-172 2       Rpld 2-256       Added 2-256, 2-257 3 2-295-2-301 2023 8-23-93 1, 2 29-2 3 29-78(4) 4, 5 29-83(a) 6 29-114 7 29-122(f) 8 29-143(3) 9 29-198(a)(7) 10 29-199(6), (7) 11 29-202(2)(b) 2024 8-23-93 1 26-274 2028 8-23-93 1 2-373(b)(7) 2 6-7(d)(3) 3 27-1(g)(2) 4 27-29 2031  9-27-93 1-5 8-64.1 2034 11- 8-93 1 29-160 2035 11-22-93 1 26-251 2, 3 26-307(a)(1), (2) 4       Rpld 26-307(a)(3) 5 26-311(a) 2036 11-22-93 1 26-3 2 26-31(c) 3 26-263 2037 12-13-93 1 29-161 2038 12-13-93 1 26-271 2039 12-13-93 1 26-254(c) 2040 12-13-93 1 16-260-16-267 2043  1-10-94 1 26-271 2 26-307(a) 2046  2-28-94 1, 2 27-51-27-77 2047  2-28-94 1 2-154 2048  2-28-94 1 26-277 2050  3-14-94 1, 2 2-104, 2-105 3       Rpld 2-106 2051  3-14-94 1-4 12-5(a)-(c), (f) 12-45 2053  4-25-94 1 29-141 2055  4-25-94 1-5 16-3-16-7 6 16-76-16-88 2056  5-23-94 1 18-2 (13)-(18) 2057  5-23-94 1 26-251 2 26-307(a)(2) 3 26-310 2059  5-26-94 1 12-5(d) 2060  5-26-94 1 20-275-20-279 2062  7-11-94 1 14-2(f) 2064  8- 8-94 1 18-1 2 19-117 3 1-9(5)-(9) 4 3-6 5 14-35 6 4-97 2066  9-12-94 1 29-159 2067 10-10-94 1 3-43 2 3-46 3 5-53(5) 4 6-44 5, 6 7-124(a), (b) 7, 8 7-125(a), (b) 9 7-126(a) 10 7-127 11 7-334 12 7-336 13, 14 7-338(b), (e) 15, 16 7-339, 7-340 17-19 7-364, 7-365 20, 21 12-5 22 12-42 23 23-89 24 23-159 25, 26 23-162 27 24-19(a) 28 24-29(a) 29 24-42(a) 30 24-72 31 26-497 2069 11-14-94 1 26-277 2070 11-14-94 1, 2 26-125 3 26-171 2072 10-24-94 1 2-295 2073 11-28-94 1 21-27 2074 12-12-94       Added 11-32 2075 12-12-94 1 29-2 2076 12-12-94 1 26-271 2077 11-14-94 23-13 2078 12-12-94 1-3 26-271-26-273 2079 11-28-94 1-3 12-5(a), (c), (g) 2083  2-13-95 1 26-271 2084  2-13-95 1 2-300 2085  2-13-95 1 2-43 2089  3-27-95 1-3 25-2 2090  3-27-95 1 26-271 2, 3 26-277, 26-278 2093  4-10-95 1 29-123 2094  4-10-95 1 26-277 2097  4-24-95 1 19-21 2098  4-24-95 1 12-2(4) 2101  5- 8-95 1 26-271-26-273 2102  5-22-95 1 29-2 2 29-177 2103  6-12-95 1 29-160 2104  5- 8-95 1 26-170 2105  5-30-95 1 7-26, 7-27 2108  6-26-95 1       Rpld 24-1-24-6, 24-16-24-19, 24-27-24-29, 24-38-24-42, 24-53-24-75       Added 24-1-24-6, 24-16-24-19, 24-27-24-29, 24-38-24-42, 24-53-24-75 2109  6-26-95 1 1-9(c)(10) 2 18-1 2110  7-24-95 1, 2 26-271 3 26-273.1 2114  9-11-95 1 29-2 2 29-155(c)(10) 3 29-156(b)(5)b. 4 29-156(b)(12) 2116  9-11-95 1 26-170 2 26-207(7) 3 26-207(9) 2117 10- 9-95 1 29-162 2 29-163 3 29-164 4 29-165 5 29-166 2118 10- 9-95 1 26-271 2121 12-11-95 1 29-160 2123 11-13-95 1 2-296 2 2-298 2124 12-11-95 1 26-277 2127 11-27-95 1 2-256 2128 11-27-95 20-159 2129  1- 8-96 1 8-28 2130  1-22-96 1 26-271 2 26-272 3 26-273 2131  1-22-96 1 2-41(a) 2135  3-11-96 1 19-22 2137  4-22-96 1       Rpld 11-1, 11-26-11-32, 11-51-11-59, 11-76-11-80       Added 11-1, 11-26-11-32, 11-51-11-59, 11-76-11-80 2139  5-13-96 1 29-159(a) 2141  4-22-96 1 23-65(d) 2142  5-28-96 1 12-5(g) 2144  6-24-96 1 5-22(b) 2155  8-12-96 1 29-124 2156  7-22-96 1 27-30 2157  8-26-96 1 26-271 2158  9- 9-96 1-4 29-163 2159  9-23-96 1 12-5(h) 2163 10-14-96 1 29-83 2164  9- 9-96 1 7-415(a) 2165 10-28-96 1 15-70 2168 11-11-96 1       Added 26-281 2172 12- 9-96 1 26-271 2 26-277 2173 12-23-96 1 29-177(a)(35) 2174  1-27-97 1       Added 2-258-2-271 2175  2-10-97 1 20-122(c) 2176  3-10-97 1       Rpld 2-676-2-681       Added 2-676-2-681 2177  2-24-97 1 29-160 2178  2-24-97 1       Rpld 14-1-14-3 14-31-14-35 14-51, 14-52 14-71-14-73 14-91-14-106 14-126-14-146 14-166-14-171 14-191-14-204       Added 14-1-14-4 14-31-14-35 14-51, 14-52 14-71-14-79 14-91-14-106 14-126-14-147 14-166-14-171 14-191-14-204 2179  2-24-97 1 26-271 2180  3-10-97 1 29-177(i)(4) 2181  3-24-97 1, 2 20-249 3 20-252 4 20-256 5 20-257.1 2182  2-24-97 1       Added 28-25-28-58 2183  3-10-97 1 1-9 2       Rpld 12-3       Added 12-3 2184  2-24-97 1 29-160(c)(16) 2 29-160(E)(8) 2186  3-24-97 1 14-74(d) 2189  4-14-97 1 25-1 2190  6-23-97 1 14-76 2194  6-23-97 1       Rpld 7-46-7-58 7-76-7-79 7-96-7-101 7-121-7-129 7-146-7-152 7-171-7-174       Added 7-46-7-61 7-76-7-79 7-96-7-101 7-121-7-133 7-146-7-151 7-171-7-174 2195  6-23-97 1       Rpld 7-256       Added 7-256 2       Rpld 7-257 Added 7-257 7-258-7-262 7-281-7-286 7-306-7-311 7-331-7-343 7-361-7-371 7-391-7-394 2196  6-23-97 1       Added 7-500-7-513 2201  8-25-97 1-8 Adopting Ord., 
1997 Code of Ordinances, p. cx.i 2199  8-11-97 1 26-207(12) 2 26-271 2200  8-25-97 1 26-271 2202  8-25-97 1 26-271 2206 10-13-97 1 26-298(a) 2 26-308(a) 2207 10-27-97 1 26-271 2210 12- 8-97 1 29-160 (note) 2212 11-24-97 1 26-271 2214  1-12-98 1 26-271 2215  1-26-98 1 26-278 2219  2- 9-98 1 26-271 2220  2-23-98 1 23-38 2221  2-23-98 1 22-26-22-33, 22-46-22-51, 22-61-22-66 2223  3-23-98 1 6-41 2 6-42 3 6-43(a) 4 6-44 5 6-46(a) 2228  4-13-98 1 26-277 2229  3-23-98 1 2-234 2 2-236 2231  4-27-98 1 29-165(i) 2232  4-27-98 1 26-254(a) 2 26-282 2233  5-11-98 1 26-254(c)(1) 2234  4-27-98 1 26-186(a) 2236  6- 8-98 1 29-156(a) 2238  6-22-98 1 26-207(6) 2 26-207(9) 2239  5-26-98 1 26-271 2240  5-26-98 1 26-272 2 26-273 3 26-273.1 2241  9-28-98 1 29-149(4) 2 29-150(4) 2242  9-28-98 1 7-550, 7-551 2244 10-12-98 1 26-271 2 26-207 2245 10-12-98 1       Rpld 5-23(d), 5-24, 5-25 2246 10-26-98 3 29-107 2247 11- 9-98 1 26-277 2248 12-28-98 3 29-107 2249  1-11-99 1 26-271 2250  1-11-99 1 2-43 2 2-154 2251  1-25-99 1 2-287 2252  1-25-99 1 26-272 2 26-273 2256  2-22-99 1 5-6(c)(1) 2257  4-12-99 1 26-271 2 26-272 3 26-273 2258  4-12-99 1 26-271 2260  4-26-99 1 7-26, 7-27 2261  4-26-99 1 29-107 2263  4-26-99 1 26-265 2264  6-14-99 1 26-271 2265  6-28-99 1 29-2 2 29-115 3 29-143(3) 2266  6-28-99 1 26-271 2267  7-12-99 1-3 29-107 2268  7-12-99 1, 2 26-271 3, 4 26-277 5 26-297(a) 2269  7-12-99 1 27-96 2 27-97 3 27-98 2270  7-12-99 1 14-4 2 14-31 3 14-32 4 14-78 5 14-96 6 14-97 7 14-202 8 14-203 9 14-205 2271  8- 9-99 1       Rpld 2-256-2-259 2272  6-28-99 1, 2 26-277 2273  8-23-99 1 25-39 2274  8- 9-99 1 2-107 2275  8-23-99 1, 2 26-271 2276  9-13-99 1 27-99-27-103 2277 10-25-99 1 26-272 2 26-273 2278 10-25-99 1 26-271 2279 11- 8-99 1       Rpld 29-160(d)(1)d.-g.       Added 29-160(d)(1)d.-f. 2       Rpld 29-160(f)(1)d.-f.       Added 29-160(f)(1)d., e. 2280 11- 8-99 1       Added 19-15(e) 2281 12-13-99 1-3 29-107 2282 12-13-99 1 1-9(a)(1) 2 1-9(c) 2283 12-27-99 1 26-271 2284 12-27-99 1 26-271 2285  1-10-00 1 26-271 2 26-277 3 26-278 2286  1-25-00 1 8-26-8-36 2287  2-14-00 1 2-104 2288  2-14-00 1 26-272 2 26-273 3 26-271 2289  7-24-00 1       Rpld 22-26-22-66       Added 22-26-22-56 2290  2-28-00 1 26-272 2 26-273 3       Added 26-272.1 4 26-273.1 2292  3-13-00 1 16-76(e)       Added 16-76(f), (g) 2       Added 16-77(g) 3       Added 16-78(c) 4       Added 16-79(i) 2295  3-27-00 1 26-170 2297  4-10-00 1-3 25-2 2299  5- 8-00 1 29-78 2300  4-24-00 1-3 27-30(a), (d), (e) 2301  5-22-00 1 20-223 2302  6-12-00 1, 2 26-271 2304  7-24-00 1 29-123 2305  7-24-00 1 2-126 2306  8- 7-00 1 22-32 2 22-35 3 22-54 4       Added 22-57 2308  8-28-00 1 26-271 2311 10-23-00 1 26-170 2314 11-13-00 1       Rpld 26-207(12) 2       Added 26-207(12) 2315 11-13-00 1, 2 26-207(7) 3, 4 26-207(9) 5 26-207(11) 2318 12-11-00 1, 2 26-271 2319  1- 8-01 1       Rpld 29-144(2)(a) 2       Added 29-144(2)(a) 2321  1- 8-01 1       Rpld 7-191-7-240 2       Added 7-191-7-240 2322  1-22-01 1       Rpld 27-97 2       Added 27-97 2324  2-12-01 1       Added 20-27(a)(5) 2       Added 20-28(b)(4) 3 20-28(c) 4       Added 20-29(4) 5       Added 20-133-20-136 6       Added 20-321-20-328 2325  2-12-01 1 26-207(8) 2 26-207(9) 3 26-207(11) 2327  3-26-01 1, 2 26-271 2328  3-26-01 1 26-272 2 26-273 2329  4- 9-01 1 29-78 2 29-177(a)(12) 3       Added 29-177(a)(12A) 2333  5-29-01 1       Added 20-27(a)(6) 2       Added 20-28(b)(5) 3 20-28(c) 4       Added 20-29(5) 5       Added 20-137-20-140 6       Added 20-329-20-336 2337  6-11-01 1 6-41 2       Added 20-224 2339  7- 9-01 1 29-202(9)d.4. 2341  7-23-01 I 5-22(b) 2342  8-13-01 1 26-298(a), (b) 2       Added 26-312 2343  8-13-01 1 26-307(a) 2344  8-13-01 1 26-271 2345  7-23-01 1-3 29-107 2346  8-27-01 10-2 2347  9-24-01 1 28-33(a) 2348  9-24-01 1, 2 26-271 2349  9-24-01 1       Added 20-351-20-354 2354  9-24-01 1 26-312 2353 10-22-01 1 25-39 2355 11-12-01 1 29-202(10) 2 29-202(12) 2357 11-12-01 1, 2 26-271 2358 11-26-01 1 26-207(7) 2 26-207(9) 3 26-207(11) 2359 11-26-01 1 20-351 2 20-352 2360 12-10-01 1 27-31 2361 12-10-01 1 108 2362 12-10-01 1, 2 5-2 3 5-3 4       Rpld 5-22(d)       Added 5-22(d)-(f) 5 5-23 6       Added 5-24-5-27 2363 12-10-01 1 26-100 2       Added 26-100A, 26-100B, 26-106, 26-134, 26-135 2364  3-11-02 1 2-676-2-681 2365  3-11-02 3 29-107 2366  3-11-02 1 28-177(a) 2367  3-11-02 1 26-271 2368  4- 9-02 1 26-171 2369  4- 9-02 1 26-308(a) 2 26-311 2370  4- 9-02 1 26-309 2373  5-13-02 1 20-116(e) 2375  6-10-02 1 7-50 2 7-51 2376  6-10-02 1 7-256 2 7-257 2377  6-10-02 1 7-550, 7-551       Added 7-552-7-555, 7-570-7-575, 7-591-7-595, 7-601-7-612 2378  6-10-02 1 26-271 2374  6-24-02 1 25-39 2379  6-24-02 1 26-271 2380  6-24-02 1       Rpld 7-76(c) 2 7-281 2382  7- 8-02 1       Rpld 29-119 2383  7- 8-02 1 26-271 2384  7- 8-02 1 26-170 2385  6-24-02 adopt. ord. 2386  7-22-02 1 26-308(a) 2 26-311 2387  6-24-02 1 12-1-12-12 2388  8-12-02 10-2 2389  8-12-02 1 27-100 2 27-101 3 27-111 2390  8-12-02 1 26-170 2391  8-12-02 1 26-271 2392  8-26-02 1       Added 5-61 2396 10-14-02 1       Added 26-458 2397  9-23-02 1 5-6(c)(1) 2399 11-25-02 1-4 26-271 2400 11-25-02 1 26-272.1 2 26-273.1 2401 11-25-02 1-3 26-272 4-6 26-273 2402 11-25-02 1 26-207(9) 2 26-207(11) 2403 11-25-02 1 26-207(7) 2 26-207(9) 2404 11-25-02 1 26-271 2405 11-25-02 1 26-271 2406 11-25-02 1-4 26-271 2407 12- 9-02 1 26-170 2408 12- 9-02 1 12-4 2 12-5(a)(2), (3) 3 12-5(e) 4 12-5(g) 2410 ;4en;1-13-03 1 23-132 2 23-134 2411  1-27-03 1 26-271 2412  1-27-03 1, 2 26-271 2413  2-10-03 29-107 2414  2-10-03 1-3 29-106 29-202(2)-(4) 2415  3-10-03 29-107 2416  2-24-03 1       Added 29-167 2418  3-10-03 1 26-272 2 26-273 2419  3-10-03 1 26-271 2420  3-10-03 1 26-271 2421  3-10-03 1 20-249(a) 2422  3-10-03 1 20-223(2) 2423  3-10-03 1 12-5(g) 2 12-12(b) 2424  3-24-03 1 12-41-12-45 2425  4-14-03 1 11-51-11-59       Added 11-60, 11-61 2426  4-14-03 1-3 26-271 2430  5-12-03 1, 2 26-271 2431  5-27-03 1 11-51-11-61 2439  6-23-03 1 29-4(c) 2440  7-14-03 1 26-207(7) 2 26-207(9) 2441  8-11-03 1 26-170 2442  8-25-03 1 12-5(g) 2443  8-25-03 1 20-249 2444  8-25-03 1 28-34 2 28-39(b) 3 28-45 4 28-46 2445  8-25-03 1 26-251 2446  8-25-03 1 26-307 2447  8-25-03 1 2-126(a) 2448  8-25-03 1 22-35 2 22-57 2449  9- 8-03 1 26-271 2450  8-11-03 1 26-312 2451  9-22-03 1 26-207(5.1) 2 26-207(7) 3 26-207(9) 2452  9-22-03 1 26-271 2455  9-22-03 1 26-271 2456  9-22-03 1 26-271 2454 10-27-03 1 26-271 2458 11-17-03 1 25-39 2462 12-22-03 1 26-228(a) 2463 12-22-03 1       Rpld 16-236-16-250       Added 16-236-16-240 2464  1-12-04 1 26-271 2465  1-12-04 1, 2 26-271 2466  1-12-04 1 26-272 2 26-273 2467  1-12-04 1-7 26-271 2470  2- 9-04 1 11-27 2471  1-26-04 1 26-277 2472  1-26-04 1 26-271 2474  3- 8-04 1 15-2 2       Rpld 15-111,       Rnbd 15-112       as 15-111 15-111 3 15-151 4 15-2, 15-59(b), 15-68 2477  5-10-04 1       Added 29-168 2478  5-10-04 1       Added 29-125 2482  7-26-04 1 11-51 2 11-55(3) 3 11-57(2) 4       Added 11-57(4) 2484  8-23-04 1 7-424 2485  8-23-04 1 ch. 7, art. VI(tit.) 2       Added 7-479-7-488 2486  8-23-04 1       Added 18-2(19) 2488  9-20-04 1 26-271 2489  9-20-04 1 26-272 2 26-273 3 26-271 2493 11-22-04 1 26-271 2494 11-15-04 1 26-170 2495 11-15-04 1 26-271 2499 12-20-04 1 26-271 2500 12-20-04 1 26-271 2501  1-10-05 1 26-271 2505  2-14-05 1 5-22(b)(3) 2509  4-11-05 1 26-271 2510  4-11-05 1 26-278 2511  4-11-05 1, 2 26-170 2512  4-11-05 1-3 26-170 2513  4-11-05 1 26-271 2514  4-11-05 1 26-170 2515  3-28-05 1 8-56 2517  6-13-05 1 26-271 2518  6-13-05 1 5-61 2519  5-23-05 1 5-22 2520  6-13-05 1-3 25-2 2522  6-13-05 1       Added 23-14 2       Added 23-15 2523  6-27-05 1 12-5 2526  6-27-05 1 12-3(c) 2 12-5(g) 2527  7-11-05 1 26-271 2528  7-11-05 1-3 26-271 2529  7-11-05 1 26-271 2533  7-11-05 1 15-2-15-4 2 15-56-15-71 3 15-151, 15-152 2535  8- 8-05 1 7-26, 7-27       Added 7-28 2536  8- 8-05 1       Rpld 7-553(E) 2       Added 7-553(E)-(K) 2537  8- 8-05 1 11-1 2 11-26(a) 3 11-27 4 11-29 5 11-77 6 11-79(a) 7 11-80 2538  8- 8-05 1 26-271 2 26-277 2539  8- 8-05 1 26-271 2540  8- 8-05 1 5-23(b)       Added 5-23(c), (d) 2541  8- 8-05 1       Added 19-23 2542  8-22-05 1 26-271 2543  8-22-05 1 26-207(5.1) 2 26-207(7) 2545  9-12-05 1       Added 29-169 2546  9-26-05 1 29-115(11) 2547  9-26-05 1 26-297(b)(1) 2 26-308(a) 3       Added 26-313 2548  9-26-05 1       Added 26-314 2549  9-26-05 1       Added 26-315 2550 10-10-05 1 26-271 2551 10-10-05 1       Rpld ch. 26, art. VIII, 26-411-26-422       Added ch. 26, art. VIII, 26-411-26-421 2552 10-10-05 1-3       Added 26-361-26-363 2553 10-10-05 1 26-97 2 26-98 3 26-99 4 26-104 5       Added 26-136 6       Added 26-137 2554 10-10-05 1       Added ch. 23, art. III, div. 1(tit.) 2       Added ch. 23, art. III, div. 2, 23-66-23-75 2555 10-24-05 1 19-1 2 19-2 3 19-4 4 19-5 5 19-6 6 19-7 7 19-8 8 19-11 9 19-17 10 19-18       Rnbd 19-23       as 19-38 11       Added 19-22 12       Added 19-24 13       Added 19-25 14       Added 19-26 15       Added 19-27 16       Added 19-28 17       Added 19-29 18       Added 19-30 19       Added 19-31 20       Added 19-32 21       Added 19-33 22       Added 19-34 23       Added 19-35 24       Added 19-36 25       Added 19-37 2557 11-14-05 1 26-271 2558 11-14-05 1 26-271 2 26-277 2559 10-24-05 1 26-298(a)(6) 2561 12-12-05 1 29-160 2562 11-28-05 1 29-107(a) 2563 11-14-05 1 26-271 2564 11-14-05 1 26-274 2565 11-14-05 1 26-272 2 26-273 2567  1- 9-06 1 19-14 2568  1- 9-06 1       Rpld 19-22 2569  2-13-06 1       Added 27-113-27-124 2570  2-13-06 1       Added 27-201-27-225 2571  2-13-06       Rpld 10-2       Added 10-2 2572  3-13-06 1 26-271 2573  4-24-06 1 2-268 2 2-271 2574  5-22-06 1 26-170 2575  5-22-06 1 27-120 2 27-121 2576  5-22-06 1 5-22(e) 2577  6-12-06 1 26-271 2 26-274 3 26-277 2578  6-12-06 1 23-65(d) 2579  6-12-06 1 1-9(c)(4)a.-c. 2580  6-12-06 1 1-9(c)(11)a., b. 2581  6-12-06 1 14-35 2582  6-26-06 1       Added 11-81, 11-82 2583  6-12-06 1       Added 2-418(b)(17) 2       Added 2-420 3       Rpld 22-50(10) 4 26-292 5       Rpld 26-295 6 26-305 2584  6-12-06 1-4       Rpld 2-331-2-334 5-7 2-372-2-374 8, 9 2-393, 2-394 2585  6-26-06 1 26-271 2588  7-10-06 1 20-323 2589  7-10-06 1       Rpld 26-207(12)       Added 26-207(4.1) 2 26-207(6) 3 26-207(9) 4 26-207(11) 5       Added 26-207(12) 6       Added 26-207(13) 2590  8-28-06 1 29-123 2592  8-14-06 1 26-272 2 26-273 2594  9-11-06 1 12-5(e) 2 27-30(c) 3       Added 27-120(g) 2595  9-11-06 1       Added 27-301-27-313 2596  9-11-06 1 26-274 2598  9-11-06 1 19-18 2601  9-25-06 1 26-207(10) 2 26-207(11) 2604 10-30-06 18-2 2605 10-23-06 1 2-62 2606 10-23-06 1 26-277 2607 11-13-06 1       Added 6-113-6-115 2608 11-13-06 1       Added 24-76, 24-77 2610 12-18-06 1 26-271 2 26-277 2611  2-12-07 1, 2 26-125 3 26-186(a) 4 26-816(b) 5       Added 26-186(c) 2612  2-12-07 1, 2 26-271 2613  1-22-07 1       Rpld 26-130       Added 26-130       Added 26-130A 2615  2-26-07 1       Rpld 2-676-2-681       Added 2-676-2-681 2616  2-26-07 1 1-9(c)(11) 2617  2-26-07 1 5-26 2 5-27 2618  2-26-07 1, 2 26-3 3-7       Added 26-138-26-142 2619  2-26-07 1       Added 19-12A 2624  4-23-07 1-8 Adopting ord., p. cxv 2625  5-29-07 1       Rpld 18-1-18-8       Added 18-1-18-7 2626  5-29-07 1 18-36, 18-37 2627  5-29-07 1 1-9(c)(10) 2628  5-29-07 1       Added 20-252(14) 2631  7-23-07 1 29-59(d) 2633  7- 9-07 1 1-9(c)(11) 2       Added 1-9(c)(12) 2634  9-24-07 1 12-5(g) 2635 11-12-07 1       Rpld 26-271       Added 26-271 2636 11-12-07 1 26-272 2637 11-12-07 1, 2 26-273 2638 11-12-07 1       Rpld 26-272.1 2       Rpld 26-273.1 2639 12-17-07 1       Rpld 7-46-7-61 7-76-7-79 7-96-7-101 7-121-7-133 7-146-7-151 7-171-7-174       Added 7-46-7-58 2640 12-17-07 1       Rpld 7-256-7-262 7-281-7-286 7-306-7-311 7-331-7-343 7-361-7-371 7-391-7-394       Added 7-256-7-258 2641 12-17-07 1       Rpld 7-550-7-555 7-570-7-575 7-591-7-595 7-601-7-612       Added 7-550-7-553 2643  1-14-08 1       Rpld 14-2       Added 14-2 2       Rpld 14-3       Added 14-3 3       Rpld 14-4       Added 14-4 4       Rpld 14-32       Added 14-32 5       Rpld 14-35       Added 14-35 6       Rpld 14-51       Added 14-51 7       Rpld 14-71       Added 14-71 8       Rpld 14-73       Added 14-73 9       Rpld 14-93       Added 14-93 10       Rpld 14-96(a)(2)       Added 14-96(a)(2) 11       Rpld 14-97(b)       Added 14-97(b) 12       Added 14-148 13       Rpld 14-205(a)       Added 14-205(a) 14       Rpld 14-205(c)       Added 14-205(c) 15       Added 14-205(k) 2644  1-14-08 1       Added 20-129A 2645  1-14-08 1       Rpld 20-215       Added 20-215 2646  2-25-08 1       Added 27-2-27-5 2647  2-25-08 1 23-65 2       Added 23-65(e) 2649  3-10-08 1       Rpld 6-11 2652  4-28-08 1       Rpld 20-263(a)       Added 20-263(a) 2653  4-28-08 1       Rpld 20-262(b)(1)       Added 20-262(b)(1) 2654  4-28-08 1       Rpld 23-38       Added 23-38 2655  5-12-08 1       Rpld 27-30(a), (d), (e)       Added 27-30(a), (d), (e) 2656  5-27-08 1-3       Rpld 12-3-12-5       Added 12-3-12-5 2657  6- 9-08 1       Rpld 22-29(9)       Added 22-29(9) 2658  6- 9-08 1       Rpld 23-38(b)       Added 23-38(b) 2659  5-12-08 1 26-271 2660  6-23-08 1 26-132 2661  7-14-08 1       Rpld 15-1-15-4 15-31-15-38 15-56-15-71 15-91 15-111 15-131-15-133 15-171, 15-172       Added 15-1-15-4 15-31-15-38 15-56-15-62 15-65-15-71 15-91 15-111 15-131-15-133 15-151-15-153 15-155, 15-156 15-171, 15-172 2662  8-25-08 1 26-274 2 26-271 2663  8-18-08 1       Added 17-5(5) 2664  9- 8-08 1 26-272 2 26-273 3 26-271 2665 11-24-08 1 5-59 2       Rpld 5-61       Added 5-61 3       Added 5-62 2666 11-24-08 1-4 26-271 2667 12- 8-08 1 26-271 2668 12-22-08 1 7-49(a) 2 7-50 3       Rpld 7-52 4       Rpld 7-53(a)       Added 7-53(a) 2670  1-26-09 1 26-271 2 26-272 3 26-273 2671  1-26-09 1       Rpld 8-26-8-36 8-56-8-91 8-111-8-113 2672  1-26-09 1       Rpld 2-212       Added 2-212 2673  1-26-09 1       Rpld 2-307       Added 2-307 2       Rpld 2-308       Added 2-308 3       Rpld 2-309       Added 2-309 2674  1-26-09 1       Added 2-331-2-334 2675  1-26-09 1       Rpld 2-351-2-354 1-4       Added 2-351-2-354 2677  2-23-09 1       Added 7-560-7-564 2678  3- 9-09 1       Rpld 23-186-23-200 2679  3- 9-09 1       Rpld 26-281       Added 26-281 2680  3-23-09 1       Added 14-206-14-219 2681  3-23-09 1-4       Rpld 19-91-19-94 1-4       Added 19-91-19-94 4(1)       Rpld 19-95 4(1)       Added 19-95 2682  3-23-09 1       Rpld 1-9-(c)(11)       Added 1-9-(c)(11) 2683  5-26-09 1       Rpld 19-4       Added 19-22, 19-23 2684  6-22-09 1 26-271 2685  6-22-09 1 1-9(a)(1) 2686  7-13-09 1 26-271 2688  7-13-09 1 6-41 2 6-51 3 6-52 2691  7-27-09 1       Rpld 26-297       Added 26-297 2       Rpld 26-313       Added 26-313 3       Rpld 26-314       Added 26-314 4       Rpld 26-315       Added 26-315 2689  8-10-09 1 26-271 2690  8-24-09 1 26-275 2 26-276 2692  9-14-09 1 26-271 2693  8-10-09 1 1-8(a) 2695  8-24-09 1       Rpld 11-26       Added 11-26 2697 10-26-09 1 29-123(g) 2 29-123(j) 2       Added 29-123(k) 2699 11-23-09 1 26-297(b)(5), (6) 2700 12-14-09 1       Rpld 29-2       Added 29-2 2       Rpld 29-34       Added 29-34 3       Rpld 29-35       Added 29-35 4       Rpld 29-112       Added 29-112 5-7       Rpld 29-155-29-157       Added 29-155-29-157 2701  1-11-10 1       Added 29-126 2702  1-25-10 1       Rpld 27-51-27-77       Added 27-51-27-77 2703  2-22-10 1 26-132 2704  2-22-10 1       Rpld 26-207(5.1)       Added 26-207(5.1) 2       Rpld 26-207(7)       Added 26-207(7) 3       Rpld 26-207(9)       Added 26-207(9) 2705  2-22-10 1       Rpld 26-252       Added 26-252 2       Rpld 26-254       Added 26-254 3       Rpld 26-265(b)(3)       Added 26-265(b)(3) 4       Rpld 26-282(b)       Added 26-282(b) 5       Rpld 26-282(d)       Added 26-282(d) 6       Rpld 26-297(a) 7       Rpld 26-298(a), (b)       Added 26-298(a), (b) 8       Rpld 26-313(a)       Added 26-313(a) 2707  5-24-10 1       Rpld 7-550-7-553       Added 7-550-7-554 2708  5-24-10 1       Rpld 7-256       Added 7-256 2       Rpld 7-257       Added 7-257 2709  5-24-10 1       Rpld 7-49(b)-(d)       Added 7-49(b) 2-4 7-50 2710  6-14-10 1 26-271 2713  8- 9-10 1       Rpld 29-114       Added 29-114 2714  8- 9-10 1       Rpld 29-115(12)       Added 29-115(12), (13) 2716  9-13-10 1 26-265(b)(2) 2717  9-13-10 1       Rpld 27-1-27-5       Added 27-1-27-9 2718  9-27-10 1       Added 27-401-27-415 2720 10-25-10 1 26-271 2722 11- 8-10 1       Rpld 26-307       Added 26-307 2       Rpld 26-308       Added 26-308 3       Rpld 26-310       Added 26-310 4       Rpld 26-312       Added 26-312 2723 12-13-10 1-3 25-2 2724 12-13-10 1       Rpld 24-1-24-6 24-16-24-19 24-27-24-29 24-38-24-42 24-53-24-77       Added 24-1-24-7 24-16-24-19 24-27-24-31 24-38-24-43 24-53-24-78 2725  1-24-11 1       Rpld 26-138       Added 26-138 2       Added 26-143 3       Rpld 26-332       Added 26-332 4       Rpld 26-389       Added 26-389 5       Rpld 26-390       Added 26-390 2726  1-24-11 1, 2       Rpld 5-22(g), (h)       Added 5-22(g), (h) 3       Rpld 5-23       Added 5-23 4       Rpld 5-24       Added 5-24 5       Rpld 5-26(b)(10)       Added 5-26(b)(10) 2727  1-24-11 1       Rpld 6-86-6-90       Added 6-86-6-88 2728  2-14-11 1       Rpld 2-171       Added 2-171 2       Rpld 2-172       Added 2-172 3       Rpld 2-308       Added 2-308 4       Rpld 2-371       Added 2-371 5       Rpld 2-372       Added 2-372 6       Rpld 2-373       Added 2-373 7       Rpld 2-374       Added 2-374 8       Rpld 2-375       Added 2-375 9       Rpld 2-393(b)(5)       Added 2-393(b)(5) 10       Rpld 2-416-2-420       Added 2-416-2-420 2729  2-14-11 1       Rpld 26-49       Added 26-49 2       Rpld 26-292       Added 26-292 2730  2-14-11 1 20-322(a), (e) 2       Rpld 20-235       Added 20-235 2731  2-14-11 1       Added 2-256-2-259 2732  2-28-11 1       Rpld 26-207(6)       Added 26-207(6) 2733  2-28-11 1-10 26-271 2734  2-28-11 1 26-276 2 26-277 3 26-278 2735  2-28-11 1 26-132 2736  2-28-11       Rpld 27-30       Added 27-30 2739  3-28-11 1, 2 26-271 2741  4-25-11 1       Rpld 7-26-7-28       Added 7-26-7-28 2742  4-25-11 1-3 7-257 2743  4-25-11 1 7-553 2744  4-25-11 1       Rpld 14-2       Added 14-2 2       Rpld 14-4       Added 14-4 3       Rpld 14-32       Added 14-32 4 14-34 5       Rpld 14-76(a)       Added 14-76(a) 6       Rpld 14-91(a)(1), (2), (b)(5)       Added 14-91(a)(1), (2), (b)(5) 7       Rpld 14-96(a)(1)       Added 14-96(a)(1) 8       Rpld 14-96(a)(2)       Added 14-96(a)(2)a.-c. 9       Rpld 14-99(a)(4)       Added 14-99(a)(4) 10 14-141 11 14-171 12       Added 14-172  6- 9-2011(E-mail) Officials, pg. xcviii 2740  6-13-2011 1 11-26 2 11-27 3 11-77 4       Rpld 11-80 2748  6-13-2011 1 14-210(c) 2 14-210(e) 2749  6-13-2011 1 5-6(c) 2750  7-11-2011 1       Rpld 29-2       Added 29-2 2, 3       Rpld 29-34, 29-35       Added 29-34, 29-35 4       Rpld 29-37       Added 29-37 5       Added 29-39 6       Rpld 29-112       Added 29-112 7-9       Rpld 29-155-29-157       Added 29-155-29-157 2752  8- 8-11 10-2 2753  8-29-11 1 26-271 Officials  1- 1-2011 to 
12-31-2011 Added Officials, pg. c 2755 12-27-2011 1       Added 29-127 2756 12-12-2012[2011] 1 26-271 2757 12-12-2012[2011] 1 26-272 2 26-273 2758  1-23-2012 1       Rpld 23-91       Added 23-91       Rpld 23-127       Added 23-127       Rpld 23-162       Added 23-162 2759  2-27-2012 1       Rpld 2-676-2-681       Added 2-676-2-681 2760  3-12-2012 1       Rpld 18-36-18-44       Added 18-36-18-46 2761  4- 9-2012       Added Adopting Ord., 
pg. cxvii 2763  4-23-2012 1       Added 20-225 2764  5-14-2012 1       Rpld 12-5       Added 12-5 2765  5-29-2012 1       Rpld 7-46-7-58       Added 7-46-7-58 2766  5-29-2012 1       Rpld 19-15       Added 19-15 2767  6-11-2012 1       Added 26-207(2.1) 2       Rpld 26-207(5.1)       Added 26-207(5.1) 3       Rpld 26-207(6)       Added 26-207(6) 4       Rpld 26-207(7)       Added 26-207(7) 2768  6-11-2012 1 26-271 2769  6-11-2012 1 26-271 2770  7- 9-2012 1       Added 12-13 2771  7- 9-2012 1       Rpld 26-311       Added 26-311 2772  7-23-2012 1 26-207(7) 2 26-207(9) 2773  7-23-2012 1       Rpld 2-300       Added 2-300 2778  8-27-2012 1       Added 6-56(c) 2       Rpld 6-58       Added 6-58 3       Added 6-67 2781 10-22-2012 1 26-272 2 26-273 2782 11-26-2012 1       Rpld 29-149(1)       Added 29-149(1) 2       Rpld 29-150(1)       Added 29-150(1) 3       Rpld 29-151(1)       Added 29-151(1) 2787 12-26-2012 1       Rpld 29-112(d)       Added 29-112(d) Officials  1- 3-2013(E-mail) Current Officials, 
pg. cii 2788  1-28-2013 1       Added 6-68 2790  2-25-2013 1       Added 7-565-7-569 2791  4-22-2013 1       Rpld 27-6(a)       Added 27-6(a) 2795  6-24-2013 1, 2       Rpld 12-5, 12-6       Added 12-5, 12-6 2797  9-23-2013 1       Rpld 29-160       Added 29-160 2798  9- 9-2013 1, 2       Rpld 23-65(d), (e)       Added 23-65(d), (e) 2799  9- 9-2013 1       Rpld 23-68(a)       Added 23-68(a)       Rpld 23-70(4)       Added 23-70(4) 2800 10-28-2013 1       Rpld 29-177(i)       Added 29-177(i) 2802 10-28-2013 1       Rpld 9-34       Added 9-34 2803 12-23-13 1       Added 8-1 2       Added 8-2 3       Added 8-3 2804  1-13-14 1-3 25-2 Officials 12-28-13(email) Government Officials, pg. civ 2805  2-10-14 1 2-41 2806  4-28-14 1       Added 29-128 2807  3-24-14 1 26-271 2 26-274 3 26-277 2808  4-14-14 1 10-2 2811  5-12-14 1, 2 26-271 3 26-277 4 26-272 5 26-273 2812  4-28-14 1 14-3 2 14-4 3 14-32 4 14-35 5 14-71 6 14-205 2813  5-27-14 1 26-254(tit.) 2815  6- 9-14 1 7-27 2816  6- 9-14 1       Added 7-50(3)(A)(4) 2817  6- 9-14 1       Added 7-553(110.1)(3) 2818  6- 9-14 1       Added 7-257(104.1)(c) 2819  6- 9-14 1 15-31(tit.) 2820  6- 9-14 1       Added 20-322(f) 2821  6- 9-14 1 12-5(g) 2       Added 12-5(i) 2822  6-23-14 1       Rpld 22-26-22-35 22-47-22-57 2823  6-23-14 1       Rpld 20-26-20-32 20-46-20-49 20-61-20-64 20-76-20-79 20-91-20-94 20-106-20-140       Added 20-91-20-94 20-106-20-132 2       Rpld 20-156-20-164       Added 20-156-20-164 3       Rpld 20-321-20-328       Added 20-321-20-328 4       Rpld 20-329-20-336       Added 20-329-20-336 2824  6-23-14 1 2-126(b) 2 2-212 3       Added 2-171-2-181 4       Rnbd Ch. 2, Div. 3, 
2-171, 2-172       as Ch. 2, Div. 4, 
2-191, 2-192 5       Rnbd Ch. 2, Div. 4, 
2-191-2-194       as Ch. 2, Div. 5, 
2-195-2-198 2825  6-23-14 1       Rpld 2-306-2-311 2-331-2-334 2-351-2-354 2-371-2-375 2-391-2-396       Added 2-306-2-311 2-331-2-334 2-351-2-354 2-371-2-375 2-391-2-396 2-416, 2-417 2       Rpld 2-436-2-441 2-461-2-464 2-481-2-484 2-501-2-504 2-521-2-524       Added 2-436-2-441 2-461-2-464 2-481-2-484 2-501-2-504 2-521-2-524 3       Rpld 2-541-2-546 2-566-2-571 2-591-2-596 2-616-2-619 2-636-2-639       Added 2-541-2-546 2-566-2-571 2-581-2-584 2-601-2-604 4       Added 2-626-2-631 2-641-2-646 2-651-2-655 5       Rnbd Ch. 2, Art. VIII       as Ch. 2, Art. IX       Rnbd 2-656-2-659       as 2-661-2-664 6       Rnbd Ch. 2, Art. IX       as Ch. 2, Art. X 2827  9- 2-14 1       Rpld 23-66       Added 23-66 2-5       Rpld 23-68-23-71       Added 23-68-23-71 2829 10- 6-14 1 26-271 2830 10-20-14 1       Added 5-6(c)(1)c. 2832 12- 1-14 1, 2 26-271 2833 12- 1-14 1       Added 26-316 2834  3- 2-15 1 26-272 2 26-273 2835  2- 2-15 1 26-207(5.1) 2 26-207(6) 2836  2-16-15 1       Added 14-4(7) 2 14-31 3, 4 14-34 5 14-93(b)(3) 6 14-106(a) 7 14-106(b) 8       Added 14-149 9       Added 14-220-14-226 2837  3- 2-15 1 29-2 2 29-177(a) 3 29-177(e) 4 29-177(g) 5 29-177(h) 6       Added 29-179 2838  3-16-15 1-8       Added 2-685-2-692 2840  3-16-15 1       Added 12-5(a)(5) 2 12-5(g) 2841  5- 4-15 1 29-177(g) 2842  5- 4-15 1       Added 7-259-7-267 2       Added 27-30(m) 2843  5-18-15 1 29-79(2) 2844  6- 1-15 1 29-151 2845  7- 6-15 1       Rpld 25-36-25-45       Added 25-36-25-45 2847  7-20-15 1 29-2 2 29-156(c) 2850  7- 6-15 1 7-259-7-267 2 27-30(m) 2851  9- 8-15 1 7-49 2 7-50 2853  9- 8-15 1 29-168(a) 2 29-168(c) 3 29-168(i) 2854 10- 5-15 1       Added 24-2(16)       Rnbd 24-2(16)-(45)       as 24-2(17)-(46) 2 24-6(3) 3 24-18(e)(10) 2855 10-19-15 1 26-281 2856 10-19-15 14-213 2858 11-16-15 1 26-271 2862  5-16-16 1       Rpld 16-31 2       Rpld 16-33 2863  5-16-16 1 26-170 2864  6- 6-16 1       Rpld 27-26-27-31       Added 27-26-27-31 2865  6-20-16 1       Rpld 16-211-16-220 2866  6-20-16 1 26-272 2 26-273 2867  6-20-16 1       Added 26-272.1 2       Added 26-273.1 2868  7- 5-16 1       Rpld 7-26-7-28       Added 7-26-7-28 2869  7- 5-16 1       Rpld 7-550-7-554       Added 7-550-7-554 2870  7- 5-16 1       Rpld 7-256-7-258       Added 7-256-7-258 2871  7- 5-16 1       Rpld 11-26-11-32       Added 11-26-11-33 2872  7- 5-16 1 7-50 2874  8- 1-16 1 26-312 2875  8-15-16 1 29-179 2876  8-15-16 1       Rpld 20-114       Added 20-114 2 20-116(a) 2878  9-19-16 1 19-15(b)(2) 2 20-217 2879  9-19-16 1 29-162(i)(1), (2) 2 29-164(f)(2), (3) 3 29-165(h)(1), (2) 4 29-166(h)(1), (2) 2880  9-19-16 1 12-8 2 12-13(d) 2881  9-19-16 1 14-91(a)(3) 2 14-91(b)(4) 3 14-92(b) 4 14-93(b) 2882  9-19-16 1 18-2(18) 2 18-2(20) 3       Rpld 18-2(31)k., l.       Added 18-2(31)k.-m. 4       Added 18-2(39)-(42) 5 18-37 2883  9-19-16 1 20-262(a) 2 20-263 2884 10- 3-16 1 29-177(a)(16) 2885 10- 3-16 1       Rpld 14-4(7) 2 14-31 3 14-34 4       Rpld 14-220-14-226       Added 14-220-14-226 2886 10- 3-16 1       Rpld 16-131-16-143 2       Rpld 16-161-16-165 2887 10-17-16 1 27-31 2888 11- 7-16 1 29-79(2) 2890 12- 5-16 1 26-271 2891 12-19-16 1       Rpld 28-25-28-58       Added 28-1, 28-25-28-58 2893  1-16-17 1 26-271 2894  2-20-17 1 2-676-2-681 2895  3- 6-17       Added Adopting ord., 
p. cxix 2896  3- 6-17 1 12-1 2 12-3 3 12-2(4) 4 12-5(a)(3), (e) 5 12-8 6 12-13(b) 2897  3- 6-17 1 26-272 2 26-273 2898  3-20-17 1, 2 26-207(7), (9) 2899  4- 3-17 1       Rpld 16-32       Added 16-33-16-44 2       Rpld 16-51-16-58       Added 16-51-16-53 3       Rpld 16-76-16-88 2900  4- 3-17 1 2-108 2907  7-10-17 20-263 2910  9- 5-17 20-262 2911  9- 5-17 23-38 2912 11- 6-17 1 26-271 2913 11-20-17       Rpld 4-1-4-24       Added 4-1-4-24 2915 12- 4-17 1 19-24 2916 12-18-17 1 14-31-14-35 2 14-220-14-226  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2019 CODE-LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location of ordinances and other legislation adopted since August 12, 1991 within the 2019 Code. 
Legislation Date Section 2019 Code 
Section Ord. No. 1922 11-26-1990 3 23-381 4 23-381 5 23-356 Ord. No. 1926 1-2-1991 2 23-381 3 23-412 4 23-412 Ord. No. 1928 1-2-1991 1 21-2 2 21-2 Ord. No. 1929 1-2-1991 1 23-231 Ord. No. 1935 2-25-1991 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 1943 5-13-1991 1 23-2 2 23-744 3 23-745 4 23-111 5 23-112 6 23-113 8 23-118 9 23-120 10 23-189 11 23-234 12 23-372 13 23-459 15 23-463 16 23-465 17 23-515 18 23-516 19 23-517 20 23-518 21 23-529 22 23-531 23 23-23 27 23-135 28 23-229 29 23-28 Ord. No. 1953 9-9-1991 1 24-191, 24-192 Ord. No. 1956 10-14-1991 1 23-140 Ord. No. 1957 10-28-1991 1 2-186 Ord. No. 1962 11-11-1991 1 24-192 Ord. No. 1960 11-25-1991 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 1961 11-25-1991 1 6-58 Ord. No. 1966 2-11-1992 1 23-384 3 23-384 Ord. No. 1967 2-11-1992 1 1-9 2 6-2 3 6-3 Ord. No. 1973 5-11-1992 1 23-231 Ord. No. 1981 7-13-1992 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 4 23-300 5 23-300 Ord. No. 1982 7-13-1992 1 23-300 Ord. No. 1984 8-24-1992 1 19-131-19-135 - 19-137-19-144 Ord. No. 1985 8-24-1992 1 19-211-19-216 - 19-218, 19-219 - 19-221-19-226 Ord. No. 1991 9-28-1992 1(158.2) 23-386 Ord. No. 1995 9-28-1992 1(243A) 23-387 Ord. No. 1997 10-19-1992 1 23-125 2 23-231 Ord. No. 2002 1-11-1993 1 23-300 2 23-300 4 23-384 Ord. No. 2004 2-8-1993 5 23-385 Ord. No. 2005 2-22-1993 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2006 3-1-1993 1 5-9 3 6-46 4 6-47 6 16-3 8 16-14 9 23-370 10 23-381 11 23-412 12 23-417 Ord. No. 2011 4-12-1993 2 23-381 Ord. No. 2016 6-14-1993 3 2-446-2-450 - 2-452 Ord. No. 2024 8-23-1993 1 23-381 Ord. No. 2028 8-23-1993 2 6-7 Ord. No. 2035 11-22-1993 1 23-356 Ord. No. 2036 11-22-1993 1 23-2 2 23-23 3 23-368 Ord. No. 2040 12-13-1993 1 13-164-13-169 Ord. No. 2047 2-28-1994 1 2-186 Ord. No. 2048 2-28-1994 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2050 3-14-1994 1 2-126 2 2-127 Ord. No. 2055 4-25-1994 1 13-3 2 13-4 3 13-5 4 13-6 5 13-7 Ord. No. 2057 5-23-1994 1 23-356 Ord. No. 2060 5-26-1994 1 17-273-17-275 Ord. No. 2064 8-8-1994 3 1-9 4 3-6 Ord. No. 2067 10-10-1994 1 3-43 2 3-46 3 5-36 4 6-46 23 19-134 24 19-214 31 23-654 Ord. No. 2072 10-24-1994 1 2-446 Ord. No. 2069 11-14-1994 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2070 11-14-1994 1 23-140 2 23-140 3 23-231 Ord. No. 2077 11-14-1994 - 19-11 Ord. No. 2073 11-28-1994 1 18-20 Ord. No. 2078 12-12-1994 2 23-377 3 23-379 Ord. No. 2085 2-13-1995 1 2-47 Ord. No. 2089 3-27-1995 1 21-2 2 21-2 3 21-2 Ord. No. 2090 3-27-1995 2 23-384 3 23-385 Ord. No. 2094 4-10-1995 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2097 4-24-1995 1 16-21 Ord. No. 2101 5-8-1995 1 23-377 - 23-379 Ord. No. 2104 5-8-1995 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2109 6-26-1995 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2116 9-11-1995 1 23-231 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 2123 11-13-1995 1 2-447 2 2-449 Ord. No. 2124 12-11-1995 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2130 1-22-1996 2 23-377 3 23-379 Ord. No. 2131 1-22-1996 1 2-45 Ord. No. 2137 4-22-1996 1 9-85-9-87 Ord. No. 2141 4-22-1996 1 19-74 Ord. No. 2144 6-24-1996 1 5-9 Ord. No. 2164 9-9-1996 1 7-236 Ord. No. 2172 12-9-1996 2 23-384 Ord. No. 2174 1-27-1997 2 2-362-2-373 Ord. No. 2178 2-14-1997 1 11-82-11-85 Ord. No. 2182 2-14-1997 1 25-21-25-54 Ord. No. 2178 2-24-1997 1 11-1 - 11-3 - 11-52 - 11-78, 11-79 - 11-81 - 11-114, 11-115 - 11-117-11-129 - 11-157-11-177 - 11-197-11-202 - 11-230-11-243 Ord. No. 2183 3-10-1997 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2181 3-24-1997 1 17-232 2 17-232 3 17-235 4 17-239 5 17-241 Ord. No. 2186 3-24-1997 1 11-81 Ord. No. 2189 4-14-1997 1 21-1 Ord. No. 2190 6-23-1997 1 11-83 Ord. No. 2196 6-23-1997 1 7-378-7-391 Ord. No. 2199 8-11-1997 1 23-300 Ord. No. 2206 10-13-1997 1 23-412 Ord. No. 2215 1-26-1998 1 23-385 Ord. No. 2223 3-23-1998 1 6-43 2 6-44 3 6-45 4 6-46 5 6-48 Ord. No. 2229 3-23-1998 1 2-306 2 2-308 Ord. No. 2228 4-13-1998 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2232 4-27-1998 2 23-389 Ord. No. 2234 4-27-1998 1 23-264 Ord. No. 2240 5-26-1998 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2238 6-22-1998 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2244 10-12-1998 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2247 11-9-1998 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2250 1-11-1999 1 2-47 2 2-186 Ord. No. 2251 1-25-1999 1 2-416 Ord. No. 2252 1-25-1999 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2256 2-22-1999 1 5-5 Ord. No. 2257 4-12-1999 2 23-377 3 23-379 Ord. No. 2263 4-26-1999 1 23-370 Ord. No. 2272 6-28-1999 1 23-384 2 23-384 Ord. No. 2268 7-12-1999 3 23-384 4 23-384 Ord. No. 2269 7-12-1999 1 24-127 2 24-128 3 24-129 Ord. No. 2270 7-12-1999 4 11-85 5 11-119 6 11-120 7 11-241 8 11-242 9 11-265 Ord. No. 2274 8-9-1999 1 2-128 Ord. No. 2276 9-13-1999 1 24-157-24-161 Ord. No. 2277 10-25-1999 1 23-377 - 23-379 Ord. No. 2282 12-13-1999 1 1-9 2 1-9 Ord. No. 2285 1-10-2000 2 23-384 3 23-385 Ord. No. 2287 2-14-2000 1 2-126 Ord. No. 2288 2-14-2000 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2290 2-28-2000 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2295 3-27-2000 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2297 4-10-2000 1 21-2 2 21-2 3 21-2 Ord. No. 2301 5-22-2000 1 17-208 Ord. No. 2305 7-24-2000 1 2-159 Ord. No. 2311 10-23-2000 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2314 11-13-2000 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2315 11-13-2000 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 4 23-300 5 23-300 Ord. No. 2321 1-8-2001 2 7-88-7-116 - 7-146-7-150 Ord. No. 2322 1-22-2001 1 24-128 2 24-128 Ord. No. 2325 2-12-2001 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 2328 3-26-2001 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2337 6-11-2001 1 6-43 2 17-209 Ord. No. 2341 7-23-2001 I 5-9 Ord. No. 2342 8-13-2001 1 23-412 Ord. No. 2347 9-24-2001 1 25-29 Ord. No. 2349 9-24-2001 1 17-365-17-368 Ord. No. 2358 11-26-2001 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 2359 11-26-2001 1 17-365 2 17-366 Ord. No. 2361 12-10-2001 1 1-8 Ord. No. 2362 12-10-2001 3 5-2 4 5-9 6 5-12-5-14 Ord. No. 2363 12-10-2001 1 23-114 2 23-115, 23-116 - 23-122 - 23-150, 23-151 Ord. No. 2370 4-9-2002 1 23-423 Ord. No. 2387 6-24-2002 1 10-1, 10-2 - 10-7-10-12 Ord. No. 2384 7-8-2002 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2389 8-12-2002 1 24-158 2 24-159 3 24-191 Ord. No. 2390 8-12-2002 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2397 9-23-2002 1 5-5 Ord. No. 2396 10-14-2002 1 23-605 Ord. No. 2401 11-25-2002 1 23-377 2 23-377 3 23-377 4 23-379 5 23-379 6 23-379 Ord. No. 2402 11-25-2002 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2403 11-25-2002 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2407 12-9-2002 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2410 1-13-2003 1 19-183 2 19-185 Ord. No. 2418 3-10-2003 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2421 3-10-2003 1 17-232 Ord. No. 2422 3-10-2003 1 17-208 Ord. No. 2423 3-10-2003 2 10-12 Ord. No. 2424 3-24-2003 1 10-45-10-49 Ord. No. 2431 5-27-2003 1 9-54-9-63 Ord. No. 2440 7-14-2003 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2441 8-11-2003 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2443 8-25-2003 1 17-232 Ord. No. 2444 8-25-2003 1 25-30 2 25-35 3 25-41 4 25-42 Ord. No. 2445 8-25-2003 1 23-356 Ord. No. 2447 8-25-2003 1 2-159 Ord. No. 2451 9-22-2003 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 2462 12-22-2003 1 23-326 Ord. No. 2463 12-22-2003 1 13-136-13-140 Ord. No. 2466 1-12-2004 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2471 1-26-2004 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2482 7-26-2004 1 9-54 2 9-58 3 9-60 4 9-60 Ord. No. 2484 8-23-2004 1 7-245 Ord. No. 2485 8-23-2004 2 7-343-7-352 Ord. No. 2489 9-20-2004 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2494 11-15-2004 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2505 2-14-2005 1 5-9 Ord. No. 2510 4-11-2005 1 23-385 Ord. No. 2511 4-11-2005 1 23-231 2 23-231 Ord. No. 2512 4-11-2005 1 23-231 2 23231 3 23-231 Ord. No. 2514 4-11-2005 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2519 5-23-2005 1 5-9 Ord. No. 2520 6-13-2005 1 21-2 2 21-2 3 21-2 Ord. No. 2522 6-13-2005 1 19-12 2 19-13 Ord. No. 2537 8-8-2005 5 9-86 6 9-87 Ord. No. 2538 8-8-2005 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2541 8-8-2005 1 16-39 Ord. No. 2543 8-22-2005 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2551 10-10-2005 2 23-562-23-572 Ord. No. 2552 10-10-2005 1 23-486 2 23-487 3 23-488 Ord. No. 2553 10-10-2005 1 23-111 2 23-112 3 23-113 4 23-120 5 23-152 6 23-153 Ord. No. 2554 10-10-2005 2 19-93 - 19-98-19-101 Ord. No. 2555 10-24-2005 1 16-1 2 16-2 4 16-4 5 16-5 6 16-6 7 16-7 8 16-10 9 16-17 10 16-18 12 16-24 13 16-25 14 16-26 15 16-27 16 16-28 17 16-29 18 16-30 19 16-31 20 16-32 21 16-33 22 16-34 23 16-35 24 16-36 25 16-37 Ord. No. 2559 10-24-2005 1 23-412 Ord. No. 2558 11-14-2005 2 23-384 Ord. No. 2564 11-14-2005 1 23-381 Ord. No. 2565 11-14-2005 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2567 1-9-2006 1 16-14 Ord. No. 2570 2-13-2006 1 24-262-24-285 Ord. No. 2571 2-13-2006 - 8-1 Ord. No. 2573 4-24-2006 1 2-370 2 2-373 Ord. No. 2574 5-22-2006 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2576 5-22-2006 1 5-9 Ord. No. 2577 6-12-2006 2 23-381 3 23-384 Ord. No. 2578 6-12-2006 1 19-74 Ord. No. 2579 6-12-2006 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2580 6-12-2006 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2583 6-12-2006 3 23-419 Ord. No. 2582 6-26-2006 1 9-106, 9-107 Ord. No. 2589 7-10-2006 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 4 23-300 5 23-300 6 23-300 Ord. No. 2592 8-14-2006 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2595 9-11-2006 1 24-304-24-315 Ord. No. 2596 9-11-2006 1 23-381 Ord. No. 2598 9-11-2006 1 16-18 Ord. No. 2601 9-25-2006 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2605 10-23-2006 1 2-69 Ord. No. 2606 10-23-2006 1 23-384 Ord. No. 2607 11-13-2006 1 6-158-6-160 Ord. No. 2610 12-18-2006 2 23-384 Ord. No. 2613 1-22-2007 1 23-145, 23-146 Ord. No. 2611 2-12-2007 1 23-140 2 23-140 3 23-264 4 23-264 5 23-264 Ord. No. 2616 2-26-2007 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2617 2-26-2007 1 5-13 2 5-14 Ord. No. 2618 2-26-2007 1 23-2 2 23-2 4 23-155 5 23-156 6 23-157 7 23-158 Ord. No. 2619 2-26-2007 1 16-12 Ord. No. 2625 5-29-2007 1 15-1-15-7 Ord. No. 2627 5-29-2007 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2628 5-29-2007 1 17-235 Ord. No. 2633 7-9-2007 1 1-9 2 1-9 Ord. No. 2635 11-12-2007 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2636 11-12-2007 1 23-377 Ord. No. 2637 11-12-2007 1 23-379 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2643 1-14-2008 2 11-3 6 11-51 7 11-78 8 11-80 9 11-116 10 11-119 11 11-120 12 11-178 13 11-265 14 11-265 15 11-265 Ord. No. 2645 1-14-2008 1 17-200 Ord. No. 2647 2-25-2008 1 19-74 2 19-74 Ord. No. 2652 4-28-2008 1 17-247 Ord. No. 2653 4-28-2008 1 17-246 Ord. No. 2654 4-28-2008 1 19-47 Ord. No. 2659 5-12-2008 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2656 5-27-2008 1 10-3 2 10-4 Ord. No. 2658 6-9-2008 1 19-47 Ord. No. 2660 6-23-2008 1 23-148 Ord. No. 2661 7-14-2008 1 12-1-12-4 - 12-27-12-34 - 12-57-12-70 - 12-99 - 12-127 - 12-153-12-155 - 12-179-12-183 - 12-205, 12-206 Ord. No. 2663 8-18-2008 1 14-5 Ord. No. 2662 8-25-2008 1 23-381 2 23-376 Ord. No. 2664 9-8-2008 1 23-377 2 23-379 3 23-376 Ord. No. 2665 11-24-2008 1 5-42 2 5-44 3 5-45 Ord. No. 2666 11-24-2008 1 23-376 2 23-376 3 23-376 4 23-376 Ord. No. 2667 12-8-2008 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2670 1-26-2009 1 23-376 2 23-377 3 23-379 Ord. No. 2672 1-26-2009 1 2-277 Ord. No. 2677 2-23-2009 1 7-444-7-448 Ord. No. 2679 3-9-2009 1 23-388 Ord. No. 2680 3-23-2009 1 11-294-11-307 Ord. No. 2681 3-23-2009 1 16-129 2 16-130 3 16-131 4 16-132 4(1) 16-133 Ord. No. 2682 3-23-2009 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2683 5-26-2009 1 16-22, 16-23 Ord. No. 2684 6-22-2009 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2685 6-22-2009 1 1-9 Ord. No. 2686 7-13-2009 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2688 7-13-2009 1 6-43 2 6-53 3 6-54 Ord. No. 2691 7-27-2009 1 23-411 2 23-427 3 23-428 4 23-429 Ord. No. 2689 8-10-2009 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2693 8-10-2009 1 1-8 Ord. No. 2690 8-24-2009 1 23-382 2 23-383 Ord. No. 2692 9-14-2009 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2699 11-23-2009 1 23-411 Ord. No. 2702 1-25-2010 1 24-73-24-99 Ord. No. 2703 2-22-2010 1 23-148 Ord. No. 2704 2-22-2010 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 Ord. No. 2705 2-22-2010 1 23-357 2 23-359 3 23-370 4 23-389 5 23-389 - 23-427 6 23-411 7 23-412 8 23-427 Ord. No. 2710 6-14-2010 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2716 9-13-2010 1 23-370 Ord. No. 2717 9-13-2010 1 24-1-24-9 Ord. No. 2718 9-27-2010 1 24-334-24-348 Ord. No. 2720 10-25-2010 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2722 12-13-2010 1 23-421 2 23-422 3 23-424 4 23-426 Ord. No. 2723 12-13-2010 1 21-2 2 21-2 3 21-2 Ord. No. 2724 12-13-2010 1 20-1-20-6 - 20-31-20-34 - 20-57-20-61 - 20-100-20-105 - 20-124-20-145 - 20-165-20-167 Ord. No. 2725 1-24-2011 1 23-154 2 23-159 3 23-460 4 23-533 5 23-534 Ord. No. 2726 1-24-2011 1 5-9 2 5-9 3 5-10 4 5-11 5 5-13 Ord. No. 2727 1-24-2011 1 6-99-6-101 Ord. No. 2728 2-14-2011 1 2-255 2 2-256 Ord. No. 2729 2-14-2011 1 23-41 Ord. No. 2731 2-14-2011 1 2-341-2-344 Ord. No. 2732 2-28-2011 1 23-300 Ord. No. 2733 2-28-2011 1 23-376 2 23-376 3 23-376 4 23-376 5 23-376 6 23-376 7 23-376 8 23-376 9 23-376 10 23-376 Ord. No. 2734 2-28-2011 1 23-383 2 23-384 3 23-385 Ord. No. 2735 2-28-2011 1 23-148 Ord. No. 2739 3-28-2011 1 23-376 2 23-376 Ord. No. 2744 4-25-2011 1 11-2 2 11-4 5 11-83 6 11-114 7 11-119 8 11-119 9 11-122 10 11-172 11 11-202 12 11-203 Ord. No. 2740 6-13-2011 3 9-86 Ord. No. 2748 6-13-2011 1 11-298 2 11-298 Ord. No. 2749 6-13-2011 1 5-5 Ord. No. 2752 8-8-2011 - 8-1 Ord. No. 2753 8-29-2011 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2756 12-12-2012[11] 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2757 12-12-2012[11] 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2758 1-23-2012 1 19-136 2 19-178 3 19-217 Ord. No. 2760 3-12-2012 1 15-33 - 15-35-15-43 Ord. No. 2763 4-23-2012 1 17-210 Ord. No. 2765 5-29-2012 1 7-46-7-48 - 7-51-7-57 Ord. No. 2766 5-29-2012 1 16-15 Ord. No. 2767 6-11-2012 1 23-300 2 23-300 3 23-300 4 23-300 Ord. No. 2768 6-11-2012 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2769 6-11-2012 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2770 7-9-2012 1 10-13 Ord. No. 2771 7-9-2012 1 23-425 Ord. No. 2772 7-23-2012 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2773 7-23-2012 1 2-451 Ord. No. 2778 8-27-2012 1 6-58 2 6-60 3 6-69 Ord. No. 2781 10-22-2012 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2788 1-28-2013 1 6-70 Ord. No. 2790 2-25-2013 1 7-480-7-484 Ord. No. 2791 4-22-2013 1 24-6 Ord. No. 2795 6-24-2013 1 10-5 2 10-6 Ord. No. 2798 9-9-2013 1 19-74 2 19-74 Ord. No. 2803 12-23-2013 1 22-1 2 22-2 3 22-3 Ord. No. 2804 1-13-2014 1 21-2 2 21-2 3 21-2 Ord. No. 2805 2-10-2014 1 2-45 Ord. No. 2807 3-24-2014 1 23-376 2 23-381 3 23-384 Ord. No. 2808 4-14-2014 1 8-1 Ord. No. 2812 4-28-2014 1 11-3 2 11-4 5 11-78 6 11-265 Ord. No. 2811 5-12-2014 1 23-376 2 23-376 3 23-384 4 23-377 5 23-379 Ord. No. 2813 5-27-2014 1 23-359 Ord. No. 2819 6-9-2014 1 12-27 Ord. No. 2820 6-9-2014 1 17-300 Ord. No. 2821 6-9-2014 1 10-5 2 10-5 Ord. No. 2823 6-23-2014 1 17-40-17-43 - 17-75-17-82 - 17-84-17-102 2 17-133-17-141 3 17-299-17-306 4 17-331-17-338 Ord. No. 2824 6-23-2014 1 2-159 2 2-277 3 2-213-2-223 Ord. No. 2825 6-23-2014 1 2-473-2-478 - 2-510-2-513 - 2-535-2-538 - 2-570-2-574 - 2-597-2-602 - 2-623, 2-624 2 2-652-2-657 - 2-688-2-691 - 2-711-2-714 - 2-742-2-745 - 2-774-2-777 3 2-808-2-813 - 2-835-2-840 - 2-859-2-862 - 2-888-2-891 4 2-916-2-921 - 2-946-2-951 - 2-976-2-980 5 2-1004-2-1007 Ord. No. 2827 9-2-2014 1 19-92 2 19-94 3 19-95 4 19-96 5 19-97 Ord. No. 2829 10-6-2014 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2830 10-20-2014 1 5-5 Ord. No. 2832 12-1-2014 1 23-376 2 23-376 Ord. No. 2833 12-1-2014 1 23-430 Ord. No. 2835 2-2-2015 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2836 2-16-2015 1 11-4 5 11-116 6 11-129 7 11-129 8 11-179 9 11-339 Ord. No. 2834 3-2-2015 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2838 3-16-2015 1 2-1085 2 2-1086 3 2-1087 4 2-1088 5 2-1089 6 2-1090 7 2-1091 8 2-1092 Ord. No. 2840 3-16-2015 1 10-5 2 10-5 Ord. No. 2842 5-4-2015 1 7-196-7-204 Ord. No. 2845 7-6-2015 1 21-48-21-57 Ord. No. 2850 7-6-2015 1 7-196-7-204 Ord. No. 2854 10-5-2015 1 20-2 2 20-6 3 20-33 Ord. No. 2855 10-19-2015 1 23-388 Ord. No. 2856 10-19-2015 11-301 Ord. No. 2858 11-16-2015 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2863 5-16-2016 1 23-231 Ord. No. 2866 6-20-2016 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2867 6-20-2016 1 23-378 2 23-380 Ord. No. 2868 7-5-2016 1 7-19-7-21 Ord. No. 2869 7-5-2016 1 7-411-7-415 Ord. No. 2870 7-5-2016 1 7-169-7-171 Ord. No. 2871 7-5-2016 1 9-19-9-26 Ord. No. 2874 8-1-2016 1 23-426 Ord. No. 2876 8-15-2016 1 17-83 2 17-85 Ord. No. 2878 9-19-2016 1 16-15 2 17-202 Ord. No. 2880 9-19-2016 1 10-8 2 10-13 Ord. No. 2881 9-19-2016 1 11-114 2 11-114 3 11-115 4 11-116 Ord. No. 2882 9-19-2016 1 15-2 2 15-2 3 15-2 4 15-2 5 15-34 Ord. No. 2883 9-19-2016 1 17-246 2 17-247 Ord. No. 2885 10-3-2016 1 11-4 4(14-226) 11-339 Ord. No. 2890 12-5-2016 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2891 12-19-2016 1(28-1) 25-1 1(28-25) 25-21 1(28-26) 25-22 1(28-27) 25-23 1(28-28) 25-24 1(28-29) 25-25 1(28-30) 25-26 1(28-31) 25-27 1(28-32) 25-28 1(28-33) 25-29 1(28-34) 25-30 1(28-35) 25-31 1(28-36) 25-32 1(28-37) 25-33 1(28-38) 25-34 1(28-39) 25-35 1(28-40) 25-36 1(28-41) 25-37 1(28-42) 25-38 1(28-43) 25-39 1(28-44) 25-40 1(28-45) 25-41 1(28-46) 25-42 1(28-47) 25-43 1(28-48) 25-44 1(28-49) 25-45 1(28-50) 25-46 1(28-51) 25-47 1(28-52) 25-48 1(28-53) 25-49 1(28-54) 25-50 1(28-55) 25-51 1(28-56) 25-52 1(28-57) 25-53 1(28-58) 25-54 Ord. No. 2893 1-16-2017 1 23-376 Ord. No. 2894 2-20-2017 2-676 2-1053 2-677 2-1054 2-678 2-1055 2-679 2-1056 2-680 2-1057 2-681 2-1058 Ord. No. 2896 3-6-2017 1 10-1 2 10-3 3 10-2 4 10-5 5 10-8 6 10-13 Ord. No. 2897 3-6-2017 1 23-377 2 23-379 Ord. No. 2898 3-20-2017 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2899 4-3-2017 1(16-33) 13-33 1(16-34) 13-34 1(16-35) 13-35 1(16-36) 13-36 1(16-37) 13-37 1(16-38) 13-38 1(16-39) 13-39 1(16-40) 13-40 1(16-41) 13-41 1(16-42) 13-42 1(16-43) 13-43 1(16-45) 13-44 1(16-51) 13-62 1(16-52) 13-63 1(16-53) 13-64 Ord. No. 2900 4-3-2017 1 2-129 Ord. No. 2907 7-10-2017 - 17-247 Ord. No. 2910 9-5-2017 - 17-246 Ord. No. 2911 9-5-2017 - 19-47 Ord. No. 2913 11-20-2017 4-1 4-1 4-2 4-2 4-3 4-3 4-4 4-4 4-5 4-5 4-6 4-6 4-7 4-7 4-8 4-8 4-8.A 4-9 4-8.B 4-10 4-9 4-11 4-10 4-12 4-11 4-13 4-12 4-14 4-13 4-15 4-14 4-16 4-15 4-17 4-16 4-18 4-17 4-19 4-18 4-20 4-19 4-21 4-20 4-22 4-21 4-23 4-23 4-24 4-24 4-25 Ord. No. 2916 12-18-2017 1(14-31) 11-27 1(14-32) 11-28 1(14-33) 11-29 1(14-34) 11-30 1(14-35) 11-31 2(14-220) 11-333 2(14-221) 11-334 2(14-222) 11-335 2(14-223) 11-336 2(14-224) 11-337 2(14-225) 11-338 2(14-226) 11-339 Ord. No. 2917 2-19-2018 1 23-300 2 23-300 Ord. No. 2918 4-2-2018 1 6-9 2 6-12 Ord. No. 2921 4-16-2018 1 7-49 2 7-50 Ord. No. 2922 5-7-2018 1(29-1) 26-1 1(29-2) 26-2 1(29-3) 26-3 1(29-4) 26-4 1(29-31) 26-27 1(29-32) 26-28 1(29-33) 26-29 1(29-34) 26-30 1(29-35) 26-31 1(29-36) 26-32 1(29-37) 26-33 1(29-38) 26-34 1(29-39) 26-35 1(29-56) 26-59 1(29-57) 26-60 1(29-58) 26-61 1(29-59) 26-62 1(29-76) 26-83 1(29-77) 26-84 1(29-78) 26-85 1(29-79) 26-86 1(29-80) 26-87 1(29-81) 26-88 1(29-82) 26-89 1(29-83) 26-90 1(29-84) 26-91 1(29-85) 26-92 1(29-86) 26-93 1(29-87) 26-94 1(29-106) 26-117 1(29-107) 26-118 1(29-108) 26-119 1(29-109) 26-120 1(29-110) 26-121 1(29-111) 26-122 1(29-112) 26-123 1(29-113) 26-124 1(29-114) 26-125 1(29-115) 26-126 1(29-116) 26-127 1(29-117) 26-128 1(29-118) 26-129 1(29-119.1) 26-130 1(29-120) 26-131 1(29-121) 26-132 1(29-122) 26-133 1(29-123) 26-134 1(29-124) 26-135 1(29-125) 26-136 1(29-126) 26-137 1(29-127) 26-138 1(29-128) 26-139 1(29-141) 26-162 1(29-142) 26-163 1(29-143) 26-164 1(29-144) 26-165 1(29-145) 26-166 1(29-146) 26-167 1(29-147) 26-168 1(29-148) 26-169 1(29-149) 26-170 1(29-150) 26-171 1(29-151) 26-172 1(29-152) 26-173 1(29-153) 26-174 1(29-154) 26-175 1(29-155) 26-176 1(29-156) 26-177 1(29-157) 26-178 1(29-158) 26-179 1(29-159) 26-180 1(29-160) 26-181 1(29-161) 26-182 1(29-162) 26-183 1(29-163) 26-184 1(29-164) 26-185 1(29-165) 26-186 1(29-166) 26-187 1(29-167) 26-188 1(29-168) 26-189 1(29-169) 26-190 1(29-176) 26-219 1(29-177) 26-220 1(29-178) 26-221 1(29-179) 26-222 1(29-196) 26-253 1(29-197) 26-254 1(29-198) 26-255 1(29-199) 26-256 1(29-200) 26-257 1(29-201) 26-258 1(29-202) 26-259 Ord. No. 2924 6-4-2018 27-26 24-37 27-27 24-38 27-28 24-39 27-29 24-40 27-30 24-41 27-31 24-42 Ord. No. 2925 6-4-2018 27-113 24-223 27-114 24-224 27-115 24-225 27-116 24-226 27-117 24-227 27-118 24-228 27-119 24-229 27-121 24-231 27-122 24-232 27-123 24-233 27-229 24-230 Ord. No. 2927 6-18-2018 - 23-300 Ord. No. 2928  8-20-2018 1(6-14) 6-12 Ord. No. 2929  9- 4-2018 1(29-2) 26-2 2(29-156) 26-177(e)(16) 3(27-114) 24-224 Ord. No. 2931 10- 1-2018 1(29-2) 26-2 2(29-168) 26-189 Ord. No. 2937  4- 1-2019 - Adopting Ord. Ord. No. 2939  5- 6-2019 26-181 Ord. No. 2940  6- 3-2019 1       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. VI       Added Ch. 2, Art. VI 2       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. VII       Added Ch. 2, Art. VII Ord. No. 2941  6- 3-2019 1 2-218 2 7-307, 7-311, 7-312 3 10-1, 10-3, 10-5, 10-8, 10-13 4 15-83 5 17-76, 17-99, 17-196, 17-197, 17-199-17-210, 17-246, 17-247, 17-275 6 19-73, 19-74, 19-94, 19-97, 19-185 7 23-71-23-83, 23-388 8 24-6 Ord. No. 2942  6- 3-2019 1 15-2(20) 2 17-40-17-42, 17-75, 17-86, 17-88, 17-89 3 17-231, 17-232, 17-236, 17-237, 17-245 Ord. No. 2943  6- 3-2019 1 2-475, 2-537, 2-918, 2-978 2 12-27(a) 3 15-80 4 17-140, 17-304, 17-305, 17-332, 17-337 5 23-41 6 24-38, 24-41, 24-274 7 26-62, 26-190  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Iowa Code. 
Iowa Code 
Section Section 

this Code ch. 7A 24-344 ch. 12B 2-369 ch. 12C 2-369 ch. 17A 17-274 - 23-135 - 23-533 - 24-311 ch. 20 2-218 ch. 21 2-159 - 12-31 - 24-311 - 24-344 34.1 23-154 35B.16 16-36 ch. 35C 2-411 64.22 4-21 66.29 2-160 ch. 99B 5-13 - 16-14 ch. 99D 5-13 ch. 99F 5-13 ch. 99G 5-13 100.18 11-119 ch. 103 7-50 ch. 105 7-170 - 7-414 ch. 123 5-1 - 5-3 - 5-5 - 5-10 - 5-13 - 16-14 - 17-208 - 19-95 - 19-99 123.3(11) 5-5 123.32 5-65 123.39 5-14 123.40 5-14 123.46 17-208 123.47 23-115 123.59 11-297 123.95 5-13 ch. 124 16-14 ch. 135C 26-2 ch. 147A 16-22 ch. 148 23-534 ch. 152C 16-14 162.2 6-2 - 6-3 170.1 16-5 204.101(6) 15-2 ch. 216 12-2 - 12-60 216.17 12-67 216E.1 23-2 221.484 23-146 ch. 232 5-10 232.19 5-9 ch. 236 16-5 ch. 237 26-2 317.1A 17-246 ch. 321 5-9 - 23-155 - 23-531 321.1(20A) 5-12 321.89 15-40 321.190 5-12 321.208 23-113 321.216B 5-12 321.218 25-35 321.263 23-464 321.266 23-465 321.271 23-461 321.277 25-35 321.297 23-222 321.409 23-567 321.423(6) 23-524 321.431 23-516 321.433 23-123 321.445 23-533 - 23-534 321.446 23-533 321.449 23-297 321.451 23-2 321.484 23-146 321A.32(1) 25-35 ch. 321E 23-531 321I.10(3) 23-154 321J.2 25-35 321J.2A 25-35 321J.21 25-35 ch. 321L 26-220 321L.2 23-370 321L.2(1)b 23-370 321L.5 23-370 321L.8 23-370 ch. 321N 25-1 321N.1(3) 25-1 321N.1(5) 25-1 321N.1(6) 25-1 ch. 322 23-2 ch. 329 4-17 329.3 4-2 331.307 4-21 335.6 4-16 - 4-24 335.8 4-16 - 4-24 335.10 4-17 335.12-335.16 4-17 335.18-335.21 4-17 ch. 354 20-2 - 20-102 354.6 20-105 354.9 20-142 354.11 20-105 354.11(1)e 20-104 - 20-138 354.12 20-104 354.18 20-166 ch. 355 20-2 - 20-102 355.8 20-105 362.3 21-54 364.2 24-9 364.3 1-8 364.12(3)(b) 17-245 364.22 7-51 - 11-265 364.222 5-44 372.15 2-215 376.6 8-3 376.9 8-3 384.37 et seq. 19-186 384.84 24-228 - 24-232 - 24-278 - 24-313 - 24-346 384.91 2-452 ch. 386 2-1053 - 2-1085 386.3(1)(c) 2-1087 388.4-388.6 2-452 386.5 2-1091 386.6-386.13 2-1092 386.8 2-1056 - 2-1089 388.8 2-452 ch. 400 2-304 - 2-311 ch. 403A 11-1 ch. 414 18-23 - 26-119 414.4 4-16 - 4-24 414.6 4-16 - 4-24 414.7 4-17 414.9-414.19 4-17 414.15 4-20 ch. 423B 21-2 427A.1(1)e 21-48 - 21-50 435.1 24-42 453A.2(2) 23-116 455B.381(4) 16-98 455B.381(5) 16-98 455B.411(3)a 16-98 476.1 16-5 ch. 477 24-9 ch. 477A 24-3 - 24-4 - 24-9 477A.1(2) 24-2 477A.1(3) 24-2 477A.1(16) 24-2 477A.7 22-1 ch. 478 16-5 - 24-9 ch. 480 19-47 480.3 19-47 ch. 480A 24-3 - 24-9 480A.1 24-4 480A.2(3) 24-2 480A.2(4) 24-2 484C.1 16-5 ch. 499A 7-480 ch. 499B 7-444 - 7-445 - 11-30 499B.20 7-444 ch. 504 13-36 ch. 504A 13-36 505.1 et seq. 12-99 ch. 523I 17-83 523I.502 17-83 ch. 524 12-99 ch. 533 12-99 ch. 534 12-99 ch. 536 12-99 ch. 536A 12-99 554.7101 et seq. 21-49 ch. 562A 11-295 602.1303(4) 16-22 702.22 16-33 708.2(1)-(5) 16-1 708.7(2) 16-2 ch. 725 16-14 801.4 5-9 801.4(11) 23-370 804.5 5-9 805.8A(4) 23-116 805.8A(4)b 23-114 805.8A(4)c 23-115 805.8A(14)c 23-534 805.8A(14)d 23-156 - 23-157 805.8A(14)e 23-150 - 23-151 805.8C(2) 5-14 805.8C(7) 5-10 808.12 16-33 ch. 809 23-153 ch. 809A 23-153 907.3 23-113 909.3A 5-10  
