CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code
of Ordinances of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, 2003.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances
are defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of
Ordinances unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases
used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the
provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Dyersville, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which
a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Dyersville, Iowa, 2003.
6. “Council” means the city council of Dyersville, Iowa.
7. “County” means Dubuque and/or Delaware County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 2 -
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the
ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative
thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have
their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa
Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly,
exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of
its residents and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed
to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing
functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of
Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or
death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or
related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the
doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents,
employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or
license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 3 -
the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from
any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage,
injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the
foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City
whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for
personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in
writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice
shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location
of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for
any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend.
A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any
person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or
damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as
to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the
person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses
incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of
Ordinances, the rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of
Iowa shall be utilized to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that
the term “statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is
required or authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the
provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant,
subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner
affect this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section,
subsection or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the
Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes,
cross references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section
itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a
section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or
amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 4 -
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of
Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances
is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or
property pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the
lawful right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the County,
pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant.
No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of
any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure, building or premises shall fail or neglect,
after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer
or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of
Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board
or officer or employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the
exercise of the power, the power shall be exercised in light of the following standard:
The discretionary power to grant, deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in
light of the facts and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably
foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health,
safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
Code of Ordinances for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of the
Code of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2])
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 5 -
[The next page is 9]

CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Dyersville,
Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the
Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers
have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State
law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two (2)
Council Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of three (3)
wards as established by this Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four
(4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on
file with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep
copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
EDITOR'S NOTE
Ordinance No. 387 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
approved by the Council on July 3, 1972.
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 10 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES
3.01 Division Into Wards and Precincts 3.04 Ward 2
3.02 Joint City – Delaware County Precinct Number 13 3.05 Ward 3
3.03 Ward 1
3.01 DIVISION INTO WARDS AND PRECINCTS. The City is divided into
three (3) wards and four (4) precincts.
3.02 JOINT CITY – DELAWARE COUNTY PRECINCT NUMBER 13.
Delaware County Precinct Number 13 is described as follows:
North Fork Township and that part of Bremen Township lying south of 210th
Street and that part of said Bremen Township lying south of 197th Street and
west of 300th Avenue and the territory contained within the property described
as beginning at the center of Section 25, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of
the 5th P.M., thence south to the southwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of
the Southeast Quarter of Section 36, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the
5th P.M., thence east to the southeast corner of Section 36, Township 89 North,
Range 2 West of the 5th P.M., thence north to the northeast corner of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 25, Township 89 North,
Range 3 West of the 5th P.M., thence west to the point of beginning.
3.03 WARD 1.
WARD 1
Beginning at the center of Section 25, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the
5th P.M., thence south to the southwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 36, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the 5th
P.M., thence east to the southeast corner of Section 36, Township 89 North,
Range 2 West of the 5th P.M., thence north to the northeast corner of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 25, Township 89 North,
Range 3 West of the 5th P.M., thence west to the point of beginning, and
WARD 1 – PRECINCT NUMBER 2
Beginning at the southwest corner of Section 31, Township 89 North, Range 2
West of the 5th P.M., thence east to the centerline of the North Fork of the
Maquoketa River, thence north along the centerline of the North Fork of the
Maquoketa River to the centerline of First Avenue West, thence west along the
centerline of First Avenue West to the centerline of Fourth Street Northwest,
thence north along the centerline of Fourth Street Northwest to the centerline of
the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad Track, thence west along the centerline of the
Illinois Central Gulf Railroad Track to the centerline of Fifth Street Northwest,
thence north along the centerline of Fifth Street Northwest to the centerline of
Sixth Avenue Northwest, thence east along the centerline of Sixth Avenue
Northwest, to the centerline of Second Street Northwest, thence north along the
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 12 -
centerline of Second Street Northwest to the centerline of Eighth Avenue
Northwest, thence east along the centerline of Eighth Avenue Northwest, to the
centerline of Second Street Northeast, thence north along the centerline of
Second Street Northeast, to its intersection with the North Corporate boundary
of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, thence west along the North Corporate
Boundary of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, to the northeast corner of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 25, Township 89 North,
Range 3 West of the 5th P.M., thence south to the point of beginning.
3.04 WARD 2.
WARD 2 – PRECINCT NUMBER 3
Beginning at the intersection of Second Street Northeast with the North
Corporate Boundary of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, thence east along the
North Corporate Boundary of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, to the northeast
corner of Lot 8 of Valley Oaks Subdivision in the City of Dyersville, Iowa,
thence south along the East Corporate limit of the City of Dyersville, Iowa, to
its intersection with the centerline of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad Track,
thence northwesterly along the centerline of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad
Track to its intersection with Iowa State Highway #136, thence southwesterly
along the centerline of Iowa State Highway #136 to its intersection with the
centerline of Second Avenue Southeast, thence northerly along the centerline
of Second Avenue Southeast, to the centerline of Ninth Street Southeast,
thence south along the centerline of Ninth Street Southeast to the centerline of
Fourth Avenue Southeast, thence west along the centerline of Fourth Avenue
Southeast, to the centerline of Eighth Street Southeast, thence south along the
centerline of Eighth Street Southeast, to the centerline of Fifth Avenue
Southeast, thence west along the centerline of Fifth Avenue Southeast, to the
centerline of the North Fork of the Maquoketa River, thence northerly along
the centerline of the North Fork of the Maquoketa River to its intersection with
the centerline of First Avenue West, thence west along the centerline of First
Avenue West to the centerline of Fourth Street Northwest, thence north along
the centerline of Fourth Street Northwest to the centerline of the Illinois
Central Gulf Railroad Track, thence west along the Illinois Central Gulf
Railroad Track to the centerline of Fifth Street Northwest, thence north along
the centerline Fifth Street Northwest, to the centerline of Sixth Avenue
Northwest, thence east along the centerline of Sixth Avenue Northwest to the
centerline of Second Street Northwest, thence north along the centerline of
Second Street Northwest, to the centerline of Eighth Avenue Northwest, thence
east along the centerline of Eighth Avenue Northwest, to the centerline of
Second Street Northeast, thence north along the centerline of Second Street
Northeast to the point of beginning.
3.05 WARD 3.
WARD 3 – PRECINCT NUMBER 4
The Third Ward shall comprise and include all that part of the City of
Dyersville, Iowa, not included within the First and Second Wards as above
described.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 13 -
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Criminal Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform
any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions
specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a
serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of
the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided
herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a
violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City
in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified
as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be
applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding
the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard
or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production
or manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or
manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil
penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 14 -
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense - Not to exceed $500.00
B. Each Repeat Offense - Not to exceed $750.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8,
by an industrial user shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or
continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation
shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation
shall not be subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial
startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing
the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate
the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four
(24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more
than eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code
of Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal
infraction. The citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of
Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last
known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as
provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of
Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer,
and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve
as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following
information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [4])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 15 -
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the
same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for
abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
4.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer
from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or
regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it
preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 16 -
[The next page is 21]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 21 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance
with the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not
later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in
January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly
swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to
the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
Dyersville as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective office:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 22 -
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise
directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law
or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some
other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept
confidential. Access to public records which are combined with data processing
software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to the officer’s
successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s
custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any
multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies
shall be held in accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless
closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 23 -
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present
shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records
open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and
in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording
devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic
means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an
interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits
thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly
permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The
provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a
City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the
holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not
prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves
as Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 24 -
kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contract is for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly involve the
procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) in a
fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[11])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City
utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by
submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded
and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if
during that time the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 25 -
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as
otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or
employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but
every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be
filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person
removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date
of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues
connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office
shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2])
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the
remaining members of the Council within forty (40) days after the vacancy
occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the
full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council
shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2a])
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining
balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2b])
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a
public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts
from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not,
directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors,
offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a public official, public employee or
candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 26 -
[The next page is 29]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective
municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal
offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than
twenty-five (25) eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the
ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same
office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination papers
shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall
be in substantially the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall
include information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance
with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time
and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right
of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the
right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the
candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of
votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the
positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 30 -
[The next page is 35]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 35 -
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control 7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for
rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The City Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of
the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of
moneys the following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn
by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s
making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or
Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the payment of small
claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and
small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service for which
payments the finance officer shall obtain some form of receipt or bill
acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash
fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall draw a check for
replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check
and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual
manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not
be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
4. Change Fund. The finance officer is authorized to draw a check on the
Utility Fund for establishing a change fund in the amount of one hundred
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 36 -
dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of making change without commingling
other funds to meet the requirements of the office. Said change fund shall be
in the custody of the finance officer, who shall maintain the integrity of the
fund.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and
distinct funds in accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the
emergency fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the debt service fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically
prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the
capital improvements reserve fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the
original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a utility or enterprise fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and
Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only
after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in
accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan
agreements relating to the utility or enterprise fund. A surplus is defined as the
cash balance in the operating account
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 37 -
or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months,
and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to
restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of
the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The finance officer and City Administrator shall be
responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the
Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives
of the Mayor and Council.
2. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall
set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause
notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published
not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date
established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the
County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
3. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the
date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than
ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a
sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of
taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the
offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
4. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and
the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but
not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each
of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted
to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following
fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each
program and purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 38 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a
program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner
as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the power to
make administrative transfers between objects of expenditure accounts
budgeted within activity accounts with Council approval. The finance officer
shall have the power to make transfers between activities, or between
subprograms without prior Council approval to meet expenditures which
exceed estimates or are unforeseen but necessary to carry out Council
directives or to maintain a necessary service and provide the required
appropriation balance. All such administrative transfers shall be presented to
the Council in the current fiscal year for approval.
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less
than the following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk
following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts
to record receipts by source and expenditures by program, sub-program and
activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting
purposes as planned and approved by the Council. Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures
can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted
except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense
was incurred.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 39 -
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution
authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due,
which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late
payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be
reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner
as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution
authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so
authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills,
contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6. Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the
following financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month
a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program
and activity for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December first of each year there shall
be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal
year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the
City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed with
the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 40 -
[The next page is 45]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption
from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses and
distribution centers.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes
new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is
necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing
and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the
owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from
the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department
of Economic Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not
limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 46 -
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial
real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value
added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure
shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below
the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction
added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in
actual value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and Finance and shall contain information pertaining to
the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed
necessary by the Director of Revenue and Finance.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive
prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City
Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public
hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the
new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 47 -
entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been
completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council
continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the
City, the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall
continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this
chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has
received any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 48 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 49 -
CHAPTER 9
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
9.01 Tax Imposed 9.04 Collection
9.02 Renting and Rent Defined 9.05 Restrictions on Use of Revenues
9.03 Effective Date of Tax
9.01 TAX IMPOSED. There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax
upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all rooms, apartments or sleeping
quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house or tourist court
or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for
rent, whether with or without meals. Said tax shall be imposed until repealed by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
9.02 RENTING AND RENT DEFINED. “Renting” and “rent,” as used in this
chapter, include any kind of direct or indirect charge for the use of rooms, apartments
or sleeping quarters. However, the tax imposed in this chapter does not apply to the
gross receipts from the renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented
by the same person for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
9.03 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX. The hotel and motel tax as set forth in this
chapter shall be imposed on all gross rent receipts received after January 1, 2002.
9.04 COLLECTION. The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the
person or company liable for same to the Iowa State Director of Revenue in the
manner required by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
9.05 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF REVENUES. The revenue derived from the
tax imposed by this chapter shall be accounted for as follows:
1. All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and
motel tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.
2. At least fifty percent (50%) of the revenue derived from the hotel and
motel tax shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing,
improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating or maintaining
recreational, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities, including, but not
limited to, memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic centers, convention
buildings, auditoriums, coliseums and parking areas or facilities located at
those recreational, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities, or the
payment of principal and interest on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness
issued by the City for those recreational, convention, cultural or entertainment
CHAPTER 9 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 50 -
facilities, or for the promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention
business in the City and surrounding areas.
3. The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any lawful
purpose for which revenues derived from ad valorem taxes may be expended.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 51 -
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
10.01 Purpose 10.06 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial
10.02 Northwest Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District
Park Economic Development District 10.07 2004 Addition to the Dyersville Economic
10.03 Northeast Dyersville Industrial Development District
Park Economic Development District 10.08 2008 Addition to the Dyersville Economic
10.04 Southeast Dyersville Industrial Development District
Park Economic Development District 10.09 2009 Addition to the Dyersville Economic
10.05 Dyersville Southwest Commercial Development District
Park Economic Development District
10.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division
of taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Areas of the City
each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective date of the ordinances codified in this
chapter in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on
loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the
City, to finance projects in such areas.
10.02 NORTHWEST DYERSVILLE INDUSTRIAL PARK ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
Northwest Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by Resolution No. 10-90 adopted
on May 7, 1990:
In Section 30, the N½ of the SW¼ of Township 89 N, Range 2 west of the 5th P.M.,
Dubuque County:
Lot 1-1-1-1 of Dyersville Industrial Park, and
Lot 2 of 1-1-1, and
Lot 3 of 1-1-1, and
Lot 4 of 1-1-1, and
Lot 1 of West ½ of 2-1, and
Lot 1 of East ½ of 2-1, and
The north 192.8' of 2, and
Lot 1 of South 192.36' of 2, and
Lot 2 of South 192.36' of 2, and
Lot 2 of 3, and
Lot 3 of 1-1.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 52 -
Also
Lots 1, 2 and 3 of the Dyersville Industrial Development Addition,
Also
South of the CGW Beltline and north of Chicago Central & Pacific Railway, the south
1.87 acres of West½ of the SW¼ of Section 30
Also
In the Dyersville West Addition:
Lots 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8 of Block 2 and
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 9A of Block 7 and
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 of Block 1 and the South 29/100's acres of Block 20.
Also
The south 55/100's acres of the south balance of Lot 1 of the E½ of the SW¼ of
Section 30.
In Section 25, the East½ of the SE¼ of Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the Fifth
P.M., Delaware County:
Lot 1 of Joe Ertl Farm except that portion previously conveyed by instrument recorded
at Book 104, Page 218, and
Lot 2 of Lot 2 of Joe Ertl Farm
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area known as
the Northwest Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District by
and for the benefit of the State, the City, Dubuque and Delaware Counties, West
Dubuque Community School District and all other taxing districts, from and
after the effective date of Ordinance No. 569, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
taxing property in said Urban Renewal Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1989, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period
taxes determined as provided in subsection 1 of this section shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
of the City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9 and 403.12
of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 53 -
whole or in part, projects undertaken pursuant to a Dyersville Urban
Renewal Project, except that taxes for payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinabove provided.
3. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said
Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of
the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Area shall
exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in said Urban
Renewal Area on the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 569.
4. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection 2 referred
to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
10.03 NORTHEAST DYERSVILLE INDUSTRIAL PARK ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by Resolution No. 9-90 adopted
on May 7, 1990:
Lot 2-2-1-1 of the NW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 32, Township 89 North, Range 2
West of the 5th P.M., containing 0.38 acres, more or less.
Lot 1-2-1-1 and Lot 2-2-1-1 all in the SW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 32, Township 89
North, Range 2 West of the 5th P.M., containing 5.03 acres, more or less.
Part of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of the NW¼ of the NE¼, Part of Lot 1 of Lot 1
of Lot 1 of the SW¼ of the NE¼, Part of Lot 2 of the SE¼ of the NE¼ and Lot 2 of
Lot 1 of the N½ of the SE¼, all in Section 32, Township 89 North, Range 2 West of
the 5th P.M., Dubuque County, Iowa, containing a total of 33.69 acres, more or less,
subject to all easements of record and more particularly described by metes and
bounds as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner of Section 32, Township 89 North, Range 2 West
of the 5th P.M.; thence north 89°24'03" west 1151.04 feet along the north line of the
NE¼ of said Section 32;
Thence south 00°41'10" west 1564.15 feet along the east line of Lot 2 of the NE¼ of
the NE¼ and the east line of Lot 2 of the SE¼ of the NE¼ to the point of beginning;
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 54 -
Thence north 63°32'30" west 794.21 feet;
Thence north 06°43'56" west 404.55 feet;
Thence north 52°29'57" west 278.04 feet;
Thence north 70°20'07" west 233.54 feet;
Thence north 76°49'49" west 203.46 feet to a point on the westerly line of said Lot 1
of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of the NW¼ of the NE¼;
Thence south 01°19'19" east 105.63 feet along said westerly line;
Thence south 24°26'00" east 302.80 feet along said westerly line;
Thence north 90°00'00" east 226.58 feet along said westerly line;
Thence south 01°08'58" west 1278.45 feet along said westerly line and the westerly
line of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of Lot 1 of the SW¼ of the NE¼ of said Section 32;
Thence south 60°15'06" east 1213.90 feet along the northerly line of the Old Chicago
and Great Western Railroad right-of-way;
Thence north 00°41'10" east 1212.06 feet along the east line of said Lot 2 of Lot 1 of
the N½ of the SE¼ and said Lot 2 of the SE¼ of the NE¼ to the point of beginning.
Said described parcel containing a total of 33.69 acres, more or less, subject to all
easements of record. Bearings are referenced to a plat in Book 31, Page 287 of
Dubuque County Records.
In Section 32, the NE¼ of the NW¼ of Township 89 North, Range 2 West:
Lot 1 of 1 of 2 of 2, also Lot 1 of Vacated Bradford Street and Stanton Road, also Lot
1 of 2 of Vacated Bradford Street and Stanton Road, also Lot 2 of 2 of Vacated
Bradford Street and Stanton Road.
In Section 32, the S½ of the NW¼ of Township 89 North Range 2 West:
Lot 1 of 1.
In Section 32, the NW¼, NW½ of Township 89 North, Range 2 West:
All of Lots 130 and 131 of East Dyersville, also north part of Lots 187 through 190 of
East Dyersville.
All that land described as Lot 2 of Lot 1 of Lot 2 of Lot 2 of the NE¼ of the NW¼ of
Township 89 North, Range 2 West in Section 32, Dyersville, Dubuque County, Iowa.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area known as
the Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District by and
for the benefit of the State, the City, Dubuque County, West Dubuque
Community School District and all other taxing districts, from and after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 570, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
taxing property in said Urban Renewal Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1989, shall be
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 55 -
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period
taxes determined as provided in subsection 1 of this section shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
of the City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9 and 403.12
of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, projects undertaken pursuant to a Dyersville Urban
Renewal Project, except that taxes for payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinabove provided.
3. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said
Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of
the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Area shall
exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in said Urban
Renewal Area on the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 570.
4. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection 2 referred
to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
10.04 SOUTHEAST DYERSVILLE INDUSTRIAL PARK ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
Southeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by Resolution No. 36-90 adopted
on November 5, 1990:
Lots 2 and 3 of the Burkle Industrial Park in Section 5 of Township 88 North, Range 2
West of the 5th P.M. in Dubuque County, Iowa. Said described parcel containing a
total of 40.0 acres, more or less, subject to all easements of record.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 56 -
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area known as
the Southeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District by and
for the benefit of the State, the City, Dubuque County, West Dubuque
Community School District and all other taxing districts, from and after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 580, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
taxing property in said Urban Renewal Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1990, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period
taxes determined as provided in subsection 1 of this section shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
of the City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9 and 403.12
of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, projects undertaken pursuant to a Dyersville Urban
Renewal Project, except that taxes for payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinabove provided.
3. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said
Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of
the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Area shall
exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in said Urban
Renewal Area on the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 580.
4. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection 2 referred
to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 57 -
10.05 DYERSVILLE SOUTHWEST COMMERCIAL PARK
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section
apply to the Dyersville Southwest Commercial Park Economic Development
District, the boundaries of which are set out below:
Smiths Sub-Lot B; Smiths Sub-W 100' of Lot 7; Smiths Sub-E 75' of Lot 7; Smiths
Sub-Lot 6 and S 809' S834' of W½ Lot 4 and S 809' E 34' S 834' Lot 5 & W 18' S
834' Lot 5 & W 18' N 90' Lot 5, Dyersville Lots 902 & I-903 EXC West 90' & All of
Lot 1-2-904; Tegelers Sub-Lots 4, 6 & 7 Luehrsman Sub-Lot 1-1-1-1-16 Heirings Sub
W 255.7' Lot 26A and all of Lots 27 through 38; E 36' VACATED Allen St. ABTG
Lot 197; Dyersville-Lot 196 & Lot 197; Dyersville-Lot 194 and Lot 195; Dyersville
Lot-192 and Lot 193; Dyersville-N 60' Lots 99 & 100 & 101 & W 20' N 60' Lot 102;
Dyersville-S 55' Lots 99 & 100 & S 55' W 20' Lot 102; Dyersville-Lots 96 & 97 & 98
& W 20' Lot 95 & W 170' Lots 25 & 26 & W 170' Hamilton St (300' long) & W 70'
Alley (400' long) & W 70' Florence St (400' long) All west of Rivoli Street;
Dyersville-N 60' Lots 103 & 104 & E 30' N 60' Lot 102; Ploesl Sub-Lot 1; Ploesl Sub-
Lot 2; Ploesl Sub-Lot 3; Ploesl Sub-Lots 4 & 5; Ploesl Sub-Lot 6 & Lot 7; Ploesl Sub-
Lot 8; Lot 2-1-1-1 NW SW EXC S 46' & Lot 1-1 S 1; 2 NW; Lot 1-3 N½ EXC S 1
AC; Dyersville - W 90' of Lots 902 & I-903 & all of Lot I-904; Lot 2-1 S½ NW West
of 3rd St; Lot 2-1 S½ NW East of 3rd St; Arbor Court Lot 20; Westridge Sub-Lot 2-4;
Westridge Sub-Lot 1; Westridge Sub-Lot 2; Lot 2-1-1-2-1-1-2-1 & Lot 1-2-1-2-1-1-2-
1, E½ SW & Lots 2-1-2-1-1 & 2-2-1-1 NW SW; Ament Sub-Lot 3; Ament Sub-Lot 4;
Lot 1-1-1-2-1 E½ SW; Lot 2-2-1-2-1-1-2-1 E½ SW; Lot 1-1-1-2-2-1 E½ SW; Lot 2-
1-1-2-2-1 E½ SW; Lot 2-2-2-1-1-2-1 E½ SW; Lot 2-1-1-1 E½ SW; Scenic Heights
Lot 43 Blk 5 E of River; Southview-Lot 2; Allan Ertl Farm - Lot 1-1-1-1-1; Hill Side
Center Add-Lots 12 & 13; Lot 2 W½ SE; Westridge Estates - Lot A, Lot B, Lots 1
through 8 Blk 1, Lots 1 through 8 Block 2, Lots 1 through 5 and 10 through 14 Blk 3,
Lots 1 through 13 Blk 4; all in Section 31 T 89N R 2 W and PT NE NW of Section 06
T 88 N R2W; PT NE NW of Section 06 T 88 N R2W; PT NE NW lying N of HWY
a/k/a that PT of M/B 15712-92 lying in NW of NW of Section 06 T88N R2W, all in
Dubuque County, Iowa
and the NW¼ of NE¼, the NE¼ of NE¼, the SW¼ of NE¼, the SE¼ of NE¼, the
NW¼ of SE¼, the NE¼ of SE¼, the SW¼ of SE¼, and the SE¼ of SE¼ of Section
36, T89 R3, all in Delaware County, Iowa.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area known as
the Dyersville Southwest Commercial Park Economic Development District by
and for the benefit of the State, the City, Dubuque County, Delaware County,
Western Dubuque School District and all other taxing districts, from and after
the effective date of Ordinance No. 618, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
taxing property in said Urban Renewal Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1993, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 58 -
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period
taxes determined as provided in subsection 1 of this section shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
of the City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9 and 403.12
of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, projects undertaken pursuant to a Dyersville Urban
Renewal Project, except that taxes for payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinabove provided.
3. All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said
Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of
the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Area shall
exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in said Urban
Renewal Area on the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 618.
4. At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection 2 referred
to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Dyersville Urban Renewal Project Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
10.06 1998 ADDITION TO THE NORTHEAST DYERSVILLE
INDUSTRIAL PARK ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The
provisions of this section apply to the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville
Industrial Park Economic Development District, the boundaries of which are set
out below, such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on February 16, 1998:
Lot 1-2-1-1 of NW¼, NE¼, Section 32-89-2W
Lot 2-1-1-2 of NE¼, NW¼, Section 32-89-2W
Lot 1-2 of SE¼, NE¼, Section 32-89-2W
Lot 2-1 of N½, SE¼, Section 32-89-2W
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 59 -
Lot 1 of SE¼, NE¼, Section 32-89-2W
Lot 1-1 of N½, SE¼, Section 32-89-2W
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the 1998 Addition to the Northeast
Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District each year by and for
the benefit of the State, the City, the County and any school district or other
taxing district in which the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial
Park Economic Development District is located, from and after the effective
date of Ordinance No. 662, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the
1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic
Development District, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of
the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City
certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in
subsection 2, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include
the territory in the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial
Park Economic Development District on the effective date of Ordinance
No. 662, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise
included after said effective date, the assessment roll applicable to
property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for
the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic
Development District to include the annexed area, shall be used in
determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed
area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the
City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of
Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
projects in the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park
Economic Development District, except that taxes for the payment of
bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 60 -
provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of
the taxable property in the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville
Industrial Park Economic Development District exceeds the total
assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the
assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the 1998 Addition to
the Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by
or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.
When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon
the taxable property in the 1998 Addition to the Northeast Dyersville
Industrial Park Economic Development District shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on
all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and
the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably
pledged by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on
loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of
the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects in the 1998 Addition to the
Northeast Dyersville Industrial Park Economic Development District.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
(Ord. 662 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
10.07 2004 ADDITION TO THE DYERSVILLE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
2004 Addition to the Dyersville Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on July 6,
2004:
Lot 1, Racing Champions Ertl Subdivision, City of Dyersville, Dubuque
County, Iowa.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment each year by and for the benefit of the State, the City, the County
and any school district or other taxing district in which the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment is located, from and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 708,
shall be divided as follows:
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 61 -
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area Amendment, as shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which
the City certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in
subsection 2, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include
the territory in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment on the effective
date of Ordinance No. 708, but to which the territory has been annexed
or otherwise included after said effective date, the assessment roll
applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends
the plan for the Urban Renewal Area Amendment to include the annexed
area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the
City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of
Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
projects in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment, except that taxes for
the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be
collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without
limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing
districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such
loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon,
have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as
taxes on all other property.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 62 -
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and
the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably
pledged by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on
loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of
the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects in the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
(Ord. 708 - Jul. 04 Supp.)
10.08 2008 ADDITION TO THE DYERSVILLE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
2008 Addition to the Dyersville Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on
February 4, 2008:
That part of Sections 35 and 36, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of
the 5th Principal Meridian and that part of Sections 1, 2 and 3, Township
88 North, Range 3 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Delaware County,
Iowa, described as follows:
Beginning at the south quarter corner of Section 36, Township 89 North,
Range 3 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Delaware County, Iowa;
Thence southerly approximately 174 feet to the southerly right-of-way
line of US Highway 20;
Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way line approximately 58
feet;
Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way line approximately
359 feet;
Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way line approximately
431 feet;
Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way line approximately
101 feet;
Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way line approximately
823 feet to the west line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter of Section 1, Township 88 North, Range 3 West and the
northeast corner of Parcel A in the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 2, Township 88 North, Range 3 West as shown in
Book 7, Page 62;
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 63 -
Thence westerly along the north line of said Parcel A a record distance of
895.25 feet and along said southerly right-of-way line of US Highway 20
to the northeast corner of Lot 1 as recorded in Book 2, Page 157;
Thence westerly along the north line of said Lot 1, also being said
southerly right-of-way line of US Highway 20, a record distance of
633.14 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 1;
Thence southerly along the west line of said Lot 1 a record distance of
344.00 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 1;
Thence easterly along the south line of said Lot 1 a record distance of
633.14 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 1 and southwest corner of
said Parcel A in the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter;
Thence easterly a record distance of 640.9 feet according to Book 7,
Page 62 along the south line of said Parcel A;
Thence southerly a record distance of 164.35 feet;
Thence easterly a record distance of 255.45 feet to the southeast corner of
said Parcel A and the east line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2;
Thence southerly along said east line of the Northeast Quarter
approximately 1,802 feet to the north line of the South Half of the
Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 2;
Thence westerly approximately 1,326 feet along said north line of the
South Half of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter to the west
line of the East Half of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 2;
Thence northerly along said west line of the East Half of the Northeast
Quarter approximately 1,152 feet to a point 20 chains south of the north
line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 2;
Thence westerly approximately 1,782 feet to a point approximately 20
chains south and 13 chains and 30 links east of the northwest corner of
the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 2;
Thence northerly approximately 224 feet;
Thence westerly 880 feet to the west line of the Northeast Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter of said Section 2;
Thence southerly along said west line of the Northeast Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter approximately 210 feet;
Thence westerly approximately 1,323 feet to the west line of said Section
2 also being the centerline of 320th Avenue;
Thence westerly approximately 1,324 feet to the west line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 3, Township 88
North, Range 3 West;
Thence northerly along said west line of the Northeast Quarter of the
Northeast Quarter approximately 1,328 feet to the northwest corner of
said Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 3;
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 64 -
Thence easterly along the north line of said Northeast Quarter of Section
3 approximately 1,321 feet to the northeast corner of said Section 3;
Thence continuing easterly along the north line of the Northwest Quarter
of the Northwest Quarter of Section 2, Township 88 North, Range 3
West approximately 192 feet;
Thence northerly along westerly right-of-way line approximately 544
feet;
Thence easterly along said right-of-way line approximately 247 feet to
the west line of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of
Section 35, Township 89 North, Range 3 West and centerline of 320th
Avenue;
Thence southerly along said west line of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter approximately 350 feet;
Thence easterly approximately 33 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of
said 320th Avenue;
Thence southeasterly approximately 185 feet to the northerly right-ofway
line of US Highway 20;
Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way line approximately
1,186 feet to the east line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 35;
Thence continuing easterly along said northerly right-of-way line
approximately 650 feet;
Thence continuing easterly along said northerly right-of-way line
approximately 60 feet;
Thence continuing easterly along said northerly right-of-way line
approximately 188 feet;
Thence continuing easterly along said northerly right-of-way line
approximately 61 feet;
Thence continuing easterly along said northerly right-of-way line
approximately 364 feet to the east line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section 35;
Thence northerly along the west line of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter approximately 1,297 feet to the northwest corner of the
Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 35;
Thence easterly along the north line of said Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 35 approximately 1,334 feet to the northeast
corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 35,
Township 89 North, Range 3 West;
Thence southerly along the east line of said Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section 35 approximately 1,252 feet to the
northerly right-of-way line of US Highway No. 20;
Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way line of US Highway
No. 20 in the Southwest Quarter of Section 36 approximately 2503 feet;
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 65 -
Thence northeasterly along said northerly right-of-way line approximately
121.5 feet;
Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way line approximately 66
feet to the east line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 36;
Thence southerly along said east line of Southwest Quarter approximately
157 feet to the south quarter corner of said Section 36 the point of
beginning, containing approximately 277.6 acres.
Furthermore, Lot 2 of Racing Champions Ertl Subdivision, City of
Dyersville, Dubuque County, Iowa.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the
County and any school district or other taxing district in which the Urban
Renewal Area Amendment is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area Amendment, as shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which
the City certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in
subsection 2 below, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into
the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include
the territory in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment on the effective
date of Ordinance No. 736, but to which the territory has been annexed
or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll
applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends
the plan for the Urban Renewal Area Amendment to include the annexed
area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the
City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1), of the Code of
Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
projects in the Urban Renewal Area, and to provide assistance for low
and moderate-income family housing as provided in Section 403.22,
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 66 -
except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and
equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Section 298.2 of
the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within
the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section.
Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area Amendment exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to
in subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for
said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.
When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and
the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably
pledged by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on
loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1) of
the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
(Ord. 736 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
10.09 2009 ADDITION TO THE DYERSVILLE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to the
2009 Addition to the Dyersville Economic Development District, the
boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the
Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on
November 16, 2009:
Certain real property situated in the City of Dyersville, County of
Delaware, State of Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Parcel “R”: South 250' of SW 1/4 of SW 1/4, SE 1/4 of SW 1/4, NW 1/4
of SW 1/4, NE 1/4 of SW 1/4 South of the former Railroad R.O.W., SW
1/4 of NW 1/4 South of the former Railroad R.O.W., SE 1/4 of NW 1/4
of the former Railroad R.O.W., NW 1/4 of SE 1/4 South of center line of
Vine Road, NE 1/4 of SE 1/4 South of center line of Vine Road & S 1/2
of SE 1/4 of Section 26, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, Delaware County, Iowa.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 67 -
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
Amendment each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the
County and any school district or other taxing district in which the Urban
Renewal Area Amendment is located, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at
which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area Amendment, as shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which
the City certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in
subsection 2 below, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into
the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include
the territory in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment on the effective
date of Ordinance No. 755, but to which the territory has been annexed
or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll
applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends
the plan for the Urban Renewal Area Amendment to include the annexed
area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the
City to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1), of the Code of
Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
projects in the Urban Renewal Area, and to provide assistance for low
and moderate-income family housing as provided in Section 403.22,
except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and
equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Section 298.2 of
the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of
each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within
the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section.
Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area Amendment exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to
in subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be
CHAPTER 10 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 68 -
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for
said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.
When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area Amendment shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and
the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably
pledged by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on
loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1) of
the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
(Ord. 755 – Mar. 11 Supp.)
[The next page is 71]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 81 -
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office 15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as
follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the
City and presiding officer of the Council; except for the supervisory
duties delegated to the City Administrator, supervise all departments of
the City; give direction to department heads concerning the functions of
the departments; and have the power to examine all functions of the
municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from
department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a
determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within
the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff
to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the
Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an
ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after passage.
The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to
the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the
Council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 82 -
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.
6. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not
represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on
behalf of the City.
8. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have
been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance
to be issued by another municipal officer.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Mayor Pro Tem
2. City Attorney
3. Police Chief
4. Fire Chief
5. Park and Recreation Commission
6. Library Board of Trustees
7. Flood Plain Advisory Board
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is thirty-six hundred
dollars ($3600.00) per year, payable monthly. Effective January 1, 2010, the
salary of the Mayor shall be fifty-two hundred dollars ($5,200.00) per year,
payable weekly. (Ord. 752 – Sep. 09 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not
vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 83 -
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided
herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence
or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the
office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ or discharge from
employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ
or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a
member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor
during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days
or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as
determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the
Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 16 MAYOR PRO TEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 84 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 85 -
CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two
(2) Council Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of
three (3) wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for
overlapping terms of four (4) years.
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council
include, but are not limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except
as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards
based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards
or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and
order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or
repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
adopted by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.100)
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 86 -
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the
number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers
not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the
Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council
members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the
compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in
which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an
ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the
months of November and December in the year of a regular City
election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the
Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by
the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the
following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or
resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council.
Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council.
A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of twentyfive
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on any one project, or to accept public
improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council
member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to
receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the
Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not
less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council
become effective in one of the following ways:
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 87 -
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes
effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within
the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of
the motion by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution
and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a
resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a
summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment
or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days
after the date of passage and an ordinance or amendment becomes
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
17.04 MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council
and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in
Section 5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to
Council meetings are the following:
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 88 -
1. Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the
first and third Mondays of each month at six o’clock (6:00) p.m. in the
Council Chambers at City Hall.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the
Mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the
Council submitted to the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify
the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be
given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of
the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the
Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules
and maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council
can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular,
adjourned or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the
absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials
and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
1. City Clerk
2. Deputy Clerk
3. City Administrator
4. Planning and Zoning Commission
5. Zoning Board of Adjustment
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is thirty
dollars ($30.00) for each meeting of the Council attended. Effective January 1,
2010, the salary of each Council member shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for each
meeting of the Council attended. (Ord. 753 – Sep. 09 Supp)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 89 -
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. At its first meeting in January
following the regular city election the Council shall appoint by majority vote a City
Clerk to serve for a term of two (2) years. The Clerk shall receive such compensation
as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence
or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this
chapter, this Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular and
special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special
meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such
publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and
shall show the gross amount of the claim.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure
considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable,
indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and
whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances,
enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published
at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 90 -
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all such measures except
motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication
when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing
any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines,
or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the
following manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City
ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions,
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years
following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 91 -
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy
to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by
ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of
the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7 [5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in
such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council, the Clerk
shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The Clerk shall record
and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke
licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record
of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit
number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or
permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by
the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time
at which they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to
elections and nominations:
1. Certify to the County Commissioner of Elections the type of
nomination process to be used by the City no later than ninety (90) days before
the date of the regular City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 92 -
2. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a City office for filing
if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and is timely
filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
3. Designate other employees or officials of the City who are ordinarily
available to accept nomination papers if the Clerk is not readily available
during normal working hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
4. Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and
time that the petition was filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
5. Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public
measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the County
Commissioner of Elections not later than five o’clock (5:00) p.m. on the day
following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be
attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be
necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of
which is the word “IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY OF
DYERSVILLE” and “CITY SEAL.”
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 93 -
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions
required of the position of Treasurer.
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Clerk receives no additional compensation for
performing the duties of the Treasurer.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received
by the Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments
of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
9. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 19 CITY TREASURER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 94 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 95 -
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.02 Attorney for City 20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.08 Prepare Documents
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.05 Review and Comment
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Mayor shall appoint a
City Attorney to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The City Attorney shall receive
such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the
City in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before
any court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend
all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the
City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be
essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be
bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those
ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the
Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and
publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a
report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or
ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall, upon request of the
Council, give advice or a written legal opinion on contracts involving the City and
upon all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall
attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 20 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 96 -
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request,
formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the
use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09 REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES. The City Attorney shall
not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee before any court or tribunal for
the purely private benefit of said officer or employee. The City Attorney shall,
however, if directed by the Council, appear to defend any City officer or employee in
any cause of action arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of
his or her office or employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 97 -
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
21.01 Office Created 21.03 Duties
21.02 Compensation 21.04 Residency Requirement
21.01 OFFICE CREATED. There is hereby created the office of City
Administrator. The office shall be filled by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of
the entire Council. The person so appointed shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Council and shall be subject to removal by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of
the entire Council. The qualifications for the position shall include competency
through education or experience to perform the duties imposed upon the
Administrator.
21.02 COMPENSATION. The compensation for the Administrator, including
expenses, shall be in an amount and in the form as may from time to time be fixed by
the Council by resolution. The Council is hereby authorized, in its discretion, to enter
into employment contracts with the Administrator as may be necessary for his or her
employment.
21.03 DUTIES. The general duties of the office are to administer the activities,
policies and procedures of the City government. The Administrator is directly
responsible to the Mayor and Council for the administration of municipal affairs as
directed by the Mayor or Council. The department directors, except the Clerk, for
those matters specifically delegated to the Clerk by the Code of Iowa, shall report to
the Administrator. All departmental activity other than the Police Department
investigative or enforcement matters requiring the attention of the Council shall be
brought before the Council by the Administrator and all Council involvement in
administration initiated by the Council shall be through the Administrator. This does
not preclude department heads or City employees from bringing matters to the
attention of the Mayor or Council. Without limiting the foregoing, the duties of the
Administrator include the following:
1. Supervise enforcement and execution of City laws and assure
resolutions, ordinances, laws and Council directives and operational policies
are enforced and executed, or referred to the proper official for compliance.
2. Attend meetings of the Council, unless excused by the Mayor.
3. Recommend to the Council measures necessary or expedient for good
government and welfare of the City, including evaluation, development and
updating operating procedures and policies.
4. Provide general supervision and direction for the administration of City
government to expedite efficient administration of City’s business.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 98 -
5. Supervise the performance of contracts for work to be done for the
City, and all purchases of material and supplies; ensure that material and
supplies are received and are of the quality and specification called for by the
contract, and consult with department heads with reference to said contracts.
6. Cooperate and advise present or future administrative agencies, boards
or commissions which are responsible to the Mayor and Council.
7. Together with the Clerk, communicate and keep the Council fully
informed of the condition of City departments, including their financial
management, progress, budgets, background or historical information, future
needs, goals and objectives in language and format for public consumption.
8. Introduce new and approved methods for the elimination of wasteful
practices following modern municipal procedures and law requirements.
9. Perform administrative duties designated by resolution of the Council.
10. Advise the Council on participation in programs and policies with other
government political subdivisions, including city, county, state or federal
entities, and/or which may be affected by court decisions, liability or other
related matters and suggest and coordinate City grant proposals.
11. Participate in public relations and public information activities and
programs to keep the public informed through speeches, attending meetings
and attending social gatherings, and provide information to the media.
12. Provide to the Council periodic itemized financial reports in writing
concerning current and completed projects.
13. Assist in budget preparation as directed by the Council. Department
heads shall make their budget presentations to the Council. The City
Administrator shall coordinate the final budget preparation.
14. Coordinate with the Clerk to cause accurate records of the City to be
kept.
15. Order the abatement of nuisances at City expense.
16. Recommend the hiring or discharging of all employees of the City
except the Clerk, Public Works Supervisor and Police Chief. This shall not
include employees appointed by the Mayor or Council under other ordinances.
A. All employees of the City’s administrative staff shall be
recommended for hiring or discharge by the joint recommendation of
the Clerk, the City Administrator and the City Council Policy and
Administration Committee.
B. All employees of the Police Department shall be recommended
for hiring or discharge by the joint recommendation of the Police Chief,
the City Administrator and the City Council Community Protection
Committee.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 99 -
C. All employees of the Public Works Department shall be
recommended for hiring or discharge by the joint recommendation of
the City Administrator and the Chairpersons of the City Council Streets
Committee and the City Council Water and Sanitation Committee.
D. All other employees of the City shall be recommended for
hiring or discharge by the joint recommendation of the City
Administrator and the appropriate committee of the Council.
17. Obtain for the City, upon order of the Council, such specialized and
professional services deemed necessary by the Council and not already
available to the City.
18. Serve as City liaison with local economic development groups.
19. Administer and enforce the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
20. Perform such other duties as the Council may direct.
21.04 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT. The City Administrator shall, no later
than six (6) months after appointment, become a resident of the City, and continued
residency in the City is a requirement for continued employment with the City.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 100 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 101 -
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
22.01 Public Library 22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees 22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board 22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties 22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the James
Kennedy Public Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Library is under the control and direction of
the Board of Library Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the Board. The Board
consists of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council. At least one and no more than two members may be nonresidents. As the
terms of office of the Board members expire, the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council, shall appoint successors, each of whom shall hold office until his or her
successor is appointed and qualifies.
(Ord. 717 – Dec. 05 Supp.)
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All resident members of the Board
shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City. The nonresident members of the
Board shall be a bona fide citizens and residents from areas which contract with the
Library for library service. Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall
be as follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for four (4)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first. Any
Trustee serving an unexpired term with more than four (4) years remaining as
of the effective date of Ordinance No. 717, codified by this subsection, shall be
allowed to serve the remaining portion of said term.
2. Vacancies. Vacancies occurring on the Board through death,
resignation or permanent removal from the City or contracting area shall be
filled by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, but such appointment
shall be only for the remainder of the unexpired term. In the event an area
ceases to contract with the City, a nonresident Trustee from that area shall
cease as Trustee at the same time the area’s contract expires or terminates, and
such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as a resignation if any portion
of such Trustee’s term remains.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 102 -
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(Ord. 717 – Dec. 05 Supp.)
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following
powers and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer serves as
Board Treasurer, but is not a member of the Board.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian
to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however,
that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys
belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of
the Board.
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 103 -
the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted
by the City on behalf of the Library.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13. County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart
the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay
for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to
contract with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library by
their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote
of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five (5)
percent in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to
the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by
persons not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so
that books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 104 -
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation
and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library.
Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council
immediately after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as
to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the
amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of
the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be required
by the Council.
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person
willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole
or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other
property belonging to the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the
Library with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 105 -
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the
Library notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2)
months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials,
or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date
the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to
deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by
restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue
and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 106 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 107 -
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and
Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of nine (9)
members, seven (7) of whom are residents of the City. The resident members shall be
appointed by the Council and shall not hold any elective office in the City
government. The additional two members of the Commission are one member of the
County Boards of Supervisors and one resident of the area outside the City over which
the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both jointly appointed by the
County Boards of Supervisors of the affected counties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission
shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will
expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by
resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in
the same manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the
following powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules
and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 108 -
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by
Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of
art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures,
public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor
obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the
erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location
of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission and its
recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement
when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto,
laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the
Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for
any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public
improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or
the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first
have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall have had
thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 109 -
all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations
or payments whatsoever which are received by the City for City planning and
zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no
power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
9. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts,
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 110 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 111 -
CHAPTER 24
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
24.01 Created 24.04 Term of Office
24.02 Membership 24.05 Powers
24.03 Qualification
24.01 CREATED. A Park and Recreation Commission is created.
24.02 MEMBERSHIP. There shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the
Council seven (7) members to serve on the Commission. If, at the time of the
effective date of Ordinance No. 697, codified by this section (March 5, 2003), there
are more than seven (7) members serving on the Park and Recreation Commission,
any vacancies on said Commission shall not be filled until such time as there will be
only seven (7) members.
24.03 QUALIFICATION. All members shall be qualified electors of the City and
shall serve without compensation.
24.04 TERM OF OFFICE. The full term of office of each member of the
Commission is three (3) years.
24.05 POWERS. The Council may confer on such Commission all or any part of
its powers in relation to the parks, playgrounds and community facilities for other
forms of recreation.
CHAPTER 24 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 112 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 113 -
CHAPTER 25
FLOOD PLAIN ADVISORY BOARD
25.01 Board Created 25.03 Duties of the Board
25.02 Board Organization 25.04 Reports
25.01 BOARD CREATED. A Flood Plain Advisory Board is hereby created to
advise the Council on those specific issues referred to said Board by the Council.
25.02 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of five (5) voting
members, all citizens of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council for overlapping five-year terms. One of the five voting members must be the
City Civil Defense Director. The Mayor shall designate the terms of the first
appointed members and the first Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, and the Board
shall choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every one or two years thereafter.
The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson must be voting members of the Board.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. In addition to
the five voting members, the Mayor, no more than two (2) Council Members (also
appointed by the Mayor), and the City Administrator shall serve as non-voting ex
officio members of the Board.
25.03 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board shall meet and make
recommendations to the Council on those specific flood plain management issues
referred to the Board by the Council.
25.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its
activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Said
reports and any recommendations contained therein are advisory only and will be
considered by the Council along with such other information available to the Council
in considering the specific issues referred to the Board.
CHAPTER 25 FLOOD PLAIN ADVISORY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 114 -
[The next page is 135]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 135 -
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established 30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
30.02 Organization 30.07 Police Chief: Duties
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.05 Compensation 30.10 Taking Weapons
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is
established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and
ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such
other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be
authorized by the Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be
selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the
minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the
minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school
within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum inservice
training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and
receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss
the Police Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council. Upon
recommendation of the Police Chief, the Council shall confirm the other members of
the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and
duties subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by
law or ordinance.
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 136 -
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the
charge. Said records shall be retained in accordance with the following
schedule:
A. Traffic - 5 years
B. Misdemeanors:
Simple - 5 years
Serious - 10 years
Aggravated - 10 years
C. Felonies - Indefinite
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual
report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or
Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work
and all civilian personnel employed by the department, and be responsible for
the care, maintenance, use and assignment of all vehicles, equipment and
materials of the department. (Ord. 719 – Feb. 06 Supp.)
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules,
not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the
Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally
summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in
making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, 804.17)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 137 -
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the
person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested
person may have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, 804.18)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 138 -
[The next page is 145]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 145 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.09 Constitution
35.02 Organization 35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.03 Approved by Council 35.11 Liability Insurance
35.04 Training 35.12 Calls Outside City
35.05 Compensation 35.13 Mutual Aid
35.06 Fire Chief Appointed 35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties 35.15 Emergency Rescue Service
35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is
hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property
against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency
calls for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other
officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 APPROVED BY COUNCIL. No person having otherwise qualified shall be
appointed to the department until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a
majority of the Council members.
35.04 TRAINING. All members of the department shall attend and actively
participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank
and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 FIRE CHIEF APPOINTED. The Fire Chief shall be appointed and serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 146 -
35.07 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of
the Fire Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private
fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-ofway,
or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire
department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or
to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire
department.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 147 -
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property
damage in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as
a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s
Division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a
report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end
of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the
name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the
value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire
as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances
concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and
as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the
number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of
losses by value, type and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual
report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other
reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 148 -
35.09 CONSTITUTION. The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as
they deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution
and bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before
being effective, must be approved by the Council.
35.10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to
insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory
liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer
fire fighters injured in the performance of their duties as fire fighters whether within
or outside the corporate limits of the City. All volunteer fire fighters shall be covered
by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.11 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against
liability of the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property
damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties
within or outside the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.12 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY. The department shall answer calls to fires and
other emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such
emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within
the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the
department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire
departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.14 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the
authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to
Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or local fire safety
regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.15 EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICE. The department is authorized to
provide emergency rescue services and the accidental injury and liability insurance
provided for herein shall include such operation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 149 -
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and
welfare from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are
defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates an
immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances
that presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means.
“Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed
by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 150 -
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces,
handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance,
the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so
that the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup,
as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe
condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the
responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation
to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized
officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said
notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will
proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In
the event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the
present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required
and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all
costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for those services is not paid within thirty
(30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the
cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized
officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds
available for said cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be
strictly liable for all of the following:
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 151 -
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City as a result of the failure of
the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous
condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City to evacuate people from the
area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or
loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction or loss.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural
Resources and the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the onset of
the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police
Department shall immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this
section.
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of
damages, injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is
the responsible person as defined in Section 36.02[4].
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 152 -
[The next page is 185]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 179 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.06 Noise Disturbance Prohibited
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the
following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury
to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place
another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such
other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in
itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or
activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of
the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the
above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other
disruptive situation, that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff
member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds
or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an
assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is
between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of
those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 180 -
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph,
writing or via electronic communication without legitimate
purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person
annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or
railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or
to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge
or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal
activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the
alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not
occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person,
with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used
in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or
physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a
physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these
types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public
place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is
reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 181 -
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know
is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe,
knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the
United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a
symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation
that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit a public
offense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [6])
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct
any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to
prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more
persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent
manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense.
No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly,
knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the
participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity
of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of
such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 182 -
40.06 NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED. (Repealed by Ordinance
No. 763 – Mar. 11 Supp.)
[The next page is 185]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 185 -
CHAPTER 40A
NOISE CONTROL
40A.01 Purpose 40A.05 Noise Disturbance Prohibited
40A.02 Definitions 40A.06 Vehicle Noise
40A.03 Measurement of Noise and Sound 40A.07 Permits
40A.04 Test Measurement and Requirements for 40A.08 Exemptions
Determining National Classification of Sound 40A.09 Penalties for Offenses Pertaining to Noise Control
40A.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent excessive
sound, which is a serious hazard to the public health and the quality of life in
the City of Dyersville.
40A.02 DEFINITIONS. All terminology used in this chapter and not
defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
1. A or C weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound meter using the A or C weighting
network. The level so read shall be designated dB(A) or dB(C) or dBC.
2. Decibel means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure
used in describing the amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as dB.
3. Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property
to a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public
utilities, or work required to protect persons and property from an
imminent danger.
4. Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to a
public calamity or to protect persons and property from imminent danger.
5. Gross vehicle weight means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a vehicle.
6. Person means any individual, association, partnership, corporation
or officer thereof.
7. Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or
other physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at
finite speed to distant points.
8. Sound level meter means an instrument, including a microphone,
amplifier, output meter and weighting networks, that is sensitive to
pressure fluctuations. The output meter reads sound pressure level in
CHAPTER 40A NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 186 -
decibels when properly calibrated and the instrument is of Type 2 or
better as specified in American National Standards Institute Publication
SI 4-1971, or its successor publication.
40A.03 MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND. The measurement of
sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. The instruments shall
be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall
be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements
recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise
source. The microphone during the measurement shall be positioned so as not
to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured voice. A
windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. The measurement
shall be an A weighted or C weighted sound level.
40A.04 TEST MEASUREMENT AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
DETERMINING NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF SOUND.
1. No person participate in the making and creating of an excessive
or unusually loud sound within the City heard and measured in the
manner prescribed below, except when done under and in compliance
with a permit issued by the City of Dyersville.
2. It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership,
possession or control of premises to prevent such premises from being
the site of activities producing sound levels in excess of what is
permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty
shall constitute a violation of this section.
3. It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups,
gatherings and assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or
making sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter.
Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this
section.
4. For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as
excessive or unusually loud, the following test measurements and
requirements are to be applied:
A. The sound shall be measured at the edge of the City street
or alley right-of-way reasonably appearing to be to the source of
the sound. When a complaint is received, a measurement may
also be taken at the location on the property where the
complaining party was disturbed.
CHAPTER 40A NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 187 -
B. The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of
standard design and quality operated in an “A” or “C” weighting
scale.
C. A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum
permitted levels according to the following table, is declared to be
excessive and unusually loud is unlawful.
Neighborhood Characteristic Maximum Permitted
Residential (between 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.) 80
Residential (between 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) 65
Commercial 75
Park or Agriculture 75
Industrial 90
40A.05 NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any
person to do or cause any of the following described activities:
1. Use or operate a power lawn mower, power trimmer or other
gasoline or electric-powered device intended for mowing or trimming a
lawn between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock
(7:00) a.m.
2. Use or operate a gasoline-powered lawn mower which does not
have a muffler.
3. Use or operate a power chain saw between the hours of ten
o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
4. Use or operate, in residential districts, construction equipment
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00)
a.m.
5. Operate in any City park between the hours of eleven o’clock
(11:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. any sound equipment,
including radios, stereo systems, tape players or musical instruments or
devices.
Persons operating farm equipment are exempt from the provisions of this
section. In addition, the provisions of this section shall be enforced only upon
receipt of a complaint made or filed with City officials. Certification by an
official charged with enforcement of provisions of this section that a noise
disturbance complaint was made shall be sufficient to establish the fact of the
complaint.
CHAPTER 40A NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 188 -
40A.06 VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or for the owner to cause or permit to be operated within the public
right-of-way in this City, any motor vehicle which emits a noise in excess of the
dB(A) or dB(C) level established in this section.
1. The maximum allowable noise levels for motor vehicles shall be
85 dB(A) or 85 dB(C) measured at a distance of twenty-five feet.
2. No person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon
a public way, or in such close proximity to a public way as to be
distinctly and loudly audible upon such public way, any noise of any kind
by crying, calling, or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell,
hammer, drum, horn, other musical instrument, wind instrument,
mechanical devices or other similar device so as to destroy the peace of
the neighborhood.
3. No person shall cause any vehicle to accelerate in a manner as to
create excessive engine noise at any location within the corporate City
limits of Dyersville.
4. No person shall the engine of any vehicle to cause any loud noise
in excess of normal operation noises cause though normal operations
with use of original equipment devices installed per manufactures
specifications.
5. This section applies to the total noise from a motor vehicle and
shall not be construed as limiting and precluding the enforcement of any
other provisions of this chapter, and includes radios, cassette players,
disc players and similar devices associated with motor vehicles.
6. The sound may be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated on the “A” or “C” weighting scale.
40A.07 PERMITS. Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions
up to an additional 5dB(A) and dB(C) of this chapter may be made to the Police
Chief or a duly authorized representative, pursuant to the following procedure:
1. All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business
hours stating what devices are to be employed, where they are to be
employed, on what date(s) and at what times of day they are to be used,
the nature of the sounds to be produced or amplified and the number of
people in attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity.
2. Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the date(s),
location(s), time(s), nature of the sound, devices permitted, number of
people in attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity.
CHAPTER 40A NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 189 -
3. Permits shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld nor shall
the free expression of ideas or lawful speech be restrained, but sound and
noise producing conduct having no communicative value and serving
only to unreasonably disturb and disrupt the enjoyment of residences and
normal pursuits shall be restrained.
4. The Police Chief or designee may prescribe any conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the
community or the surrounding neighborhood.
40A.08 EXEMPTIONS. The requirements, prohibitions, and terms of this
chapter shall not apply to emergency work or to any authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
The terms of this section shall not apply to those activities of a temporary
duration, permitted by law including but not limited to parades, fireworks
displays, outdoor warning systems, nonprofessional athletic contests, all
construction work and all other authorized activities occurring on government
property.
40A.09 PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES PERTAINING TO NOISE
CONTROL.
1. A violation of any provision of Chapter 40A, Noise Control, shall be a
municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as listed in Chapter 4 of the
Dyersville Code of Ordinances.
2. Alternatively, a violation of any provision of Chapter 40A, Noise
Control, can be charged by a peace officer of the City as a simple
misdemeanor.
(Ch. 40A – Ord. 763 – Mar. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 40A NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 190 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 191 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.07 Antenna and Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.08 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
Safety Entities 41.09 Discharging Weapons
41.03 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.10 Throwing and Shooting
41.04 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.11 Urinating and Defecating
41.05 Interference with Official Acts 41.12 Fireworks
41.06 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators 41.13 Horseback Riding
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall
distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or
other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent
person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken
by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC
SAFETY ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a
law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing
the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he
or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or
ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer
assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of
any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably
and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.04 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No
person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee
from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 192 -
41.05 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall knowingly
resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency
medical care provider or fire fighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of
any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer,
emergency medical care provider or fire fighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct
the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or
order of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not
include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present
ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.06 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall
abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container,
with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children,
nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to
remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control,
abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.07 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow
antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any
street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building without
written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.08 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to
use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City except on
agriculturally (A-1) zoned properties for purposes of containing livestock. However,
public utilities are permitted to use barbed wire as a component of fences erected
around utility substations to provide for the safety and security of the facility. Such
barbed wire component must be a minimum of eight (8) feet above grade at all points
of said fence. Invisible fences used for pet containment are exempt.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 193 -
41.09 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council or the Police Chief. This section does not apply
to peace officers acting in the course of their duties.
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.10 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw
stones, bricks or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air
rifles, BB guns or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.11 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate
or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or
private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land, unless in a facility
designed for that purpose.
41.12 FIREWORKS. The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City are
subject to the following:
1. Definition. The term “fireworks” includes any explosive composition,
or combination of explosive substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation, and specifically includes blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, roman candles, or other fireworks of like construction and any
fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or other device
containing any explosive substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
2. Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to possess or offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided the
City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of
fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other
organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such
fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be
granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with
the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
A. Personal Injury: - $250,000.00 per person.
B. Property Damage: - $50,000.00.
C. Total Exposure: - $1,000,000.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 194 -
3. Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident,
dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the
sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the sale
or use of blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes in
athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized
military organization. This section does not apply to any substance or
composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
41.13 HORSEBACK RIDING.
1. No person shall ride any horse or pony on any of the streets, bridle
paths or thoroughfares within the City at a faster pace than a walk.
2. No person shall ride any horse or pony on any public property not
dedicated for roadway or bridle path purposes or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner thereof.
3. No person shall ride any horse or pony on any of the streets, bridle
paths or thoroughfares within the City after dark.
4. When any group consisting of more than two persons are riding
together on any street or public thoroughfare within the City, they shall not
ride more than two abreast.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 195 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.05 Fraud
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.06 Theft
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land,
dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure
whether publicly or privately owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the
following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property
without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful
possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove
therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate
or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in
property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from
entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee
whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in private
property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful
use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and
wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or
placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied
or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another
for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or
inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another,
provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible
route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 196 -
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to
do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a
person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any
transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any
proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by
authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to
remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain
in or upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted
thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the
public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also
constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as
defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section
714.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 197 -
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
43.01 Purpose 43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined 43.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale
43.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession
with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled
substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is
defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as
it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as
used in this chapter means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use,
or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of controlled substances.
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Dilutents. Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 198 -
7. Separators - Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use,
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining marijuana.
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
9. Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10. Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
12. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;
B. Water pipes;
C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand;
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
G. Chamber pipes;
H. Carburetor pipes;
I. Electric pipes;
J. Air driven pipes;
K. Chillums;
L. Bongs;
M. Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04 DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be
considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 199 -
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
3. Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and
space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa.
4. Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate
a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code
of Iowa.
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
15. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any
person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 200 -
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is
unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with
intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug
paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
[The next page is 225]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 225 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.02 Misrepresentation of Age 45.04 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age”
means twenty-one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular
course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or
beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine
or beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
1. No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic liquor, wine
or beer.
2. A person violating this section or reasonably believed to be violating
this section may be detained in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable
length of time by a peace officer, owner, operator or employee of a public
establishment or private club where alcoholic liquor, wine or beer is sold or
dispensed for off-premises or on-premises consumption for the purpose of
investigating or determining the person’s true age and identity. Such detention
shall not render the detainer criminally or civilly liable for false arrest, false
imprisonment or unlawful detention.
3. The manager of any public establishment that sells alcoholic liquor,
wine or beer for on-premises or off-premises consumption and the manager of
any private club that serves alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for on-premises
consumption is required to post in a conspicuous place a notice stating the
following:
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 226 -
NOTICE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE
You are subject to a maximum $500.00 fine for attempting to
purchase or otherwise obtain alcoholic liquor, wine or beer or
for misrepresenting your age for the purpose of purchasing
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
The size of said notice shall be not less than 8½ by 11 inches.
45.03 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the
Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section
232.19 of the Code of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or
urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified
person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of
the Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from
kindergarten through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license.
A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on
public school property or while attending any public or private school-related
function. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public
place. A person violating this subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication
under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person
may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a
device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of
a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 227 -
45.04 OPEN CONTAINER IN MOTOR VEHICLES. (See Section 62.08 of this
Code of Ordinances.)
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 228 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 229 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Cigarettes and Tobacco 46.02 Contributing to Delinquency
46.01 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any
tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products
by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section
if said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person’s
employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under
Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or
tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.02 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per-son to
encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of
delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 230 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 231 -
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose 47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires 47.07 Keg Beer
47.04 Littering
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or
other vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a public park except upon the
established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially
designated by the City.
47.03 FIRES. No fires shall be built in any public or private park, except in a place
provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it
is to be immediately used by some other party.
47.04 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse,
litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle, in any public or private park,
except those provided for that purpose.
47.05 PARKS CLOSED. No person shall enter or remain within any public or
private park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. except on nights when
regularly scheduled softball league games are played. On such nights the closing hour
shall be extended to 12:30 a.m.
47.06 CAMPING. No person shall camp in any portion of a public park except in
portions prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping
privileges or rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
47.07 KEG BEER. No person shall have keg beer within the public parks unless a
lawful permit has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of
the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 47 PARK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 232 -
[The next page is 235]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 235 -
CHAPTER 49
RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
49.01 Purpose 49.04 Residency Exceptions
49.02 Definitions 49.05 Violations
49.03 Residency Restricted
49.01 PURPOSE. This chapter is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the
health and safety of children in Dyersville from the risk that convicted sex offenders
may re-offend in locations close to their residences. As recognized by the Eighth
Circuit United States Court of Appeals in its April 29, 2005 decision of Doe v. Miller,
and as recognized by the Iowa Supreme Court in State v. Miller, and as recognized by
the Iowa Supreme Court in State v. Seering, decided on July 29, 2005, the City finds
and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. When convicted
sex offenders reenter society, they are much more likely than any other type of
offender to be re-arrested for a new rape or sexual assault. Given the high rate of
recidivism for sex offenders and that reducing opportunity and temptation is important
to minimizing the risk of re-offense, there is a need to protect children where they
congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections afforded by State law
near schools and day care centers. The City finds and declares that in addition to
schools and day care centers, children congregate or play at public parks, swimming
pools, multi-use recreational trails, and libraries, school bus stops, and other places
children regularly congregate.
49.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter the following shall be
defined as shown herein:
1. “Sex offender” means a person who has been convicted of a criminal
offense against a minor, or an aggravated offense, sexually violent offense, or
other relevant offense that involved a minor as set out in Chapter 692A of the
Code of Iowa.
2. “Corporate City limits” means that area comprised and defined by the
City of Dyersville Code of Ordinances current and future.
3. “Aggravated offense” means a conviction for any of the following
offenses:
A. Sexual abuse in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.2.
B. Sexual abuse in the second degree in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.3.
C. Sexual abuse in the third degree in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.4, subsection 1.
CHAPTER 49 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 236 -
D. Lascivious acts with a child in violation of Iowa Code section
709.8, subsection 1.
E. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa
Code section 709.11.
F. Burglary in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code section
713.3, subsection 1, paragraph “d”.
G. Kidnapping, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code section
709.1 is committed during the offense.
H. Murder, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code section 709.1
is committed during the offense.
I. Criminal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in
violation of Iowa Code section 709C.1, subsection 1, paragraph “a”.
4. “Criminal offense against a minor” means any of the following
criminal offenses or conduct:
A. Kidnapping of a minor, except for the kidnapping of a minor in
the third degree committed by a parent.
B. False imprisonment of a minor, except if committed by a parent.
C. Any indictable offense involving sexual conduct directed
toward a minor.
D. Solicitation of a minor to engage in an illegal sex act.
E. Use of a minor in a sexual performance.
F. Solicitation of a minor to practice prostitution.
G. Any indictable offense against a minor involving sexual contact
with the minor.
H. An attempt to commit an offense enumerated in this subsection.
I. Incest committed against a minor.
J. Dissemination and exhibition of obscene material to minors in
violation of Iowa Code section 728.2.
K. Admitting minors to premises where obscene material is
exhibited in violation of Iowa Code section 728.3.
L. Stalking in violation of Iowa Code section 708.11, subsection 3,
paragraph “b”, subparagraph (3), if the fact-finder determines by clear
and convincing evidence that the offense was sexually motivated.
M. Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code section
728.12.
N. Enticing away a minor in violation of Iowa Code section
710.10, subsection 1.
CHAPTER 49 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 237 -
O. An indictable offense committed in another jurisdiction which
would constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs (A) through
(N).
5. “Person” means a person who has been convicted of a criminal offense
against a minor, or an aggravated offense, sexually violent offense, or other
relevant offense that involved a minor.
6. “Residence” means the place where a person sleeps, which may include
more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
7. “Sexually violent offense” means any of the following indictable
offenses:
A. Sexual abuse as defined under Iowa Code section 709.1.
B. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa
Code section 709.11.
C. Sexual misconduct with offenders in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.16.
D. Any of the following offenses, if the offense involves sexual
abuse or attempted sexual abuse: murder, attempted murder,
kidnapping, burglary, or manslaughter.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which
would constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs (A) through
(D) if committed in this State.
8. “Other relevant offense” means any of the following offenses:
A. Telephone dissemination of obscene materials in violation of
Iowa Code section 728.15.
B. Rental or sale of hard-core pornography in violation of Iowa
Code section 728.4.
C. Indecent exposure in violation of Iowa Code section 709.9.
D. Incest committed against a dependent adult as defined in Iowa
Code section 235B.2 in violation of Iowa Code section 726.2.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which
would constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs (A) through
(D) if committed in this State.
49.03 RESIDENCY RESTRICTED. A sex offender shall not reside within the
corporate City limits of Dyersville.
49.04 RESIDENCY EXCEPTIONS. A person residing within the corporate City
limits of Dyersville does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following
apply:
CHAPTER 49 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 238 -
1. The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
2. The person is subject to an order of commitment under chapter 229A of
the Iowa Code.
3. The person was living at the residence in question prior to the effective
date of the ordinance codified by this chapter (December 21, 2005).
4. The person is a minor or a ward under a guardianship.
49.05 VIOLATIONS. Any person who resides within the City of Dyersville in
violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or
imprisonment or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty
including equitable relief.
(Ch. 49 – Ord. 718 – Dec. 05 Supp.)
[The next page is 245]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 245 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.08 Request for Hearing
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.03 Other Conditions 50.10 Abatement by City
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited 50.11 Collection of Costs
50.05 Nuisance Abatement 50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents 50.13 Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do
not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection
of water.
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places or burying grounds.
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.09)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 246 -
7. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also Chapter 51)
8. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
9. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
10. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
11. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established
airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation
including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a
proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
12. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on
or permitted to the disturbance of others.
13. Residential and Commercial Lawns. Lawns in excess of six inches (6")
in height. (Ord. 741 – Apr. 08 Supp.)
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances
contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be
nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is
prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided
for in this chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized
municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served
upon the property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable
time after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 247 -
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
5. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may
have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in
the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be
abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by
the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is
found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the
circumstances.
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency
exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City
may perform any action which may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07
and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required
action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized
expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf
of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by
the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 248 -
one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs
shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the
amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars
($100.00), the City shall permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual
installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided
for assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required
and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 249 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included
in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure,
particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where
there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If
compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
recommend you review the situation with your attorney before
proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney
may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the Code of
Iowa rather than this procedure.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 250 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other nonferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles,
machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances;
iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following
characteristics:
A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked
windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or
broken glass.
B. Broken, Loose or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken,
loose or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk
lid.
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which
has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or
insects.
D. Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any
other flammable fuel.
E. Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or two or
more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle
totally inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or
has not been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30)
days or more.
F. Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle which,
because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that
the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 252 -
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination
thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any
person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the
corporate limits of the City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that
any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance
within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle
is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the
property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a
junk vehicle stored within a garage or other enclosed structure.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located
upon private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
[The next page is 265]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 265 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.10 Vicious Dogs
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.11 Rabies Vaccination
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.12 Prohibited Animals
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.13 Owner’s Duty
55.05 Livestock 55.14 Confinement
55.06 Trapping of Animals Prohibited 55.15 At Large: Impoundment
55.07 At Large Prohibited 55.16 Disposition of Animals
55.08 Damage or Interference 55.17 Impounding Costs
55.09 Annoyance or Disturbance
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this
chapter.
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
2. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or
housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.
3. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine,
equine, ovine or porcine species, farm deer, as defined in Section 481A.1
of the Code of Iowa; ostriches, rheas, emus, or poultry. This section
shall also include any and all animals commercially boarded or
commercially raised for sale or gaming. (Ord. 742 – Jul. 08 Supp.)
4. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring an animal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1 and 717B.1)
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or
confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the
animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail
to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of
necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which
causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds
or confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care
consistent with customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the
livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means
which causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal
husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 266 -
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has
ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except
the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal
shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the
City except by written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the
City’s zoning regulations.
55.06 TRAPPING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED. It is unlawful to set a
trap or snare of any kind which is capable of taking, capturing, trapping or
killing any game or fur-bearing animal on public property in the established
limits of the City. Public property includes all land owned by the City, the State
or any other subdivision of the State. However, the Police Chief may authorize
the use of a trap or snare when it is determined to be in the best interest of
public safety. Traps for the control of mice, rats and other vermin when used in
an enclosed structure are not prohibited.
55.07 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an
animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.08 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an
animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another
thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises.
55.09 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of
a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to
any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or
otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or
other vehicles.
55.10 VICIOUS DOGS. It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a
vicious dog within the City. A dog is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked
or bitten any person without provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite
persons exists and is known or ought reasonably to be known to the owner.
55.11 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies
vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 267 -
in said person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been
vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at large
are not subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.12 PROHIBITED ANIMALS. No person shall keep within the City any
of the following animals, whether actually vicious or not: Lions, tigers, jaguars,
leopards, cougars, lynx, ocelots, bobcats, bears, wolves, coyotes, pit bull dogs
(or cross breeds where one parent is a wolf, coyote or pit bull), crocodiles,
alligators and all venomous or constricting snakes.
55.13 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other
animal which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of
such bite or attack to report this act to Police Department. It is the duty of
physicians and veterinarians to report to the Police Department the existence of
any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12 CONFINEMENT. If a local board of health or the Police Department
receives information that an animal has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is
suspected of having rabies, the board shall order the owner to confine such
animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the
manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by the local
board of health or the Police Department, and after ten (10) days the board of
health or Police Department may humanely destroy the animal. The owner shall
pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police service
dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance
of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.15 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT. Animals found at large in violation
of this chapter shall be seized and impounded, or at the discretion of the peace
officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to
answer charges made thereunder.
55.16 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS. When an animal has been
apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be provided to the owner
within two (2) days after impoundment, if the owner’s name and current address
can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other device that is on or
part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by the owner upon
payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it
immediately vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven
days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 268 -
within seven (7) days, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or
destroyed by euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.17 IMPOUNDING COSTS. Impounding costs are fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each unlicensed dog six months of age and over, ten dollars
($10.00) for each unlicensed dog under six months of age and ten dollars
($10.00) for each licensed dog or other animal, plus one dollar ($1.00) per day
for food and care. Fees incurred for the boarding and disposal of impounded
animals which remain unpaid for a period of ninety (90) days shall constitute a
lien upon the property of the owner of the animal and shall be certified by the
Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
[The next page is 271]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 271 -
CHAPTER 56
DOG LICENSE REQUIRED
56.01 Annual License Required 56.06 Immunization
56.02 License Fees 56.07 Duplicate Tags
56.03 Delinquency 56.08 Transfers of Licensed Dogs
56.04 License Tags 56.09 Kennel Dogs
56.05 License Records
56.01 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
1. Every owner of a dog over the age of four (4) months shall procure a
dog license from the Clerk on or before the first day of January of each year.
2. Such license may be procured after January 1 and at any time for a dog
which has come into the possession or ownership of the applicant or which has
reached the age of three (3) months after said date.
3. The owner of a dog for which a license is required shall apply to the
Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk.
4. The form of the application shall state the breed, sex, age, color,
markings, and name, if any, of the dog, and the address of the owner and shall
be signed by the owner. The application shall also state the date of the most
recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine administered and the date the dog
shall be revaccinated.
5. All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following the date of
issuance.
56.02 LICENSE FEES. The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution
of the Council.
56.03 DELINQUENCY. All license fees shall become delinquent on the first day
of July of the year in which they are due and a delinquent penalty of one dollar ($1.00)
shall be added to each unpaid license on and after said date.
56.04 LICENSE TAGS. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Clerk shall
deliver or mail to the owner a license which shall be in the form of a metal tag
stamped with the serial number of the license as shown on the record book of the
Clerk, the year in which it is issued, and the name of the City. The license tag shall be
securely fastened by the owner to a collar or harness which shall be worn at all times
by the dog for which issued. A license issued for one dog shall not be transferable to
another dog. Upon the expiration of the license the owner shall remove said tag from
the dog.
56.05 LICENSE RECORDS. The Clerk shall keep a book to be known as the
record of licenses which shall show:
CHAPTER 56 DOG LICENSE REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 272 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.11 and 351.22)
1. The serial number and date of each application for a license.
2. The description of the dog as specified in the application, together with
the name of the owner of the dog.
3. The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number of each
tag, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine
administered, and the date the dog shall be revaccinated.
4. The amount of all fees paid.
5. Such other data as may be required by law.
56.06 IMMUNIZATION. Before a license is issued, the owner shall furnish a
veterinarian’s certificate showing that the dog for which the license is sought has been
vaccinated against rabies, and that the vaccination does not expire within six months
from the effective date of the dog license. A tag showing evidence of proper
vaccination shall at all times be attached to the collar of the dog.
56.07 DUPLICATE TAGS. Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license tag has
been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag on the payment of one dollar
($1.00) and the Clerk shall enter in the license record the new number assigned.
56.08 TRANSFERS OF LICENSED DOGS. Upon transfer of a licensed dog into
the City, the owner shall surrender the original license tag to the Clerk. The Clerk
shall preserve the surrendered tag and, without a license fee, issue a new license tag.
56.09 KENNEL DOGS. Dogs kept in state or federally licensed kennels, which are
kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under
constant restraint, are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
[The next page is 285]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 285 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known
and cited as the “Dyersville Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are
defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are
adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for
business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty
percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of
three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and
buildings in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a
school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 286 -
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the city not included in the
business, school or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or
alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this chapter
and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a
peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic
laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in
an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the
Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City
for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273 & 321.274)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a
vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons
or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect
the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other
manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. A
peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the
proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by
law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on
any street except as provided herein:
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 287 -
1. Definition. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles
represented or advertised to the public as a parade.
2. Approval Required. No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining approval from the Council. The person organizing or sponsoring the
parade shall provide information concerning the time and date for the parade
and the streets or general route therefor, and any approval given to such person
includes all participants in the parade, provided they have been invited to
participate.
3. Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which approval has
been given and the persons lawfully participating therein shall not be deemed
an obstruction of the streets, notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance to the contrary.
4. Control By Peace Officers and Fire Fighters. Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in
the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of
the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 288 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 289 -
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.05 Traffic Lanes
61.02 Installation 61.06 Necessity of Signs
61.03 Compliance 61.07 Moving or Damaging Devices
61.04 Crosswalks 61.08 Standards
61.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Police Chief shall cause to be
placed and maintained appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces
and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones,
emergency snow routes, loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones,
quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above, truck routes, school stops, stop
intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for
traffic, play streets, intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals;
intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited; and
intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate
the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections.
61.02 INSTALLATION. The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained
traffic control devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the City under
State law or to regulate, guide or warn traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.03 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any
official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to designate and
maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due
to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
road-way, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
CHAPTER 61 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 290 -
61.05 TRAFFIC LANES. Where traffic lanes have been marked on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of
any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making
a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.06 NECESSITY OF SIGNS. No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs
are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of
the alleged violation, an official sign is not in a viewable position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person.
61.07 MOVING OR DAMAGING DEVICES. It is unlawful for any per-son to
move, deface or otherwise damage any sign, signal or other traffic control device
placed upon the streets of the City.
61.08 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards
established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 291 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.07 Tampering with Vehicle
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.08 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.09 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.10 Reckless Driving
62.05 Quiet Zones 62.11 Careless Driving
62.06 Funeral Processions 62.12 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
62.13 Emergency Road Closure and Barricades
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails
or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a
fire department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable
provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and
the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. These sections of the
Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2. Section 321.20B – Proof of security against liability.
3. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited.
4. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
5. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
6. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
7. Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
8. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
9. Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
10. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
11. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
12. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
13. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
14. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
15. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
16. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card.
17. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 292 -
18. Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
19. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
20. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
21. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
22. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
23. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
24. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
25. Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.
26. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
27. Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
28. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
29. Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
30. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
31. Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals –
unlawful possession.
32. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
33. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
34. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
35. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
36. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
37. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
38. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
39. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
40. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
41. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
42. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
43. Section 321.302 – Overtaking on the right.
44. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
45. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
46. Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
47. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 293 -
48. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.
49. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
50. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
51. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
52. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
53. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
54. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
55. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
56. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
57. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
58. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
59. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
60. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
61. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
62. Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
63. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
64. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
65. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
66. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
67. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
68. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
69. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
70. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
71. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
72. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
73. Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat – penalty.
74. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
75. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
76. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
77. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 294 -
78. Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
79. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
80. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
81. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
82. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
83. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
84. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
85. Section 321.372 – School buses.
86. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped
vehicles.
87. Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
88. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
89. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
90. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
91. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
92. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
93. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
94. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
95. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
96. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
97. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
98. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
99. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
100. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
101. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
102. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
103. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
104. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
105. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
106. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
107. Section 321.406 – Cowl lamps.
108. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 295 -
109. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
110. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
111. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
112. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
113. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
114. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
115. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
116. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
117. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
118. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.
119. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
120. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
121. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited.
122. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
123. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
124. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
125. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
126. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
127. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
128. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
129. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
130. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
131. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses – use required.
132. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
133. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
134. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
135. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
136. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
137. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
138. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
139. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
140. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 296 -
141. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
142. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
143. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
144. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
145. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity – reregistration.
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive
a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles
having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any
said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or
portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not
drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on
the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle
in the place intended for their accommodation. No person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a
quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. Upon the immediate approach of a
funeral procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized
emergency vehicle, shall yield the right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle
which is part of a funeral procession shall not be charged with violating traffic
rules and regulations relating to traffic signals and devices while participating in
the procession unless the operation is reckless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.324A)
62.07 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person,
either individually or in association with one or more other persons, willfully to
injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or
from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 297 -
62.08 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
1. Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or
highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an
open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
2. Passengers. A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street
or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle
an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)
As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor vehicle
designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in
operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger
while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or
unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the
trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if
the motor vehicle does not have a trunk.
62.09 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to
allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an
intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic
approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction shall be
deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the
manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.10 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such
manner as to indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
62.11 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall intentionally operate a motor
vehicle on a street or highway in any one of the following ways:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A)
1. Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or sliding
upon acceleration or stopping.
2. Simulating a temporary race.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 298 -
3. Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with
the ground.
4. Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
62.12 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate,
or cause to be used or operated within the City of Dyersville any engine
brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid
in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive,
loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle.
2. City owned fire apparatus or apparatus responding in Mutual for
the City of Dyersville is exempt from this section.
(Ord. 744 – Jul. 08 Supp.)
62.13 EMERGENCY ROAD CLOSURE AND BARRICADES. As
required for emergency circumstances or for routine street maintenance by
Public Works officials or sub-contractor, roads may be ruled closed by the
Police Chief or authorized designee and the following procedure.
1. The closure shall be indicated by the use of “road closed”
marking, barricades, traffic cones, caution tape, or similar road closure
devices.
2. It shall be unlawful for any non-authorized persons to remove
such barricades to allow unauthorized access to the closed road or area.
3. It shall be unlawful for any non-authorized vehicle to travel a
closed road.
4. Any violation of the Road Closed provisions shall be a simple
misdemeanor invoking a one-hundred dollar ($100.00) criminal penalty
plus cost and fees or a municipal infraction in accordance with the City
of Dyersville Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 764 –Mar. 11 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 298 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.03 Controlled Access Facilities
63.02 Speed Limits 63.04 Minimum Speed
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same
at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other
conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed
greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance
ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using said
street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 SPEED LIMITS. The following are the lawful speed limits within the City:
1. Central Business District ...............................20 MPH
2. Outlying Business District .............................25 MPH
3. Residential District ........................................25 MPH
4. Manufacturing District...................................25 MPH
5. Suburban District ...........................................45 MPH
6. Alleys.............................................................15 MPH
7. City Parks.......................................................20 MPH
8. Mobile Home Parks .......................................20 MPHa
9. School Zone ...................................................20 MPHb
10. Chicago Great Western Beltline Rd.
except for the 200 & 300 blocks NE.........35 MPH
11. The 200 & 300 blocks NE of the
Chicago Great Western Beltline Rd..........25 MPH
63.03 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. The speed limits for Iowa
Highway controlled access facilities are:
aSpeed limits within mobile home parks are enforceable only when the owner of the park has filed a
written request for enforcement with the City pursuant to Section 321.251 of the Code of Iowa.
bSchool Zones: The 500, 600 and 700 blocks of Third Avenue SE;
The 100 and 200 blocks of Third Avenue SW
The 100 and 200 blocks of Third Street SW
The 200 and 300 blocks of First Avenue W
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 299 -
1. Iowa Highway #20: 65 MPH
2. Iowa Highway #136:
45 MPH from the south corporate limit to Iowa Highway #20 Overpass
35 MPH from the Iowa Highway #20 Overpass to Eighth Ave. SE
25 MPH from Eighth Ave. SE to Third Ave. NE
40 MPH from Third Ave. NE to Highway Station 20+00
55 MPH from Highway Station 20+00 to the north corporate limit
63.04 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except
when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 300 -
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 L-turn for Parking
64.02 U-turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to
turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection
the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of
the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters
the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall
be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered
upon leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a
different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at
intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle
shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such
markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn within the Business
District and at any intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in
accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03 L-TURN FOR PARKING. No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing
the centerline of the street, for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 64 TURNING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 301 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 302 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Stop or Yield 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops 65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.01 STOP OR YIELD. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed
by traffic control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle on the
intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which is approaching so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving
across or within the intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.322)
65.02 SCHOOL STOPS. At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle
approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from
the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle
emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into
the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle
is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
65.05 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control
signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-ofway,
slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 303 -
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk
at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 305 -
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it
appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain
streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by such signs erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may,
upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in
writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or
the City over those streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the
jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of
the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets
for which said signs are erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City
bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on
the street serving the bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs,
in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable
distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits,
and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in
excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. When truck routes have been designated in accordance
with Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply
with the following:
1. Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those
streets within the City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 306 -
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or
empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall
proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its point
of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing
or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
4. Authorized Official Truck Routes. The established Authorized Official
Truck Routes are defined:
A. Beltline Road from 1st Avenue West to HWY 136
B. 1st Avenue West to West City limits
C. X49 from South City limits to North City limits
D. Vine Road
E. HWY 136 from South City limits to North City limits
F. 2nd Avenue East from HWY 136 to East City limits
G. 3rd Avenue NE from HWY 136 to East City limits
H. 5th Street NW from Beltline Rd to 6th Avenue NW
I. 2nd Street NE from Beltline Rd to 6th Ave NE
J. 6th Avenue NE from 2nd Street NE to 7th Street NW
K. HWY 20 from West City limits to East City limits
L. Field of Dreams Way from 7th Street SW to West end
M. 15th Avenue SE from HWY 136 to East end
N. 16th Avenue SE from HWY 136 to 6th Street SE
O. 6th Street SE from 16th Avenue SE to 13th Avenue SE
P. 5th Street SE from 16th Avenue SE to south termination
Q. 8th Street NW from Beltline to 6th Avenue NW.
5. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the established
Official Authorized Truck Routes:
A. Government Owned Vehicles such as, but not limited to, street
maintenance equipment and snow plows.
B. Official School Vehicles used by and for the Schools.
C. Authorized Emergency Vehicles.
D. Authorized Solid Waste Vehicles.
(Ord. 759 – Mar. 11 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 306 -
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or
along a street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for
the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any
point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 307 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 308 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. When appropriate signs are in place,
as provided for in Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than
permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
CHAPTER 68 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 309 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 311 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Parking Prohibited
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.03 Park Adjacent to Curb — One-way Street 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.04 Angle Parking 69.10 Snow Emergency
69.05 Angle Parking — Manner 69.11 Snow Routes
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.12 Parking in R-1 and R-2 Residential Zones
69.01 PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED. Parking of vehicles
shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by designated traffic control
devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code. No person shall
stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of any such posted parking regulations
unless in compliance with the directions of a peace officer.
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a
vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in
the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as
hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the
left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB — ONE-WAY STREET. No person
shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18)
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the
case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in
the following locations:
1. Third Street SW East side of the 100 Block;
2. First Street SW West side of the 100 Block;
3. First Avenue W South side of the 100 and 200 Blocks;
4. First Avenue E South and north sides of the 100 Block
through the 400 Block;
5. Second Street SE Both sides of the 100 Block;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 312 -
6. Third Street SE East side of the 100 Block;
7. Second Street NE Both sides of the 100 Block;
8. Third Street NE East side of the 100 Block;
9. Fourth Street NE West side of the 100 Block;
10. Second Avenue NE North side of the 200 Block;
11. Second Avenue NE South side of the 300 Block.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
(Ord. 743 – Jul. 08 Supp.)
69.05 ANGLE PARKING — MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of
streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall
park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway
or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No
part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking
district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of twenty-one (21)
feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person
shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours or
for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing
of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or
licensed under the Code of Ordinances.
69.07 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following
places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 313 -
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox
which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail
from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within, or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of
any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to
any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at
the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to
any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly
sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or
when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 314 -
traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause
curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty
(50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre,
auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms,
hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other
building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which
space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left
standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging
passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided
said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public
or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or
ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public
way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb
line, where curbing has been installed.
18. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that
any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space.
69.08 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following
regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities
parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 315 -
of Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person
shall establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space
without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities
parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a
violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons
with disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a
permit or being transported in accordance with Section
321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under
Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with
a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit
must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the
Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone
which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A
(1) of the Code of Iowa.
69.09 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the following regulations.
1. Residential and Business Districts. Excepting only when such
vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise
or cargo, no person shall park or leave unattended any such vehicle on
any street in any district zoned a residential or business district in the
City. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere
with other traffic.
2. Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 316 -
equipment or other device in operation giving off audible sounds
excepting only the drive of a service station when actually being
serviced, and then in no event for more than thirty (30) minutes.
3. Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked
on any street, alley or highway for a period of time of more than thirty
(30) minutes.
69.10 SNOW EMERGENCY. On the basis of falling snow or the forecast
of snow, the Mayor or the Police Chief may cause a declaration of a snow
emergency to be publicly announced by broadcast from a radio or television
station with a normal operation range covering the City. During the snow
emergency, no person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle upon any
public street, alley, or City-owned parking lot through the duration of the snow
storm and the 48-hour period after cessation of such storm, except that the
emergency snow parking regulations shall be automatically terminated for any
public street, alley or parking lot which has become substantially cleared of
snow from curb to curb for the entire length of the block. Enforcement of this
section shall begin no sooner than two (2) hours after a declaration of a snow
emergency.
69.11 SNOW ROUTES. The Council may designate certain streets in the
City as snow routes, and there shall be no parking of any vehicle upon said
snow routes from November 1 to April 15, between the hours of two o’clock
(2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m., when a forecast of two or more inches
of snow has been made for the area by a newspaper circulated in the City or by
a radio or television station with a normal operating range covering the City or
when it becomes necessary for the City to cause snow to be plowed or removed
from its public places due to the accumulation of two or more inches of snow,
unless the snow has been cleared from curb to curb for the entire length of the
block after cessation of the snow storm. The Police Chief shall, in November of
each year, cause a notice generally outlining the snow route and snow
emergency provisions to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City.
69.12 PARKING IN R-1 OR R-2 RESIDENTIAL ZONES. No owner or
tenant of a dwelling unit in an R-1 or R-2 Residential zone shall have more than
three (3) vehicles registered to such owner or tenant or to persons sharing the
dwelling unit with said owner or tenant parked on the streets of such residential
zone at any one time. A combination of a vehicle and licensed trailer or
equipment is considered as two vehicles for purposes of this section.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 317 -
[The next page is 321]
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause
to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer
may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such
person before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the
defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy for
the records of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are
designated by Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the
scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 805.8)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Admitted violations of parking
restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances may be charged upon a simple notice
of a fine in accordance with the following, payable at the police department. Failure
to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in
District Court.
1. Yellow curb................................................... $10.00
2. Fire hydrant ................................................... $10.00
3. Facing wrong direction ................................. $5.00
4. 18 inches from curb....................................... $5.00
5. Blocking sidewalk or driveway..................... $5.00
6. Truck parking................................................ $10.00
7. Restricted area............................................... $10.00
8. 48-hour parking ............................................ $5.00
9. Blocking mailbox.......................................... $5.00
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 321 -
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
10. Snow emergency............................................$25.00 effective 04/01/08
11. Improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit................................................$100.00
(Ord. 737 - Mar. 08 Supp.)
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle
is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not
present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle
in a conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any
proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that
the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof
that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to
remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking
lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated
or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by
reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban
on parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Forty-eight (48) Hour Period. When any vehicle is left
parked for a continuous period of forty-eight (48) hours or more. A diligent
effort shall first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found the owner
shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 322 -
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 323 -
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
[The next page is 335]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 324 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 335 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.04 Places of Operation
75.02 Definitions 75.05 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.06 Accident Reports
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of allterrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire
vehicle with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6)
low pressure tires, or a two-wheeled, off-road motorcycle, that is limited in
engine displacement to less than eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters and in
total dry weight to less than seven hundred fifty (750) pounds and that has a
seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for
steering control. Two-wheeled, off-road motorcycles shall be considered allterrain
vehicles only for the purpose of titling and registration. An operator of
a two-wheeled, off-road motorcycle is exempt from the safety instruction and
certification program requirements of Section 321G.23 and 321G.24 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1[1])
2. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one
thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belttype
tread, or any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for
travel on snow or ice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1 [18])
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV or
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the
Code of Iowa or rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the
Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment
and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G)
75.04 PLACES OF OPERATION. The operators of ATV’s and snow-mobiles
shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATV’s and snowmobiles may
be operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs and snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets
which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets
as may be designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 336 -
2. Exceptions. ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited
streets only under the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on any
street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor
vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. ATVs and snowmobiles may make a direct
crossing of a prohibited street provided:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place
where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The ATV or snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be operated
on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or snowmobile may be driven
directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[8])
4. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails and
snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f and g])
5. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be
operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property
without the express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be
operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one
inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be operated
upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking”
except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which
operation is authorized by this chapter.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 337 -
75.05 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are
liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or
snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury
or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time
the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the
ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18)
75.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in
an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to
two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the
operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident
report within forty-eight (48) hours, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10)
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 338 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 339 -
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.08 Carrying Articles
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.09 Riding on Sidewalks Downtown
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.10 Towing
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.11 Improper Riding
76.05 Bicycle Paths 76.12 Parking
76.06 Speed 76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.14 Special Penalty
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such
person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall be subject to all regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not
ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall
be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not
ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 340 -
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand
upon the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS DOWNTOWN. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride a bicycle:
1. On the sidewalk in front of any business located on 1st Avenue East and
1st Avenue West from 4th Street SE to 3rd Street SW.
2. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to designate and post signs in
such areas where bicycles are prohibited on sidewalks. No person shall ride a
bicycle in such area.
(Ord. 715 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to
tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City.
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or
reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard
the safety of the operator or others.
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be
responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the
rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to
the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible
from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle,
may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 341 -
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.14 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
may, in lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for
violations of the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by
the City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second
offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 342 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °




CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 343 -
CHAPTER 77
BICYCLE REGISTRATION
77.01 Registration Required 77.04 Destroyed or Stolen Tag
77.02 Records 77.05 Altering or Counterfeiting Tag Unlawful
77.03 Transferability
77.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED. Every person who owns and/or operates a
bicycle within the limits of the City shall cause the ownership thereof to be registered
at the office of the Police Chief of the City. Upon such registration, the Police Chief
shall issue to such person a registration tag, plate or other means of identification. The
registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened to the bicycle for which it is
issued so that the plate is readable at a distance of at least seventy-five (75) feet from
the rear of the bicycle. There shall be paid to the Police Chief a fee for the tag or plate
in the amount of fifty cents (50¢). The registration plates or tags will expire on
December 30th of every other year.
77.02 RECORDS. The Police Chief shall keep a record of the number of each
registration, the date issued, the name of the person who registered and the number
issued to the person.
77.03 TRANSFERABILITY. In the event a registered bicycle is sold or
transferred, the registration tag, plate or other means of identification shall pass to the
new owner or transferee and the sale or the transfer of the bicycle shall be reported to
the Police Chief by the new owner or transferee within five (5) days after sale or
transfer, together with the name of the new owner or transferee of the bicycle.
77.04 DESTROYED OR STOLEN TAG. In the event that the registration tag,
plate or other means of identification is lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner shall
report the same to the Police Chief immediately and the Police Chief shall then issue a
new registration tag at the cost of twenty-five cents (25¢) to such owner.
77.05 ALTERING OR COUNTERFEITING TAG UNLAWFUL. It is unlawful
for any person to alter or counterfeit any registration tag, plate or other means of
identification issued in conformity with this chapter.
CHAPTER 77 BICYCLE REGISTRATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 344 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 345 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Fees for Impoundment
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Proceeds from Sales
80.05 Extension of Time 80.10 Duties of Demolisher
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for
more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates
or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle
totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for
more than twenty-four (24) hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days.
However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within
the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B
of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not
paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency
responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means any city or public agency organized for the
disposal of solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle
to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle
vehicles.
3. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 346 -
authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an
abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned
vehicle on private property. A police authority taking into custody an abandoned
vehicle which has been determined to create a traffic hazard shall report the reasons
constituting the hazard in writing to the appropriate authority having duties of control
of the highway. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment and
facilities or hire a private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs
a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the
private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of
record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity which takes into
custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail,
the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other
known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed
to their last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into
custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the
year, make, model and serial number of the vehicle, describe the personal property
found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being
held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle
and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon
payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the
vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also
state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a
waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in
the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of
the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or
destruction. The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the
vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or
property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and
charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police
authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
ten (10) day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer
have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A
court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest
of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten (10) day
reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 347 -
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If the identity of the last registered
owner cannot be determined, or if the registration contains no address for the owner,
or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses
of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in
the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements
of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time
requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in
Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 EXTENSION OF TIME. The owner, lienholders or claimants may, by
written request delivered to the police authority or private entity prior to the expiration
of the ten (10) day reclaiming period, obtain an additional five (5) days within which
the motor vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3c])
80.06 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay
three dollars ($3.00) if claimed within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar
($1.00) for each additional day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges if
stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon
said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage
charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has
not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make
a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the
highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.08 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any
person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor
vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is
faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk,
without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an
engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle
totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of
authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking
certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of
title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.09 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned
vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing
and notification required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for
the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 348 -
shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle
fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.10 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise
acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or
otherwise demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck,
dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking
certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 349 -
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
81.01 Definitions 81.04 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Warning Signals 81.05 Speed
81.03 Obstructing Streets
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
2. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1 [29])
81.02 WARNING SIGNALS. Operators shall sound a horn at least one thousand
(1,000) feet before a street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring
the bell continuously until the crossing is passed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)
81.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in such a
manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time
in excess of ten (10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.
2. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person
on the track.
3. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental
safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
5. In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
6. No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s action was
necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or
its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.
CHAPTER 81 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 350 -
81.04 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and maintain
good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
81.05 SPEED. It is unlawful to operate any railroad train between the intersections
of Eighth Street NW, Fifth Street NW, Second Street NE and Third Street NE at a
speed greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(Girl vs. United States R. Admin., 194 Iowa 1382, 189 N.W. 834, [1923])
[The next page is 361]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 361 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Director’s Duties 90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connection to Public Water System 90.13 Failure to Maintain
and Use of Private Wells 90.14 Curb Valve
90.04 Abandoned Connections 90.15 Interior Valve
90.05 Permit 90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.06 Connection Charge 90.17 Completion by the City
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.08 Plumber Required 90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.09 Excavations 90.20 Backflow Preventer
90.10 Tapping Mains
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in
this Code of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall
be joint and several.
3. “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City or any duly
authorized assistant, agent or representative.
4. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or
community use.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the
building served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02 DIRECTOR’S DUTIES. The Director shall supervise the installation of
water service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations
pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new ones.
The Director shall make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter,
as may be needed for the detailed operation of the water system, subject to the
approval of the Council. In the event of an emergency the Director may make
temporary rules for the protection of the system until due consideration by the Council
may be had.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 362 -
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM AND
USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.
1. Connection to the Public Water System. Except as otherwise provided
herein, all residences and business establishments within the City using water
for human habitation or occupancy shall connect to the public water system.
Water is used for human habitation or occupancy if it is used in the plumbing
system of a residence or a business occupied by humans.
2. Exceptions. A residence or business establishment within the City
using water for human habitation or occupancy may obtain its water from a
private well as follows:
A. Existing Wells. A well in existence on the effective date of
Ordinance No. 732 (May 23, 2007) may continue to obtain water from
a private well as follows:
(1) For human habitation or occupancy until the date
established in Section 90.03(2).
(2) For non-human habitation or occupancy until such time
when well needs repair including pump repair or replacement.
B. New Wells. A well may be drilled only upon property that does
not have access to the City water system within 200 feet of the
property, and use of the well for human habitation or occupancy may
continue until the date established herein.
(1) Permit. No person shall install or maintain a private
well after the date of enactment of the ordinance codified by
this section, or own or use a private well within the City after
such a date, unless the person has registered such well and
obtained a permit for same from the City. The registration and
permit process shall be completed on forms provided by the
City.
(2) Contaminated Area. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary which permits a private well to remain in existence
within the City, neither shall a new private well be drilled nor
shall repairs to an existing private well be made after the date of
enactment of the ordinance codified by this section, if the well is
located within a contaminated area.
(3) Variance. The City Council, upon recommendation of the
Director of Public Works of the City or any duly authorized
assistant, agent or representative, may consider a variance or
exception to this section on application to the City.
(4) Termination/Abandonment of Use of Existing Wells.
The use of any private well not permitted to continue under this
section shall cease and the well shall be plugged in accordance
with rules of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources on May
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 363 -
21, 2009, or 90 days after the date the public water system is
extended to within 200 feet of the affected property, whichever
is later.
(a) All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any
other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(b) The owner of the well or the owner’s agent, shall
notify the system or town at least 48 hours prior to
commencement of any well abandonment activities.
The abandonment of the well shall be observed by the
Superintendent of the community water system.
(5) Definitions. For use in this section the following terms
are defined:
(a) “Private well” means any groundwater well,
except a monitoring well used as a part of a remediation
system, used both for drinking water and for nondrinking
water purposes, including a groundwater well
which is not properly plugged in accordance with rules
of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
(b) “Contaminated area” means a point within an
area that has groundwater contamination or that in
accordance with design models of the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources may become contaminated due to
percolation of groundwater contamination in the vicinity
of the well site.
(c) “Human habitation or occupancy” means use of
water in the plumbing system of a residence or business
used or occupied by humans.
3. Penalties. Any well owner violating any provision of the ordinance
codified by this chapter shall upon conviction be punished by forfeiture of not
less than $500.00 and not more than $750.00 and the cost of prosecution. If
any person fails to comply with this chapter for more than 10 days after
receiving notice of the violation, the community water system may impose a
penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense be
assessed as a special tax against the property.
(Ord. 732 – Jun. 07 Supp.)
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is
abandoned or a service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned
connections with the mains shall be turned off at the corporation cock and made
absolutely watertight.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 364 -
90.05 PERMIT. Before any person makes a connection with the public water
system, a written permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the
permit shall include a legal description of the property, the name of the property
owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and if all
fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be issued. Work
under any permit must be completed within sixty (60) days after the permit is issued,
except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond
the control of person making the application, an extension of time within which to
complete the work may be granted. The permit may be revoked at any time for any
violation of these chapters.
90.06 CONNECTION CHARGE. Before any permit is issued the person who
makes the application shall pay a connection charge in the amount of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each residential connection and three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for each commercial or industrial connection to reimburse the City for costs borne by
the City in making water service available to the property served. The connection
charge is in addition to any current special assessment applicable.
(Ord. 725 – Apr. 07 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any water
service pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent
and applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions,
of Division 4, Plumbing Rules and Regulations, of the State Building Code and the
City’s Standard Specifications for Water Distribution Systems.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of water service pipes and
connections to the water system shall be made by a plumber authorized to do business
in the City. The Mayor shall have the power to revoke the permit of any plumber for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in
making a connection shall be performed in accordance with the City of Dyersville
Standard Specifications and the provisions of Chapter 135.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the
direct supervision of the Director and in accord with the following:
1. Independent Services. No more than one house, building or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Director and unless provision is made so that each house, building or
premise may be shut off independently of the other.
2. Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in
diameter shall receive no larger than a three-fourths (3/4) inch tap. All mains
of over six (6) inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one inch tap.
Where a larger connection than a one inch tap is desired, two (2) or more small
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 365 -
taps or saddles shall be used, as the Director shall order. All taps in the mains
shall be made at or near the top of the pipe, at least eighteen (18) inches apart.
No main shall be tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in the main.
3. Corporation Cock. A brass corporation cock, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Director, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation cock in the main shall in no case be smaller than one size smaller
than the service pipe.
4. Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the
exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Director in such form as the
Director shall require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.11 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipes from
the main to the meter setting shall be of such material as specified in the City of
Dyersville Standard Specifications for Water Distribution System.
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. All costs and
expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the water service
pipe from the public water main to the building served shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service pipe
which is the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a
nuisance and the owner fails to correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess
the costs thereof to the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE. There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a
main shut-off valve of the inverted key type on the water service pipe at the outer
sidewalk line with a suitable lock of a pattern approved by the Director. The shut-off
valve shall be covered with a heavy metal cover having the letter “W” marked
thereon, visible and even with the pavement or ground. The proper operation of the
turn-off valve is the responsibility of the property owner. When turn-off is required
by a utility representative and the turn-off is not operative, or if a failure occurs within
the service line, the City shall be held harmless. The utility representative, at his or
her discretion, may discontinue service in a most efficient manner.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every
service pipe inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building
as possible and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one
service pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one without
interfering with service to the others. A separate water meter shall be installed for
each individual customer. Separate meters shall be installed within ninety (90) days
of notification to the property owner that the property is not in compliance.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 366 -
90.16 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All water service pipes and their
connections to the water system must be inspected and approved in writing by the
Director before they are covered, and the Director shall keep a record of such
approvals. If the Director refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner
must proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Director to enter the premises to
inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of
authority.
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open or
only partly refilled for twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is installed
and connected with the water system, or should the work be improperly done, the
Director shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess
the costs to the property owner or the plumber.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Director may shut off the supply
of water to any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these
Water Service System chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply
shall not be turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Director
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS. It is unlawful for
any person except the Director to turn water on at the curb stop, and no person, unless
specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire
hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20 BACKFLOW PREVENTER. Any customer who is connected to any other
source of water, in addition to the municipal water system, shall install, at said
customer’s cost, a backflow preventer to prevent cross contamination of the municipal
water system. The type and location of the backflow preventer must be approved by
the Director prior to its installation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 367 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.06 Meter Repairs
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.07 Right of Entry
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems- Exception 91.08 Maintenance Test
91.04 Location of Meters 91.09 Meter Testing
91.05 Providing of Meter and Setting
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of
water and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be measured
through meters furnished by the City and installed by the customer.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler systems
may be connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct
supervision of the Director. No open connection can be incorporated in the system,
and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building
which must be sealed open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they are
easily accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05 PROVIDING OF METER AND SETTING. The property owner shall
purchase the first meter to be placed in a new facility from the City prior to approval
of said property owner’s connection. The City shall provide all subsequent meters of
a similar size to the property at no expense to the owner, unless the owner willfully, or
through neglect, damages said meter. The property owner shall also provide all
necessary piping and fittings for proper setting of the meter including a globe type
valve on the discharge side of the meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval
of the Director and shall be of a design and construction approved by the Director.
91.06 METER REPAIRS. Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to
be out of order the Director shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the
meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be liable
for the cost of repairs.
91.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Director shall be permitted to enter the premises
of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.08 MAINTENANCE TEST. Every meter shall be removed from service
periodically and thoroughly tested for accuracy. Any meter found inaccurate beyond a
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 368 -
tolerance of one and one-half percent (1½%) shall not be returned to service until
properly adjusted.
91.09 METER TESTING. The Director or any designee shall make a test of the
accuracy of any water meter at any time when requested in writing. If it is found that
such meter overruns to the extent of 5% or more, the cost of the test shall be paid by
the City and a refund shall be made to the customer for overcharges collected since the
last known date of accuracy, but not more than 5% of the total water bill and not for a
longer period than 3 months. If the meter is found to be accurate or slow or less than
5% fast, the user shall pay a testing charge of $25.00.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 369 -
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.05 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service 92.06 Lien Exemption
92.03 Billing for Water Service 92.07 Lien Notice
92.04 Service Discontinued 92.08 Customer Deposits
92.09 Deferred Payments
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service
provided by the City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided
for in Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not. As a condition of receiving water service, each customer
shall provide, upon request, his or her social security number, if an individual,
and its federal identification number, if an entity. Such identification number
shall not be maintained in customer account records, but shall be maintained in
a separate confidential file by customer name only. (Ord. 740 – Apr. 08 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. The person or entity in whose name the
meter is registered for each and every unit, building, erection or parcel of
ground, where water is used from the Municipal System of Waterworks, shall
be charged for the use of water as follows:
1. Usage Charge. Each customer shall pay a water charge based on
the amount of water used as follows: $4.00 per 1,000 gallons per month.
(Ord. 746 – May 09 Supp.)
2. Minimum Sum. In addition to the above rate of payment for the use
of water, a minimum sum shall be charged to each owner or occupant for the
use of water. The minimum sum shall be set by the following schedule:
Meter Rate Schedule Minimum Sum
5/8" meter $ 6.44 per month
3/4" meter $ 11.01 per month
1" meter $ 16.51 per month
1 1/4" meter $ 23.81 per month
1 1/2" meter $ 31.14 per month
2" meter $ 42.12 per month
3" meter $ 84.25 per month
4" meter $ 120.87 per month
6" meter $ 230.72 per month
5/8" outside $ 10.28 per month
Trailer Park $ 278.69 per month
(Ord. 746 – May 09 Supp.)
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 370 -
92.03 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as
part of a combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on a monthly basis.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due
and payable at the office of the Clerk twenty (20) days from the date on
the bill.
3. Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be
considered delinquent and a late payment penalty of $2.00 shall be added
to each delinquent water, sewer and solid waste service account.
(Ord. 727 – Apr. 07 Supp.)
92.04 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers
shall be discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that
service will be discontinued if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges and any returned check fees, is not
received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency. Such notice
shall be sent by ordinary mail and shall inform the customer of the nature
of the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing
prior to the discontinuance. If payment is not received by the close of
business on the date indicated on said notice, a Disconnect Notice will be
delivered to the location receiving the service advising that service will
be disconnected 24 hours after delivery of the Disconnect Notice. A fee
of $25.00 will be charged for delivery of the Disconnect Notice, which
amount must be paid with the delinquent bill to avoid disconnection. If
service is disconnected, this fee shall be added to the delinquent bill and
must be paid prior to reconnection.
(Ord. 727 – Apr. 07 Supp.)
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner
or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding
the shut off, the Water Committee shall conduct an informal hearing and
shall make a determination as to whether the disconnection is justified.
The customer has the right to appeal the Water Committee’s decision to
the Council, and if the Council finds that disconnection is justified, then
such disconnection shall be made, unless payment has been received.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 371 -
4. Fees. If payment is tendered to the utility representative at the
time of the turn-off trip, there shall be added a service fee of $15.00, and
the representative shall give the customer a receipt for said payment of
bill and fee. Separate turn-off and turn-on trips shall be charged one fee
in the amount of $25.00 at the time of turn-on. No turn-on fee or service
fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the regular
changes in occupancies of property, whether the meter is removed for the
safety of the meter, or not removed. In addition to the above fees, there
shall be charged a fee of $30.00 for each check returned unpaid by a
financial institution. (Ord. 710 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
5. Required Forms of Payment. If a customer has had two utility
payment checks returned within a calendar year, that customer must
make payment by cash, money order or cashiers check for a period of
one year from the date the second check was returned to the City.
(Ord. 710 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
92.05 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service
charges to the premises. Water service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.06 LIEN EXEMPTION. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to a
residential rental property where water service is separately metered and the
rates or charges for the water service are paid directly to the City by the tenant,
if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The City
may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of water
service be paid to the City. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name
of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the rental property and the
date of occupancy. A change in tenant shall require a new written notice to be
given to the City within ten (10) business days of the change in tenant. When
the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if the
water service charges are paid in full. A change in the ownership of the
residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be
given to the City within ten (10) business days of the completion of the change
of ownership. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for
repairs to a water service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 372 -
92.07 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not
be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to
certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the
owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to
the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS. There shall be required from every
customer not the owner of the premises served a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
deposit intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service. The deposit shall
be returned when the applicant discontinues using water and when all bills of
the applicant due the City are paid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 DEFERRED PAYMENTS. A deferred payment agreement may be
entered into between a tenant and the City only after consultation with
designated personnel empowered to defer payment. No agreement shall be
entered into until satisfactory proof has been provided to show that by reason of
a hardship a deferred payment schedule may be negotiated.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 373 -
CHAPTER 93
CONNECTION TO NORTHEAST BOOSTER PUMP NO. 1
93.01 Applicability 93.03 Time of Payment
93.02 Connection Charges 93.04 Termination
93.01 APPLICABILITY. All property within the following described parcels is
covered by this chapter and subject to the connection charges hereinafter provided:
1. Country Club Estates, First Addition, City of Dyersville, Dubuque
County, Iowa.
2. Country Club Estates, Second Addition, City of Dyersville, Dubuque
County, Iowa.
3. Lot 1 of Jasper’s 2nd Subdivision in the City of Dyersville, Iowa,
according to the recorded plats thereof, subject to easements of record.
4. Lot 1-1-1-1 of the NW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 32, Township 89
North, Range 2 West of the 5th P.M.
5. All other areas that the Council, by subsequent ordinance, may deem
can or do connect to Northeast Booster Pump No. 1, or to the extensions or
connections made thereto, unless an assessment has been made against a
benefiting property.
93.02 CONNECTION CHARGES. All property within the areas above described
and/or deemed or determined covered by the Council that make connection to the
Northeast Booster Pump No. 1, or connection to an extension or utilize or make use of
said Northeast Booster Pump No. 1, shall be assessed connection charges as follows:
$500.00 per residential lot of 1¼ acres or less, and lots in excess of 1¼
acres shall be charged a fee of $500.00 plus $125.00 for each quarter
acre in excess of 1¼ acres.
93.03 TIME OF PAYMENT. The payment shall be due at the time connection is
made, with the exception of residential subdivision plats, which payment shall be due
for each residential lot platted at the time said plat is presented to the Council for
resolution or approval.
93.04 TERMINATION. The requirement for payment of connection charges
pursuant to this chapter shall automatically cease twenty (20) years from the effective
date of the ordinance codified herein.†
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 682 establishing the cost to property owners making connection
to the Northeast Booster Pump No. 1 was adopted by the Council on March 19, 2001, and published in
the Dyersville Commercial March 21, 2001.
CHAPTER 93 CONNECTION TO NORTHEAST BOOSTER PUMP NO. 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 374 -
[The next page is 381]
CHAPTER 94
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
94.01 Definitions 94.06 Determination of Locations Within Zones
94.02 Maps of Zones of Influence 94.07 Enforcement and Penalties
94.03 Restrictions Within the Primary Protection Zone 94.08 Inspections
94.04 Restriction Within the Secondary Protection Zone 94.09 Notice of Violation and Hearing
94.05 Exceptions 94.10 Injunctive Relief
94.01 DEFINITIONS.
1. “Alluvium” – Sand, clay, etc., gradually deposited by moving water.
2. “Aquifer” – A rock formation, group of rock formations or part of a rock
formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to yield significant
quantities of water.
3. “Contamination” – The presence of any harmful or deleterious substances in
the water supply.
4. “Flow System Boundaries” – A delineation criterion that uses groundwater
divides, surface water bodies, or other hydrologic/physical features to delineate a
Wellhead Protection Area.
5. “Groundwater” – Subsurface water in the saturated zone from which wells,
springs, and groundwater runoff are supplied.
6. “Hazardous Substances” – Those materials specified in the most recent
version of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulation, Section 261, subparts A, B, C
and D, Federal Hazardous Waste, Section 302, and substances listed by the Iowa
Labor Commissioner pursuant to Section 89B.17 of the Code of Iowa.
7. “Labeled Quantities” – The maximum quantity of chemical as recommended
on the label, for specific applications.
8. “Person” – Any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm
association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political
subdivision, public officer, or any other entity whatsoever or any combination of such,
jointly or severally.
9. “Petroleum Product” – Fuels, (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and mixtures of
these products), lubricating oils, motor oils, hydraulic fluids, solvents, and other
similar products.
10. “Pollution” – The presence of any substance (organic, inorganic, radiological,
or biological) or condition (temperature, pH, turbidity) in water that tends to degrade
usefulness of the water.
11. “Potable Water” – water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.
12. “Primary Containment” – The first level of product-tight containment, i.e., the
inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its inner
surface with the hazardous material being contained.
13. “Public Utility” – Any utility (gas, water, sewer, electrical, telephone, cable
television, etc.) whether publicly owned or privately owned.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 375 -
CHAPTER 94 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
14. “Secondary Containment” – The level of product-tight containment external
to and separate from the primary containment. Secondary containment shall consist of
leakproof trays under containers, floor curbing or other containment systems and shall
be of adequate size and design to handle all spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation
until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection of materials
shall be sufficient to preclude any substance loss. Containment systems shall be
sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented.
15. “Shallow Well” – A well located and constructed in such a manner that there
is not a continuous five-foot layer of low-permeability soil or rock between the
aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal
ground surface.
16. “Time-Related Capture Zone” – The surface or subsurface area surrounding a
pumping well(s) that will supply groundwater recharge to the well(s) within some
specified period of time.
17. “Toxic Substance” – Any substance that has the capacity to produce personal
injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption into the body.
18. “Transit” – The act or process of passing through the wellhead protection
zones, where the vehicle in transit may be parked (within the wellhead protection
area) for a period not to exceed two (2) hours.
19. “Water Pollution” – The introduction in any surface or underground water, or
any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such quantities, proportions, and
accumulations that are injurious to human, plant, animal, fish, and other aquatic life or
property or that unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property or the conduct of business.
20. “Well” – A pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a resource supply such as
water.
21. “Well Field” – A tract of land that contains a number of wells for supplying
water.
22. “Wellhead Protection Zones” – Zones delineated fixed radii criterion around
wellheads, within which toxic substances will be regulated to protect the quality of the
underground resource.
23. “Zone of Contribution” – The area surrounding a pumping well that
encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to the well.
94.02 MAPS OF ZONES OF INFLUENCE.
1. Maps. Zone of Protection maps and any amendments thereto are incorporated
by reference and made a part of this chapter. These maps shall be on file at City Hall.
At the time of adoption of the ordinance codified by this chapter the location of all
wells in the City of Dyersville supplying potable water to the City Water System shall
be located on the official Wellhead Protection Map with Primary Zone and Secondary
Zone indicated.
2. Map Maintenance. The Zone of Protection Maps may be updated on an
annual basis. The basis for such an update may include, but is not limited to, the
following:
A. Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the aquifer.
B. Changes in permitted pumping capacity of City wells.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 376 -
CHAPTER 94 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
C. Addition of wells or elimination of existing wells.
D. Designation of new well fields.
3. Wellhead Protection Zones. The zones of protection indicated on the zone of
protection maps are as follows:
A. Primary Protection Zone. The area within a zero (0) to fifty (50) feet
capture zone of any well supplying potable water to the City of Dyersville
water system.
B. Secondary Protection Zone. The area within a fifty (50) to one
hundred fifty (150) feet capture zone, excluding the Primary Protection Zone,
of any well supplying potable water to the City of Dyersville water system.
94.03 RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses within the Primary
Protection Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
A. Industrial buildings within the Primary Protection Zone, provided
there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated
within this use, and the Iowa DNR "separation distances for wells" for sources
of contamination is complied with. All sites must comply with the restrictions
and covenants set by the City of Dyersville.
B. Playgrounds/parks.
C. Wildlife areas, open spaces.
D. Lawns and gardens.
E. Residential development.
F. Non-motorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails.
2. Additional restrictions are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to soils, groundwater, or surface water within the
Primary Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a
discharge shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
B. Any person(s) responsible for discharging or causing or permitting
such discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs, and may be subject to fines as specified in this
chapter.
C. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of
fertilizers or pesticides in excess of labeled quantities to the soils, ground
water, or surface water within the Primary Protection Zone. Any person
knowing or having evidence of a discharge shall report such information to
the Wellhead Protection Officer.
94.04 RESTRICTION WITHIN THE SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONE.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Secondary Protection
Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
A. All uses listed as permitted in the Primary Protection Zone.
B. Sewer - residential and commercial.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 377 -
CHAPTER 94 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
C. Above ground storage tanks when incompliant with State Fire
Marshal's regulations.
D. Basement storage tanks.
E. Livestock grazing and field cropping activities.
2. Additional restrictions are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to the soils, groundwater, or surface water within the
Secondary Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a
discharge shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
B. Any person(s) responsible for discharging or causing or permitting
such discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs, any may be subject to fines specified in this
chapter.
C. Any person who stores, handles, produces or uses chemicals within
the Secondary Protection Zone shall make available the relevant MSDS sheets
to the Wellhead Protection Officer regardless of their status under 94.05(4).
94.05 EXCEPTIONS.
1. The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
A. The transportation of any hazardous substance through the well field
protection zones provided the transporting vehicle is in transit.
B. The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel
tank or as a lubricant in a vehicle.
C. Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management
center facilities, or public utility transmission facility.
D. Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous substances
for resale in their original unopened containers only in the Secondary
Protection Zone.
E. Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for janitorial or
minor maintenance purposes.
F. Consumer products located in the home which are used for personal,
family, or household purposes.
G. The storage and use of hazardous substances as a fuel or lubricant to
provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field provided an
enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the hazardous
substance.
H. The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the operation of
the well or plant.
2. The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance codified by this chapter may be continued even though such use may not
conform to the regulations of the chapter. However, the storage and use of hazardous
substances within the primary protection zone must provide an enclosed secondary
containment system. Such structure or facility may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or substituted subsequent to adoption of said ordinance exemption is
granted by the City Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 378 -
CHAPTER 94 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
3. Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relating to the storage,
handling, use and/or production of any toxic or hazardous substances who is exempt
from this chapter by law shall not be subject to the restrictions contained herein.
4. All requests for permits or special exceptions in the City of Dyersville
Wellhead Protection Zones must be made in writing to the City Council. All requests
must include a list of all hazardous chemicals (MSDS sheets will be made available
upon request) to be stored, handled, used, or produced under the permit or special
exception. All requests may be required to include an environmental assessment
report at the discretion of the City Council. Any exemptions or permits granted will
be made conditional and may include environmental monitoring and cleanup costs.
The exemption or permit will be made void if environmental and/or safety monitoring
indicate that the facility or activity is emitting any releases of harmful contaminants to
the surrounding environment. The facility will be held financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs.
94.06 DETERMINATION OF LOCATIONS WITHIN ZONES. In determining the
location of properties within the zones depicted on the Zone of Protection Maps, the following
rules shall apply:
1. Properties located wholly within one (1) zone reflected on the applicable
Zone of Protection Map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that zone.
2. For properties having parts lying within more than (1) zone as reflected on the
applicable Zone of Protection Map, each part shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to the zone in which it is located.
94.07 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
1. The Director of Public Works of the City or any duly authorized assistant,
agent or representative is designated as the Wellhead Protection Officer to supervise
the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
2. The Wellhead Protection Inspector(s) shall be the Director of Public Works of
the City or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
3. No building permit shall be issued which is a violation of the Iowa DNR
“SEPARATION DISTANCE FROM WELLS,” as published in the Iowa
Administrative Code: IAC [567] 43.3 (7) Table A. ‘Separation Distances’, or its
replacement.
4. No new underground tank(s) will be allowed for auxiliary fuel storage in the
Primary or Secondary zones.
5. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the provisions and penalties provided therein.
94.08 INSPECTIONS.
1. The Wellhead Protection Inspector(s) shall have the power and authority to
enter and inspect all buildings, structures and land within all wellhead protection
zones for the purpose of making an inspection. Failure of a person having authority
over a property to permit an inspection shall be sufficient grounds and probable cause
for a court of competent jurisdiction to issue a search warrant to the Protection Officer
or Inspector to inspect such premises.
2. In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or abandoned, and the
owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an inspection, the
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 379 -
CHAPTER 94 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLHEAD
PROTECTION REGULATIONS
officer or inspector may enter into or upon any open or unsecured portion of the
premises in order to conduct an inspection thereof.
3. The Wellhead Protection Officer or Inspector shall inspect each City well
annually and shall maintain an inventory, if applicable, of all hazardous substances
which exist within the Primary and Secondary Protection Zones. One format that may
be used is Iowa DNR Form, OMB No. 2050-0072. MSDS sheets on these chemicals
will be made available to the Inspector as under 94.05(4).
94.09 NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND HEARING. Whenever an officer or an inspector
determines that there is a violation of this chapter, he shall give notice thereof in the manner
hereinafter provided. A notice of violation shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Be dated and signed by the officer or inspector;
3. Specify the violation or violations; and
4. State that said violation(s) shall be corrected within ten (10) days of the date
on which the inspector issued the notice of violation.
94.10 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. If any person who engages in nonresidential activities
stores, handles, uses, and/or produces toxic substances within the wellhead protection zones,
as indicated on the Zone of Protection Maps, continues to operate in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, then, the City may file an action for injunctive relief in the court of
jurisdiction.
(Ch. 94 Added by Ord. 733 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 380 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 381 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Director 95.08 Owner’s Liability Limited
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Use of Easements
95.05 Sewer Connection Required 95.10 Special Penalties
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances
pertaining to Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the
treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(IAC, 567-69.3[1])
3. “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
(IAC, 567-69.3[1])
4. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
5. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of
domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly
discharged into the public sewer system.
6. “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City or any
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 382 -
7. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
8. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
9. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged
therefrom.
10. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
11. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all
equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage,
treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or
other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
12. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
13. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
14. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
15. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
16. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
17. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
18. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
19. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
20. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
21. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5)
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 383 -
times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
22. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
23. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
24. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 DIRECTOR. The Director shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage
system.
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers,
sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades
thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump
pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Director.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as
provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 384 -
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or
combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet
facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of
these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60)
days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property line of such owner and is
of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed
to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to connect
to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])
(IAC, 567-69.3[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the
corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system
may apply to the Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms
and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Director and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. The
Director shall have the right to inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
95.08 OWNER’S LIABILITY LIMITED. While performing the necessary work
on private property, the Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or
occupant and the owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to City
employees and the City shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage
to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and
growing out of any gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 385 -
95.09 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Director and other duly authorized employees
of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
95.10 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall
apply to violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served
by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 386 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 387 -
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.02 Connection Charge 96.08 Inspection Required
96.03 Plumber Required 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.04 Excavations 96.10 Abatement of Violations
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.11 Adoption of Chapter 10 and Appendix H
96.06 Interceptors Required of Uniform Plumbing Code
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall set
forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer
system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent. The permit
shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of the building sewer
to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that
when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the
owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an
extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted.
Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these
chapters.
96.02 CONNECTION CHARGE. The person who makes the application shall pay
a connection charge in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
residential connection and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each commercial or
industrial connection to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in making
sewer service available to the property served. The connection charge is in addition to
any current special assessment applicable.
(Ord. 726 – Apr. 07 Supp.)
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and
connections to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber authorized to do business
in the City. The Mayor shall have the power to revoke the permit of any plumber for
violation of any of the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
96.04 EXCAVATIONS. All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City. The
excavations shall be made in accordance with the City of Dyersville Standard
Specifications and the provisions of Chapter 135.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. Any connection with a public sanitary
sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the Director and in accordance
with the following:
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 388 -
1. Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
conducted by the owner and observed by the Director, to meet all requirements
of this chapter.
2. Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
3. Installation. The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of
the building sewer and the connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of Division 4, Plumbing Rules and
Regulations, of the State Building Code or the City of Dyersville Standard
Specifications for Waste Water Collection. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the Director before installation.
4. Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above
the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
5. Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain
shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors
shall be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, food establishments,
car washes, garages, and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Director, they are
necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
1. Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as provided by the Iowa Public Health Bulletin and Division 4 of the State
Building Code, to be approved by the Director, and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
2. Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 389 -
3. Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
be made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no
properly located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be installed at the location
specified by the Director. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine
and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with
stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed
so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is received from the
Director and in accordance with the Director’s direction if such connection is
approved.
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All connections or modifications with the
sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in
writing, by the Director. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the
building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the Director shall be
notified and the Director shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and
material; no sewer pipe laid under ground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Director refuses to approve the
work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses
incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Construction or maintenance of
building sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the
public right-of-way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the
requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty
(30) days after date of official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made
within such time the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property
owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as general
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
96.11 ADOPTION OF CHAPTER 10 AND APPENDIX H OF UNIFORM
PLUMBING CODE. In addition to any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances,
the installation of any private sewer and its connection with a public sewer shall
comply with all applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement
provisions, of Chapter 10 and Appendix H of the Uniform Plumbing Code (1994),
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, which provisions are
hereby adopted. An official copy of Chapter 10 and Appendix H of the Uniform
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 390 -
Plumbing Code (1994) as adopted and a certified copy of Ordinance No. 691 are on
file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection.
1. Right to Inspect. Such employees of the City as designated by the City
Administrator shall have the right to inspect any such traps, clarifiers,
interceptors or similar devices as required by Chapter 10 and Appendix H of
the Uniform Plumbing Code. The person in control or possession of each such
trap, clarifier, interceptor or similar device shall maintain, on forms provided
by the City, records showing the maintenance of such devices, including
receipts from the contractors hauling the waste removed from such devices.
2. Compliance Date. Any person required by the provisions of Chapter
10 and Appendix H of the Uniform Plumbing Code to have such a trap,
clarifier, interceptor or similar device must be in compliance with the
provisions of said Code within 180 days after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section†, or have on file with the City a Compliance
Agreement acceptable to the City setting out a timetable for compliance.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 691 adopting Chapter 10 and Appendix H of the Uniform
Plumbing Code and providing for inspection and compliance was adopted by the Council on January
21, 2002.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 391 -
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges - Powers
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the Director, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging
surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon
recommendation of the Director where such discharge is deemed necessary or
advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to
revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha,
fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic
or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams per liter
as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 392 -
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, soluble adhesives, gypsum, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow. Any waters or wastes having (a) a
five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300)
parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty
(350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) having an average
daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average sewage flow of the City,
shall be subject to the review of the Director. Where necessary in the opinion
of the Director, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or (b)
reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of
the Director and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the Director that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The
substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per
liter or six hundred (600) milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble
matter.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 393 -
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½)
inch in any dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public
agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or
other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry
into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 394 -
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances
which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES - POWERS. If any waters or wastes are
discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and
which in the judgment of the Director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the
public sewage system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 395 -
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of Chapter 99.
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Director permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the
owner’s expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Director, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods of the
Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether
a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples).
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 396 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 397 -
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required 98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is
unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under
the provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or
are employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and
layout of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with
the specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567,
Chapter 69, and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations
of the County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board
of Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater
from an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES
permit) to any ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to
the surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary
manner at all times and at no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system,
as provided in Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 398 -
compliance with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an onsite
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
98.09 MINIMUM LOT AREA. No permit shall be issued for any on-site
wastewater treatment and disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than 43,560 square feet.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 399 -
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.05 Payment of Bills
99.02 Rates for Service 99.06 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Special Rates 99.07 Special Agreements Permitted
99.04 Private Water Systems
99.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall
pay to the City sewer service fees as hereinafter provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. The person or entity in whose name the
charge is registered for each and every unit, building, erection or parcel of
ground, where sewer is connected from the Municipal Sewer System shall be
charged for the use of the City sewer based on water meter readings at the
following rates:
1. Usage Charge. Each customer shall pay a sewer charge based on
the amount of water used, as follows: $5.25 per 1,000 gallons per
month. (Ord. 747 – May 09 Supp.)
2. Minimum Sum. In addition to the above rate of payment for the
use of sewer, a minimum sum shall be charged to each owner or
occupant for the use of City sewer in accordance with the following
water meter rate schedule:
Meter Rate Schedule Minimum Sum
5/8" meter $ 8.27 per month
3/4" meter $ 14.12 per month
1" meter $ 21.18 per month
1 1/4" meter $ 30.59 per month
1 1/2" meter $ 39.99 per month
2" meter $ 52.48 per month
3" meter $ 108.19 per month
4" meter $ 155.23 per month
6" meter $ 296.31 per month
Trailer Park $ 357.91 per month
(Ord. 747 – May 09 Supp.)
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 400 -
99.03 SPECIAL RATES. Where, in the judgment of the Director and the
Council, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer
charges provided in Section 99.02 would be inequitable or unfair to either the
City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Director and
submitted to the Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS. Customers whose premises are
served by a private water system shall pay sewer charges based upon the water
used as determined by the City either by an estimate agreed to by the customer
or by metering the water system at the customer’s expense. Any negotiated, or
agreed upon sales or charges shall be subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All sewer service charges are due and
payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of a
combined service account as contained in Section 92.03 of this Code of
Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account becomes
delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.07 relating to lien notices
shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
99.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service
charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED. No statement in these
chapters shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or
contract between the Council, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special
conditions, rate and cost as established by the Council.
[The next page is 405]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 405 -
CHAPTER 100
SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
100.01 Purpose 100.04 Time of Payment
100.02 Applicability 100.05 Termination
100.03 Connection Charges 100.06 Exempted Property
100.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a charge for
connection to the Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer or to any extension thereto or for any
connection made that will utilize the Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer.
100.02 APPLICABILITY. All property within the following described parcels is
covered by this chapter and is subject to the connection charges hereinafter provided:
1. The East one-half of Section 36, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of
the 5th P.M., lying South of 1st Avenue West (Old Highway 20), East of
County Road X-49, North of Highway 20, and West of the Delaware/Dubuque
County line.
2. The South 156 feet of Lot 2-2-1-1-1 of Oakcrest Subdivision in the
City of Dyersville, Iowa.
3. Lot 1 of Melvin Nickol Place No. 2 in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
4. Lot 1 of Melvin Nickol in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
5. Lot B of Westridge Estates in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
6. Lot 1-3 of the North ½ of Section 31, Township 89 North, Range 2
West of the 5th P.M., Dubuque County , Iowa.
7. Lot 1 of Lot 904 in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
8. Lot 1 of Lot 903 in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
9. Lot 902 in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
10. Lot 2 of Lot 4 of Westridge Subdivision in the City of Dyersville,
Iowa.
11. All other areas that the Council, by subsequent ordinances, may deem
that can or do connect to the Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer or to extensions or
connections made thereto, unless an assessment has been made against a
benefiting property.
100.03 CONNECTION CHARGES. All property within the area above described,
shown on the exhibit on file at City Hall, and/or deemed or determined covered by the
Council that make connection to Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer or connection to an
extension or connection to said Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer or utilize or make use of
said Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer, shall be assessed connection charges as follows:
CHAPTER 100 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 406 -
1. 4" lateral for single family residential to three family residential:
$1,200.00.
2. 4" lateral for commercial or residential of four or more units:
$4,000.00.
3. 6" lateral for commercial or other use: $6,000.00.
100.04 TIME OF PAYMENT. The payment shall be due at the time connection is
made, with the exception of residential subdivision plats, which payment shall be due
for each residential lot platted at the time said plat is presented to the Council for
resolution of approval.
100.05 TERMINATION. The requirement for payment of connection charges
pursuant to this chapter shall automatically cease twenty (20) years from the effective
date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, August 21, 1996.
(Ch. 100 - Ord. 642 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
100.06 EXEMPTED PROPERTY. That portion of the following described
property developed or used for residential purposes is exempted from the provisions
of this chapter:
1. Lot 2 of Lot 4 of Westridge Subdivision in the City of Dyersville,
Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof, subject to easements of record.
2. Lot B of Westridge Estates in the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
3. Lot 1 of Lot 904.
4. Lot 1 of Lot 3 of the North ½ of Section 31, Township 89 North, Range
2 West of the 5th P.M.
5. The West 180.3 feet of Lot 1 of Lot 903 in the Town of Dyersville,
Iowa.
6. The West five hundred sixty-five (565) feet of the East seven hundred
ninety-four and seven-tenths (794.7) feet of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township 89 North,
Range 3 West of the 5th P.M.
7. The East two hundred twenty-nine and seven-tenths (229.7) feet of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of Section 36,
Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the 5th P.M.
8. The Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of
Section 36, Township 89 North, Range 3 West of the 5th P.M.
(Ord. 647 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 407 -
[The next page is 415]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 415 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.08 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.02 Definitions 105.09 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.10 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 645) 105.11 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.12 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.06 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 645) 105.13 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 645)
105.07 Littering Prohibited 105.14 Landscape Waste Dump Site Designation
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances
pertaining to Solid Waste Control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such
hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal
of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
2. “Director” means the director of the State Department of Natural
Resources or any designee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.101[2b])
3. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
4. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or
are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
5. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances
from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
6. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
7. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or
debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 416 -
8. “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
9. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but
not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
10. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any
multiple-family dwelling.
11. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires
and trade waste.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
12. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
14. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
including all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
15. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by subsection one of
Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
16. “Landscaping contractor” means any person(s) engaged in the activities
of landscape and/or yard maintenance for hire.
(Ord. 724 – Jan. 07 Supp.)
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to
provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises
before it becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 417 -
a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may
proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by
initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 645)
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause or permit
open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted
into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning
is permitted in the following circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2. Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree
trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted
in compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3. Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided
such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules
of the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
4. Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises. However, the burning of landscape waste
produced in clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to
areas located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other
than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall
not be used to ignite landscape waste.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])
5. Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
6. Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of public
or industrial employees in fire fighting methods, provided that such fires are
conducted in compliance with rules established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 418 -
7. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials
not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. (Repealed by
Ordinance No. 645)
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in
any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the
authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles
provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver
of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as
to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or
permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or
into a body or stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project
approved by the Director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on
land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director. However,
this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material
for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal
project.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.09 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid
waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such
materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director. As used
in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including but not
limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste,
flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which requires special
handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the
environment and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.14[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.10 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing,
operating, leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse
accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable
containers for refuse in accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with
the following specifications:
A. Residential. Residential waste containers shall be in conformity
with Section 107.04 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 645 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 419 -
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing or renting any commercial premise where an excessive amount
of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as
required above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage
containers approved by the City.
2. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored
upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored
upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission
from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be
well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel
and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and commercial
premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to
prevent materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and
streets.
3. Location of Containers for Collection. (Repealed by Ordinance No.
645)
4. Nonconforming Containers. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 645)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 420 -
105.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner
of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
5. Non-Natural Materials. Dump at the landscape waste site any manmade
materials to include, but not limited to: cardboard containers, plastic or
paper bags, or any material or items that are not of natural origin.
6. Collector/Landscape Contractor Dumping. Dispose of landscape waste
at the landscape waste site collected by collector or landscape contractors
unless the collector or landscape contractor has a current permit from the
City’s designated hauler authorizing said collector or landscape contractor to
dispose of landscape waste at said site.
7. Non-Residential Landscape Waste from Outside the City Limits.
Dumping any landscape waste generated on properties located outside the City
limits of Dyersville, Iowa.
Subsections 5-7 Added by Ord. 724 – Jan. 07 Supp.)
105.12 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary
landfill facilities operated by Dubuque Metro Area Solid Waste Agency are hereby
designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid
waste produced or originating within the City.
105.13 RECYCLABLE COLLECTION PROGRAM. (Repealed by Ordinance
No. 645)
105.14 LANDSCAPE WASTE DUMP SITE DESIGNATION. The City of
Dyersville, Iowa, shall establish a site for the dumping of landscape waste, subject to
the provisions of the City Code, for the dumping of landscape wastes generated on
properties within the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
(Ord. 724 – Jan. 07 Supp.)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 421 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 423 -
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish 106.10 Solid Waste Collection Containers and Dumpsters
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide by contract for
the collection of solid waste, except bulky rubbish as provided in Section
106.05, from residential premises only. The owners or operators of commercial,
industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid waste
produced upon such premises.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the
collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid
waste containing such materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily
cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or
insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and
transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner
that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to
prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material
shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to
the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be
collected from residential premises at least once each week and from
commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as may be
necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be
collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the
collector upon request in accordance with procedures therefor established by the
collector.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to
enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 424 -
as required by this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter
dwelling units or other residential buildings.
106.07 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. No person shall engage in the
business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste from
residential premises for the City without first entering into a contract with the
City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste
accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided
such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal project.
Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of
earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, provided that all
such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so
constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported is spilled
upon any public right-of-way.
106.08 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as
provided by this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served or
eligible to be served and there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in
accordance with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
1. Fee for Collection. The fee for solid waste collection shall be as
established, from time to time, by separate resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 645 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
2. Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same
terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service
account as contained in Section 92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid
waste collection service may be discontinued in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account
becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.07
relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to
the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 425 -
106.10 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CONTAINERS AND
DUMPSTERS.
1. No solid waste containers or dumpsters shall be placed upon any
City street, alley, or traffic way without the expressed authorization of
the Police Chief or designee.
2. Any solid waste container or dumpster that is allowed to
temporarily sit on a public street, alley, or traffic right-of-way, must be
clearly visible and marked with reflective tape, reflectors, or lights.
3. Solid waste collection containers or dumpsters may be required to
be indicated by the use of barricades or warning cones.
(Ord. 758 – Mar. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 426 -
[The next page is 429]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 429 -
CHAPTER 107
UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
107.01 Purpose 107.08 Public Nuisance
107.02 Definitions 107.09 Prohibited Practice
107.03 Collection by Operator 107.10 Hauling Solid Waste, Domestic Refuse,
107.04 Container Specifications Recyclables or Yard Waste
107.05 Treatment Pending Collection 107.11 Enforcement
107.06 Location of Containers 107.12 Charges
107.07 Accumulations Hazardous to Health or Property 107.13 Deposits Required
107.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a unit based pricing
system for the collection of residential solid waste in the City to reduce tonnage at the
sanitary landfill.
107.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply:
1. Domestic Refuse: All types of solid waste which normally originate in
the residential household. It shall include, but not be limited to waste paper,
rags, boxes, and clothing. It does not include bulky waste requiring special
pickup.
2. Garbage: The solid or semi-solid animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods, including cans,
bottles, and cartons in which it is received and wrappings in which it is
received and wrappings in which it may be placed for disposal, except such
cans, bottles, and cartons as are designated as recyclables.
3. Owner: In addition to the record titleholder, this term includes any
person residing in, renting, leasing, or occupying any premises and as between
such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
4. Person: An individual, or group or association of individuals; a firm or
any member thereof; a corporation or any executive officer, manager, person
in charge or employee thereof.
5. Recyclables: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard,
corrugated cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and
aluminum cans, plastic milk, water, orange juice, and windshield washer fluid
jugs (#2HDPE) and other items as deemed necessary by the City Council.
6. Residential Premises: All single-family dwellings and multi-family
dwellings.
7. Solid Waste: Unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
commercial, industrial, domestic, and agricultural operations and normal
community activities. Wastes which are solid or semi-solid containing
CHAPTER 107 UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 430 -
insufficient liquid to be free-flowing are considered solid wastes and include in
part the following: garbage, refuse, ashes, and other residue of incineration,
street refuse or sweepings, dead animals, solid animal waste, agricultural,
commercial, and industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes and
certain sewage treatment solid residue.
8. Yard Waste: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree
limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and
garden development and maintenance. Does not include tree stumps.
107.03 COLLECTION BY OPERATOR. The operator shall collect garbage,
domestic refuse, recyclables, and yard waste from all residential premises as
hereinabove defined in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
1. Garbage and domestic refuse shall be collected once weekly.
2. Yard waste:
A. Grass clippings and leaves shall be collected once a week from
April 1st through November 1st; provided, they are in City of
Dyersville Lawn and Leaf bags so as to prevent the dispersal of such
wastes upon the premises served or upon adjacent property or public
rights of way. Residents may takes grass and leaves to the Dyersville
Compost Site landfill at no charge, if hauled in bulk or if containers are
emptied by the individual on site, during specified times.
B. Large tree limbs that are not reduced to allow chipping on site
will not be permitted at the compost site. Such limbs may not exceed
two (2) inches in diameter.
C. Christmas trees, wreaths, and ropings will be collected once
after the holidays at the curb. All materials must be free of wire and
hardware. Flocked trees may contain toxic substances or wire;
therefore, they will not be picked up. Individuals will be responsible
for hauling them to a designated site.
3. Recyclables shall be collected once weekly:
A. Clear glass food and beverage containers, rinsed clean with
caps and lids removed.
B. Tin and aluminum cans (pop cans, tin soup cans, coffee cans,
etc.) rinsed clean with paper labels removed. Aerosol cans cannot be
recycled.
C. Plastic milk jugs (#2HDPE), rinsed clean, with caps and rings
removed and discarded.
D. Other items as deemed by the City Council.
4. Time Limit. Containers, bags, packages, or other solid waste placed at
the curb or alley line shall not be placed more than one day in advance of the
scheduled collection day. Yard waste shall be collected once each week
CHAPTER 107 UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 431 -
starting April 1, through November 1. Exception: Christmas trees, wreaths, or
ropings.
107.04 CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS. Solid waste containers shall not be
more than thirty-three (33) gallons, nor less than ten (10) gallons in nominal capacity
except, however, where only one container is used, in which case such container may
be less than ten (10) gallons in capacity. Containers shall be waterproof, ratproof, and
fitted with a tight lid. Containers shall have handles, bails, or other suitable lifting
devices or features. Containers shall be of a type originally manufactured for garbage
or other solid wastes, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of light
weight and sturdy construction. The weight of any individual container along with
contents shall not exceed forty (40) pounds. Galvanized iron and similar metal
containers, rubber or fiberglass containers, and plastic containers which do not
become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposal bags manufactured for garbage
and solid waste disposal shall be acceptable. Oil or grease drums, paint cans, or
similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable.
Yard waste containers shall be City of Dyersville Lawn and Leaf bags and shall not
exceed fifty (50) pounds.
All garbage and other solid waste shall be placed in suitable containers except,
however, it shall not be necessary to place books, magazines, or newspapers in
containers; provided, that the same are securely tied in bundles or completely
contained in disposable solid waste disposal bags. Large bulky items such as
furniture, and appliances that cannot be reduced to fit approved containers will not be
collected.
CHAPTER 107 UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 432 -
107.05 TREATMENT PENDING COLLECTION. All solid waste consisting of
waste animal and vegetable matter which may attract flies or rodents shall be drained
of all excess liquid, securely wrapped in paper and placed in paper bags or otherwise
packaged before it is placed in containers. All solid waste, except bundled
newspapers, and including all refuse intended for Municipal collection shall be
packaged in a similar manner in preparation of collection in order to facilitate the safe
and efficient transfer from private containers and property to collection vehicles with
minimum spillage and nuisance.
All yard waste, as defined in this chapter, shall be bagged in approved biodegradable
paper bags or bundled according to regulation set out in Section 107.04.
107.06 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS. The City reserves the right to designate
collection from streets or alleys where the same exist. Where alley collections are
designated, containers shall be placed in plain view on the premises adjacent to the
alley. Where street collections are designated, containers shall be placed at the curb
line. During the winter season, access to the containers, as well as the containers
themselves, shall be cleared from snow by the owner within a reasonable time after a
snowfall.
Yard waste shall be placed three feet to six feet (3' - 6') from garbage or other refuse.
107.07 ACCUMULATIONS HAZARDOUS TO HEALTH OR PROPERTY.
Accumulations hazardous to health or other property shall be unlawful for any person
to permit to accumulate, on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place,
such quantities of solid waste, refuse, yard waste, or recyclables, in containers or not,
which constitutes a health or sanitation hazard. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to permit to accumulate quantities of solid waste within or close to any
building unless the same are stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a
health or fire hazard.
107.08 PUBLIC NUISANCE. The accumulation of solid waste, refuse, yard waste,
or recyclables contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to
constitute a nuisance as set out in Section 107.07 of this chapter.
107.09 PROHIBITED PRACTICE. Combining yard waste and/or recyclables
with garbage or refuse for removal is prohibited.
CHAPTER 107 UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 433 -
107.10 HAULING SOLID WASTE, DOMESTIC REFUSE, RECYCLABLES
OR YARD WASTE. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the owner from
hauling solid waste, refuse, yard waste or recyclables accumulating on premises of the
owner; provided, such materials are disposed of at the designated Dubuque County
Waste Agency landfill or a recyclable processing site in accordance with this chapter.
This chapter does not intend to prevent the owner from hauling yard waste to the
landfill or to land apply if done according to State regulations.
107.11 ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
107.12 CHARGES. Fees for collection shall be as established from time to time by
separate resolution of the Council and shall be charged by the City and collected from
each single-family dwelling and each separate dwelling unit within a multiple-family
dwelling, or owner of a residential premises as defined in Section 107.02 serviced by
garbage, solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste collection service as provided for in
this chapter. This charge shall be in payment for collection of one container of
garbage or solid waste per week and one collection of recyclables and/or yard waste
per week as herein set out in Section 107.04. Such monthly charge shall be billed to
the owner as provided in Section 106.08 of this Code of Ordinances.
For each additional bag of garbage or solid waste, a one dollar ($1.00) sticker shall be
attached.
The collection of garbage, solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste as provided for in
this chapter, and maintenance of the availability of such service, whether or not such
service is used regularly or at all by the owner of such residential premises, is hereby
declared a benefit to the said premises at least equal to the monthly charges specified
in this chapter.
107.13 DEPOSITS REQUIRED. Deposits shall be required for solid waste,
collection service at the discretion of the City Administrator.
CHAPTER 107 UNIT BASED PRICING SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 434 -
[The next page is 441]
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted 110.06 Relocation of Company Facilities
110.02 Term 110.07 Confidential Information
110.03 Governing Rules and Regulations 110.08 Force Majeure
110.04 Franchise Fee 110.09 Hold Harmless
110.05 Construction and Maintenance of Company Facilities 110.10 Termination
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. The City (hereinafter referred to as “Grantor”)
hereby grants a non-exclusive franchise to Aquila, Inc, d/b/a Aquila Networks, a
Delaware corporation, (hereinafter called “Grantee”), its lessees, successors and
assigns. Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission and
authority to lay, construct, install, maintain, operate and extend in, along, over or
across the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and
public places as are now within the present or future limits of said Grantor, a natural
gas distribution system and all facilities necessary for the purpose of supplying natural
gas or processed gas for all purposes to the inhabitants of said Grantor and consumers
in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or through said
Grantor to points beyond the limits thereof. Such facilities shall include, but not be
limited to, all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient
for transmitting, transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes
for which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing
natural gas service to the inhabitants of Grantor and in carrying on such business.
110.02 TERM. The rights and privileges granted by this chapter shall remain in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter hereof subject to cancellation at the end of the tenth (10th)
year.
110.03 GOVERNING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
1. This franchise is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and
immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the
operations of a public utility, by State or Federal law. The rates to be charged
by Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of Grantor
and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of
service to be furnished by Grantee shall be under the jurisdiction and control of
such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law
with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and
standards of service to be supplied by Grantee. In determining the rights and
duties of the Grantee, the terms of this franchise ordinance shall take
precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other
ordinance enacted by the Grantor.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 441 -
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
2. If an energy supplier is unable to furnish an adequate supply of energy
due to an emergency, an order or decision of a public regulatory body, or other
acts beyond the control of the Grantee, then the Grantee shall have the right
and authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations limiting, curtailing or
allocating extensions of service or supply of energy to any customers or
prospective customers, and withholding the supply of energy to new
customers, provided that such rules and regulations shall be uniform as applied
to each class of customers or prospective customers, and shall be nondiscriminatory
as between communities receiving service from the Grantee.
110.04 FRANCHISE FEE. Grantor reserves and has the right, during the term of
this franchise but not more than once a year, and upon an affirmative vote of the
majority of members of the Grantor’s City Council, to impose a franchise fee or other
fees as may be authorized by law on customers located within the corporate City
limits of Grantor in an ordinance form satisfactory and acceptable to Grantee. The
form of assessment and collection of the franchise fee approved by Grantor must be
based on one of the following methods:
1. Percentage of Gross Receipts of regulated sales or transportation
revenues collected within the City;
2. Volumetric fee based on the delivery of energy within Grantor’s
corporate City limits; or
3. Flat Fee collected from Customers on a nondiscriminatory basis who
are located within the City.
Grantor may request that Grantee propose ordinance language that will apply the
permitted franchise fee.
110.05 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMPANY
FACILITIES.
1. Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all
excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such
inconvenience to the inhabitants of Grantor and to the general public as is
reasonably necessary; and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by
Grantee, leaving such properties in as good as condition as existed
immediately prior to excavation.
2. Subject to State laws and rules, Iowa Utility Board regulations, and
Grantee’s tariff on file with the Iowa Utilities Board, Grantee agrees for and on
behalf of itself, its lessees, successors and assigns, that for and during the term
and period of this grant, it will maintain in the City an adequate, modern,
standard and sufficient gas system and appurtenances and shall maintain and
operate the same in a modern and adequate fashion and in a manner adequate
to meet the necessities and requirement of the City, its industries and
inhabitants. While maintaining its facilities and equipment, Grantee shall
obtain permits as required by ordinance, except that in emergency situations,
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 442 -
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
Grantee shall take immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; in which case, Grantee shall
notify Grantor as soon as reasonably possible.
3. Grantor will give Grantee reasonable notice of plans for street
improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved
that affect Grantee’s facilities. The notice shall contain the nature and
character of the improvements, the rights-of-way upon which the
improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements and the time
when the Grantor will start the work, and, if more than one right-of-way is
involved, the order in which this work is to proceed. The notice shall be given
to the Grantee a sufficient length of time, considering seasonable working
conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the
Grantee to make any additions, alterations, or repairs to its facilities.
110.06 RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES. If Grantor elects to
change the grade of or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-ofway
or public place for a public purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from
Grantor, shall remove and relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public
rights-of-way, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for
the convenience of the Grantor, at the cost and expense of Grantee. If Grantor orders
or requests Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a
commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or
private developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent
interference and not merely for the convenience of the Grantor or other right-of-way
user, Grantee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to
relocating its facilities or equipment. Grantor shall consider reasonable alternatives in
designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause Grantee unreasonable
additional expense in exercising its authority under this section. Grantor shall also
provide a reasonable alternative location for Grantee’s facilities. Grantor shall give
Grantee written notice of vacating of a public right-of-way. Vacating of a public rightof-
way shall not deprive the Grantee of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are first paid to the Grantee.
Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure along, or to
make any unusual use of any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or
public place which shall interfere with the facilities or equipment of the Grantee, shall
first give notice to the Grantor and the Grantee and pay a sum sufficient to cover the
expense and damage incident to the moving of Grantee's facilities and equipment.
110.07 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Grantor acknowledges that certain
information it might request pursuant to this franchise may be of a proprietary and
confidential nature. If Grantee requests that any information provided by Grantee to
Grantor be kept confidential due to such proprietary or commercial value, Grantor and
its employees, agents, and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of that
information, to the extent allowed by law. If Grantor is requested or required by legal
or administrative process to disclose any such confidential information, Grantor shall
promptly notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that Grantee may seek an
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 443 -
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
appropriate protective order or other relief. Grantor shall use all reasonable efforts to
ensure that the confidentiality of Grantee's confidential information is maintained.
110.08 FORCE MAJEURE. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise
if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure. Force
Majeure shall include the following:
1. Physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes,
fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or
necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission
lines;
2. Acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage,
insurrections or wars;
3. Governmental actions such as necessity for compliance with any court
order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by a
governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of
the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of
the affected party to prevent or overcome. Each party shall make reasonable
efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as
reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance; provided,
however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike.
110.09 HOLD HARMLESS. Grantee, during the term of this franchise, agrees to
save harmless Grantor from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses
arising directly out of the negligence of Grantee, its employees or agents, in the
constructing, operating, and maintaining of distribution and transmission facilities or
appliances of Grantee; provided, however, that Grantee need not save harmless
Grantor from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of
Grantor, its employees or agents.
110.10 TERMINATION. If the Grantee shall be in default in the performance of
any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and shall continue in default for more
than thirty (30) days after receiving notice from the City of such default, the City may,
by resolution duly passed and adopted, terminate all rights granted under this franchise
to the Grantee. The said notice of default shall specify the provision or provisions in
the performance of which it is claimed the Grantee is in default. Said notice shall be
in writing and served in the manner provided by the laws of the State for the service of
original notices in civil actions.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 734 adopting a gas franchise for the City was passed
and adopted on December 3, 2007.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 444 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 441 -
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted 111.08 Nonexclusive
111.02 Poles and Wires; Indemnification 111.09 Continuous Service
111.03 Indemnity 111.10 Fixtures and Appurtenances
111.04 Excavations 111.11 Franchise Fee
111.05 Construction and Maintenance 111.12 Term of Franchise
111.06 Meters 111.13 Entire Agreement
111.07 System Requirements
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to INTERSTATE
POWER & LIGHT COMPANY, hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its
successors and assigns, the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and
operate in the City of Dyersville, Dubuque and Delaware County, Iowa, works and
plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity and a distribution system for
electric light, heat and power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles,
lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the distribution of electric current along,
under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the said City of
Dyersville, Dubuque and Delaware County, Iowa; also the right to erect and maintain
upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places, electric lines through the City of
Dyersville, Dubuque and Delaware County, Iowa, to supply individuals, corporations,
communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of said City with electric light,
heat and power for the period of twenty-five (25) years subject to a limited right of
cancellation at the end of the tenth (10th) year anniversary of the Anniversary Date as
defined within; also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the
Code of Iowa.
111.02 POLES AND WIRES; INDEMNIFICATION. The poles, wires and
appliances shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the
travel on said streets, alleys and public places in the City or unnecessarily interfere
with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage or with the sewers,
underground pipe and other property of the City.
111.03 INDEMNITY. The Grantee shall hold the City free and harmless of and
from any and all liability, damages, actions and causes of action, caused by or through
the neglect or mismanagement of the Grantee in the erection, installation,
construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, maintenance, management or control of
said electric plant and electric transmission and distribution system.
111.04 EXCAVATIONS. In making any excavations in any street, alley, avenue or
public place, Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is
in progress by guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of
the streets, shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent settling or
depressions in surface, and shall replace the surface, pavement or sidewalk of such
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 442 -
excavations with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical and if
defects are caused shall repair the same.
111.05 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. The Company shall, at its
cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over or
under any public street or alley in the City in such manner as the City may at any time
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of, in or about
any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. If the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing
facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as
the result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other nonpublic
entity, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a
precondition to relocating its existing facilities or equipment. The City shall consider
reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under
this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for the
Company’s facilities. The City shall give the Company reasonable advance written
notice to vacate a public right-of-way. Vacating a public right-of-way shall not
deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities, until the
reasonable cost of relocating the same are paid to the Company.
111.06 METERS. The Company, its successors and assigns shall furnish and
install all meters at its own expense, and shall provide the service wire to buildings as
set forth in the Company’s tariff filed with the Iowa Utilities Board.
111.07 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. The system authorized by this chapter shall
be modern and up-to-date and shall be of sufficient capacity to supply all reasonable
demands of the City and the inhabitants thereof and shall be kept in a modern and upto-
date condition.
111.08 NONEXCLUSIVE. The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be
exclusive.
111.09 CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Service to be rendered by the Company under
this chapter shall be continuous unless prevented from so doing by fire, acts of God,
unavoidable accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as
quickly as is reasonably possible.
111.10 FIXTURES AND APPURTENANCES. The Company, upon request of the
City, shall permit its poles, conduits and other distribution facilities, so far as may be
done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of its own wires and fixtures,
to be used for the purpose of maintaining thereon any control wires and other
appurtenances which may be necessary for any City department. Said City shall hold
the Company harmless from any and all causes of action for injury, litigation or
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 443 -
damages which may arise out of or by reason of the placing or maintenance of such
control wires and other appurtenances by said City upon facilities of the Company,
provided such causes of action did not arise out of the negligence of the Company.
Such control wires and other appurtenances shall meet all applicable Federal and State
codes, rules and regulations that may be in effect.
111.11 FRANCHISE FEE. In its monthly billing Company shall include a franchise
fee of zero percent (0%) on the gross receipts from the sale of electricity for customers
within the limits of the City of Dyersville, Dubuque and Delaware County, Iowa. The
Company shall commence collecting the zero percent (0%) franchise fee on the date of
January 1 or July 1, following six months from the date the acceptance of this franchise
ordinance by the Company is filed with the City Clerk. The franchise fee may increase
up to a maximum of 5% on or after January 1, 2009. The Grantor shall give the
Company a minimum 6-month notice prior to the request to implement an increase in
the franchise fee. Grantor shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts
collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a purpose as
allowed by applicable law. Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of the
City’s repeal of the franchise fee or the end of the franchise ordinance term.
1. The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in accordance
with Iowa Code Chapter 364.2(f), 423B.5 and 423E.2(3). The Company shall
not grant exemptions or refunds of the franchise fee beyond that granted by the
Code of Iowa. If at any time the Iowa Utilities Board or another authority have
proper jurisdiction, prohibits the collection or payment of a franchise fee, the
Company shall be relieved of its obligation to collect and pay to the City the
franchise fee.
2. The franchise fee shall include an additional charge equal to .06
percent (0.06%) on the gross receipts from the sale of electricity for customers
within the limits of the City of Dyersville, Dubuque and Delaware County,
Iowa. Said additional charge will cover the administrative and related
expenses incurred by Company to accommodate City’s franchise fee and shall
only apply when a franchise fee is being collected pursuant to Section 111.10.
3. City agrees that Company’s obligations related to the franchise fee are
limited to those obligations set forth herein this chapter. City further agrees to
bear all costs (including attorney fees), and to defend, indemnify and hold
Company harmless from any and all liability, claims or causes of action
associated with disputes related to the billing and/or collection of the franchise
fee, provided that the City shall not be obligated to bear such costs or to
defend, indemnify and hold Company harmless if such disputes arise from
claims of inaccurate billing by the Company.
4. Upon receipt of a final and unappeasable order or approval authorizing
annexation, or changes in the limits of said City, the City Clerk shall provide
written notification to an officer of Company of such annexation or change in
the limits of said City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee to its
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 444 -
customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the limits of the
City, commencing six (6) months from receipt of the written notice.
5. The sum of such additional charges for the franchise fee and any
additional charges related to sections herein this chapter shall be shown
separately on the utility bill to each customer.
6. The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the City on a
quarterly basis, within thirty (30) days after last day of the last revenue month
of the quarter.
7. Said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to the City for
the Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the said City
and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard to said franchise; and
said poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the distribution of
electric current along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public
places in the said City to supply individuals, corporations, communities, and
municipalities both inside and outside of said City with electric light, heat and
power shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license or rental
charge during the entire term of this chapter.
111.12 TERM OF FRANCHISE. The term of the franchise granted by this chapter
and the rights granted there under shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years
from and after its acceptance by the said Company, as herein provided.
111.13 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire
agreement between the Company and the City of Dyersville with respect to the rights
contained herein, and may not be superseded, modified or otherwise amended without
the approval and acceptance of the Company. Upon acceptance by the Company, this
franchise ordinance shall supersede, abrogate and repeal the prior electric system
franchise ordinance between the Company and the City of Dyersville as of the date the
ordinance codified by this chapter is accepted by the Company. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in no event shall the City of Dyersville enact any ordinance or place any
limitations, either operationally or through the assessment of fees other than those
approved and accepted by the Company within this chapter, that create additional
burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 745 adopting an electric franchise for the City was
passed and adopted on December 1, 2008.
[The next page is 447]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 447 -
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
112.01 Definitions 112.06 Insurance, Indemnification, and Bonds or Other
112.02 Grant of Franchise Surety
112.03 Standards of Service 112.07 Enforcement and Termination of Franchise
112.04 Regulation by City 112.08 Unauthorized Reception
112.05 Compliance and Monitoring 112.09 Miscellaneous Provisions
112.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and abbreviations have the meanings ascribed to them below.
1. “Agent” means a person or entity authorized by the City, and as such is
bound by the terms of this chapter.
2. “Affiliate” means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership with Grantee.
3. “Basic cable service” is the tier of service regularly provided to all
subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television
signals.
4. “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended.
5. “Cable service” means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of
video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video
programming or any other lawful communication service.
6. “Cable system” means a facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide
cable service and other service to subscribers.
7. “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission, or successor
governmental entity thereto.
8. “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued
by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes
construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering
cable service or other service to subscribers.
9. “Grantee” means TCI of Iowa, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee,
or assignee thereof.
10. “Gross revenues” means the monthly cable service revenues received
by Grantee from the operation of the cable system in the service area;
provided, however, that such phrase shall not include: (i) revenues received
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 448 -
from national advertising carried on cable system; (ii) any taxes on cable
service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by
any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on
behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
11. “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public rightof-
way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by
the City in the service area which shall entitle the City and the Grantee to the
use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining
the cable system. “Public way” also means any easement now or hereafter
held by the City within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for
utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and includes other
easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle
the City and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or
transmitting Grantee’s cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, pertinent to the cable system.
12. “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of the City, and
includes any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
13. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services
provided by Grantee and for which a separate charge is made by Grantee.
14. “Subscriber” means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully
receives cable services or other service therefrom with Grantee’s express
permission.
15. “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 449 -
112.02 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
1. Grant. The City hereby grants to Grantee a nonexclusive franchise
which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system and offer
cable service and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over,
under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area
and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct,
maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, or along any public way
and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be
necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.
2. Term. The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for an
initial term of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the franchise, unless
otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
3. Equal Protection. In the event the City enters into a franchise, permit,
license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or
entity other than the Grantee to enter into the City’s streets and public ways for
the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable
service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be
reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not
be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another and to provide all
parties equal protection under the law.
112.03 STANDARDS OF SERVICE.
1. Conditions of Street Occupancy. All transmission and distribution
structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee
pursuant to the terms hereof shall be in conformity with this Code of
Ordinances and shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with
the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
2. Restoration of Public Ways. If during the course of Grantee’s
construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a
disturbance of any public way by Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and
restore such public way to a condition reasonably
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 450 -
comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to
such disturbance.
3. Relocation at Request of City. Upon its receipt of reasonable advance
notice, not to be less than five (5) business days, the Grantee shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way,
or remove from the public way, any property of the Grantee when lawfully
required by City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of
street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type
of structures or improvements by the City; but the Grantee shall in all cases
have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to
any company using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of
defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made
available to the Grantee.
4. Relocation at Request of Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request
of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building,
provided: (a) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is
paid by said person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such
payment in advance; and (b) the Grantee is given not less than ten (10)
business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
5. Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Grantee shall have the
authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable
system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact
with the Grantee’s wires, cables, or other equipment. Grantee shall be
permitted to charge persons who own, or are responsible for, such trees or
natural growth for the cost of such trimming, provided that similar charges are
assessed by and paid to the utilities or the City for tree trimming. The Grantee
shall reasonably compensate the City or property owner for any damages
caused by such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and
expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any
construction of the cable system undertaken by Grantee. Such replacement
shall satisfy any and all obligations Grantee may have to the City or property
owner pursuant to the terms of this section.
6. Use of Grantee’s Equipment by City. Subject to any applicable State
or Federal regulations or tariffs, the City shall have the right to make
additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles or conduits
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 451 -
controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the Grantee in any public way;
provided that (a) such use by the City does not interfere with a current or
future use by the Grantee; (b) the City holds the Grantee harmless against and
from all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and nature
whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including but not
limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; and (c) at Grantee’s sole
discretion, the franchising authority may be required either to pay a reasonable
rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate Grantee for the use of such
poles, conduits, or equipment; provided, however, that Grantee agrees that
such compensation or charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities
pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other authorization,
relating to the service area.
7. Safety Requirements. Construction, installation, and maintenance of
the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner.
All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable
FCC or other Federal, State, and local regulations. The cable system shall not
unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the
service area.
8. Aerial and Underground Construction. In those areas of the service
area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective
public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are
underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of
its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such
facilities are actually capable of receiving Grantee’s cable and other equipment
without technical degradation of the cable system’s signal quality. In those
areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the
respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric
services are both aerial and underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion
to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution
facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in
this section shall require Grantee to construct, operate, and maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line
extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers,
power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the
transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing
telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after
the
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 452 -
effective date of this chapter, Grantee shall only be required to construct,
operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities
underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities’
facilities at the time that such are placed underground.
9. Initial Service Area. The cable system as constructed as of the date of
the passage and final adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be
constructed to provide service to all current residential dwellings within the
service area. Residential dwellings constructed after passage and final
adoption date within the initial service area will fall under the purview of
subsection 10.
10. Required Extensions of Service. The cable system as constructed as of
the date of the passage and final adoption of the ordinance codified in this
chapter substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is
hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary so as to provide
service to all current residential dwellings within the service area. Whenever
Grantee shall receive a request for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers
within 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or
distribution cable, it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost
to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees
for all subscribers; provided that such extension is technically feasible, and if it
will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market
development of the cable system, or as provided for under subsection 11 of this
section.
11. Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service. No subscriber shall be
refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a
subscriber’s request to locate the cable drop underground, existence of more than
one hundred fifty (150) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of
service to subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) subscribers per 1,320
cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other
service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of
construction, including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose
of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be
borne by Grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be
expanded, Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other
costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual
number of potential subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or
distribution cable, and whose denominator equals fifteen (15) subscribers.
Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 453 -
the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that
the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such
potential subscribers be paid in advance.
12. Service to Public Buildings. The Grantee shall provide without charge,
one (1) outlet of basic service to the City’s office buildings, fire stations, police
stations, public and parochial school buildings, and public libraries that are
passed by its cable system. The outlets of basic cable service shall not be used
to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such buildings; nor shall
such outlets be located in common or public areas open to the public. Users of
such outlets shall hold Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims
arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not limited to, those
arising from copyright liability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this section, the Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to
such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or
premises exceeds one hundred fifty (150) cable feet, unless it is technically
feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial
condition, or market development of the cable system to do so, or unless the
appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such
drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) cable feet. In the event that
additional outlets of basic cable service are provided to such buildings, the
building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith,
including, but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of Grantee, the
building owner may also be required to pay the service fees associated with the
provision of basic cable service and the additional outlets relating thereto.
13. Consumer Protection.
A. The Grantee will maintain knowledgeable qualified
representatives to respond to customer inquiries Monday through
Friday during normal business hours, and shall maintain a toll-free
telephone number.
B. Excluding those situations beyond the control of the Grantee,
the Grantee will respond to the service interruptions promptly and in no
event later than 24 hours. Other service problems will be responded to
within 36 hours during the normal work week.
C. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service
call and other installation activities will be either in the morning, in the
afternoon, or all day during normal business hours. If at anytime an
installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the
customer will be made.
14. Public, Educational, and Governmental Access. During the term of the
franchise, the Grantee will provide one channel to be used for public,
educational, and governmental access.
112.04 REGULATION BY CITY.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 454 -
1. Franchise Fee.
A. Grantee shall pay to the City a franchise fee equal to five
percent (5%) of gross revenues received by Grantee from the operation
of the cable system on an annual basis; provided, however, that Grantee
may credit against any such payments: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment
of any kind imposed by City or other governmental entity on a cable
operator, or subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such;
(ii) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed, both on utilities and cable
operators and their services), and (iii) any other special tax, assessment,
or fee such as a business, occupation, and entertainment tax. For the
purpose of this section, the 12-month period applicable under the
franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be the calendar
year, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City and Grantee.
The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable ninety (90) days
after the close of the preceding calendar year. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a brief report from a representative of Grantee
showing the basis for the computation. In no event shall the franchise
fee payments required to be paid by Grantee exceed five percent (5%)
of gross revenues received by Grantee in any 12-month period.
B. Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions. The period of limitation
for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be ten (10)
years from the date on which payment by the Grantee is due. Unless
within ten (10) years from and after said payment due date the City
initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fee in a court of
competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred, and the City shall
be stopped from asserting any claims whatsoever against the Grantee
relating to any such alleged deficiencies.
2. Rates and Charges. The City may not regulate the rates for the
provision of cable service and other services, including, but not limited to,
ancillary charges relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and
except as authorized pursuant to Federal and State law including, but not
limited to, the Cable Act and FCC Rules and Regulations relating thereto.
From time to time, and at any time, Grantee has the right to modify its rates
and charges including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional
charges and rates; provided, however, that Grantee shall give notice to the City
of any such modifications or additional charges thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date thereof. In the event that basic cable service rate increases are
subject to approval of the City, the Grantee may, at its discretion and without
consent of the City, increase rates relating to the provision of basic cable
service by an amount which is at least equal to five percent (5%) per year.
3. Renewal of Franchise. The City and the Grantee agree that any
proceedings undertaken by the City that relate to the renewal of the Grantee’s
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 455 -
franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626
of the Cable Act (as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act),
unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be
deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent
provision of Federal or State law. In addition to the procedures set forth in
said Section 626(a), the City agrees to notify Grantee of its preliminary
assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs
and interests, as well as the past performance of Grantee under the then current
franchise term. The City further agrees that such a preliminary assessment
shall be provided to the Grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period
referred to in subsection (c) of Section 626 is considered to begin.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the Grantee
and City agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise,
while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the
City and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding
renewal of the then current franchise and the City may grant a renewal thereof.
The Grantee and the City consider the terms set forth in this section to be
consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act.
4. Conditions of Sale. Except to the extent expressly required by Federal
or State law, if a renewal or extension of Grantee’s franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated, and the City either lawfully acquires
ownership of the cable system or by its actions
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 456 -
lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party,
any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on
the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern. Grantee and City
agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at Grantee’s
request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, Grantee shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified
third party. The City further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall
authorize the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior
franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of
time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If,
at the end of that time, Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified
transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the
City, Grantee and City may avail themselves of any rights they may have
pursuant to Federal or State law; it being further agreed that Grantee’s
continued operation of its cable system during the six (6) month period shall
not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either
the City or the Grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in
this section, neither City nor Grantee shall be required to violate Federal or
State law.
5. Transfer of Franchise. Grantee’s right, title, or interest in the franchise
shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to
an affiliate, without the prior consent of the City, such consent not to be
unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any
rights, title, or interest of Grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to
secure indebtedness.
112.05 COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING.
1. Testing for Compliance. The City or its appointed agent may perform
technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner
which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of
the Grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the
Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable State or Federal
laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only
after giving Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2)
business days, and providing a representative of Grantee an opportunity to be
present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the
Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof,
the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event
that such testing demonstrates that Grantee has substantially complied with
such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the
City. Except in emergency circumstances, the City agrees that such testing
shall be undertaken no more than two (2) times a year in the aggregate, and
that the results thereof shall be made available to the Grantee upon Grantee’s
request.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 457 -
2. Books and Records. The Grantee agrees that the City may review such
of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive
basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms
hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public
records required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations
of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Grantee
shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be
proprietary or confidential in nature. The City agrees to treat any information
disclosed by the Grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to
employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in
order to enforce the provisions hereof.
112.06 INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND BONDS OR OTHER
SURETY.
1. Insurance Requirements. Grantee shall maintain in full force and
effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise,
Comprehensive General Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000
combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Said insurance
shall designate the City as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancelable
except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the City.
2. Indemnification. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold
harmless, and defend the City, its officers, boards and employees, from and
against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from
property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out
of the Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system,
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
3. Bonds and Other Surety. Except as expressly provided herein, Grantee
shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition
of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The City
acknowledges that the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of Grantee
are sufficient to afford compliance with the
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 458 -
terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and City
recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately
be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In
order to minimize such costs, the City agrees to require bonds and other surety
only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably
demonstrated need therefor. The City agrees that in no event, however, shall it
require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than
$10,000, conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms,
covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety
will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the City agrees
to give Grantee at least sixty (60) days prior written notice thereof stating the
exact reason for the requirement. Such reason must demonstrate a change in
the Grantee’s legal, financial, or technical qualifications which would
materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of the
franchise or afford compliance therewith.
112.07 ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
1. Notice of Violation. In the event that the City believes that the Grantee
has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify Grantee in
writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
2. Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. Grantee shall have thirty (30)
days from receipt of the notice described in subsection 1: (a) to respond to the
City contesting the assertion of noncompliance or; (b) to cure such default or;
(c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured
within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such
default and notify the City of the steps being taken and the projected date that
they will be completed.
3. Public Hearing. In the event that Grantee fails to respond to the notice
described in subsection 1 pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection 2,
or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within sixty (60) days
after the Grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to subsection 1, the
City shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public
meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City which
is scheduled at a time which is no less than five (5) business days therefrom.
The City shall notify the Grantee of the time and place of such meeting and
provide the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
4. Enforcement. Subject to applicable Federal and State law, in the event
the City, after such meeting, determines that Grantee is in default of any
provision of the franchise, the City may:
A. Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this
franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other
surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 459 -
manner and in such amount as the City reasonably determines is
necessary to remedy the default;
B. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief;
C. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or
D. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably
lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages.
The Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly
with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the City to
enforce prompt compliance.
5. Acts of God. The Grantee shall not be held in default or
noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged
defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events
reasonably beyond its ability to control.
112.08 UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION. In addition to those criminal and civil
remedies provided by State and Federal law, it is a misdemeanor for any person, firm
or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the
cable system without the express consent of the Grantee. Further, without the express
consent of Grantee, it is a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove, or
injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or any means of receiving
cable service or other services provided thereto. Subject to applicable Federal and
State law, the City shall incorporate into its criminal code, if not presently a part
thereof, criminal misdemeanor law which will enforce the intent of this section.
112.09 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
1. Documents Incorporated and Made a Part Hereof. The following
documents shall be incorporated herein by this reference, and in the case of a
conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the document of latest date shall
govern:
A. Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the date hereof;
B. Any franchise agreement between Grantee and City reflecting
the renewal of the franchise, if any.
2. Preemption. If the FCC, or any other Federal or State body or agency
shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and
supersede or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the City, the
jurisdiction of the City shall cease and no longer exist.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 460 -
3. Actions of City. In any action by the City or representative thereof
mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a
reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance
where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
4. Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every
notice or response to be served upon the City or Grantee shall be in writing,
and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5)
business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly
addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post
office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. The
notices or responses to the City shall be addressed as follows:
City of Dyersville
340 1st Avenue East
Dyersville, Iowa 52040
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows:
TCI of Iowa, Inc.
3033 Asbury Road
P.O. Box 119
Dubuque, Iowa 52001-0119
With a copy to:
TCI of Iowa, Inc.
Attn: Operations/Legal Department
P.O. Box 5630
Denver, Colorado 80217
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 461 -
Or
5619 DTC Parkway
Engelwood, Colorado 80111
and a copy to:
TCI North Central, Inc.
Attn: Director of Franchising
8717 West 110th Street, Suite 300
Overland Park, Kansas 66210
The City and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from
time to time by giving notice to the other.
5. For the period from October 1, 1992, and throughout the term of the franchise,
if the Federal law should change so as to grant mandatory powers to municipalities,
the City reserves the right, upon proper notice to the Grantee and an opportunity for
the Grantee to comment, to enact such powers as authorized.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 604 adopting a cable TV franchise for the City was
passed and adopted on December 7, 1992.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 462 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 463 -
CHAPTER 113
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
113.01 Authority 113.04 Notice of Rate Change
113.02 Rate Regulation Proceedings 113.05 Delegation of Powers
113.03 Certification
113.01 AUTHORITY. The City has the legal authority to administer and shall
enforce against any non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as
permitted therein, the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation,
47 C.F.R. §§76.900 et. seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be amended,
which are herewith incorporated by reference.
113.02 RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS. Any rate regulation proceedings
conducted hereunder shall provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the
views of any interested party, including but not limited to, the City or its designee, the
Cable Operator, subscribers, and residents of the franchise area. In addition to all
other provisions required by the laws of the State of Iowa and by the City for such
proceedings, and in order to provide for such opportunity for consideration of the
views of any interested party, the City shall take the following actions:
1. The City shall publish notice as provided in Chapter 362 of the Code of
Iowa and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a notice of the
intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or charges
for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the FCC.
2. The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable television
rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the rate review
in question; that any interested party has a right to participate in the
proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding, explaining
how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any such views;
that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable television rates in
question will be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the FCC; and that
the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
3. The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or not
the rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable. The City may
CHAPTER 113 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 464 -
delegate the responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and
eligible individual(s) or entity. If the City or its designee cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
public notice accordingly.
4. In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may require
additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably necessary to
determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment
charges. Any such additional information submitted to the City shall be
verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising
the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way
of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and
accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed
after reasonable inquiry.
5. The City may request proprietary information, provided that the City
shall consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said proprietary
information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with
the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations.
Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate
level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the Cable Operator.
6. The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable
to administrative proceedings under the laws of the State and of the City to
discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding, including,
but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories, production of documents, and
deposition.
7. Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City shall adopt
and release a written decision as to whether or not the rate or proposed rate
increase is reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy,
including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds.
8. The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other
sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for
charging an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
9. Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s decision may
be reviewed only by the FCC.
10. The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the course
of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to exercise
its jurisdiction as authorized by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any information submitted to the City
shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
CHAPTER 113 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 465 -
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
113.03 CERTIFICATION. The City shall file with the FCC the required
certification form (FCC Form 328) on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as
appropriate. Thirty days later, or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the City shall
notify the Cable Operator that the City has been certified by the FCC and that it has
adopted all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service tier cable
television rates and equipment charges.
113.04 NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE. With regard to the cable programming
service tier, as defined by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC
Rules and Regulations, and over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate
regulation, the Cable Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for
the cable programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the services
provided, including the program services included in the tier or tiers. Said notice shall
be provided within five (5) business days after the change becomes effective.
113.05 DELEGATION OF POWERS. The City may delegate its powers to
enforce this chapter to municipal employees or officers (the “cable official”). The
cable official will have the authority to:
1. Administer oaths and affirmations;
2. Issue subpoenas;
3. Examine witnesses;
4. Rule upon questions of evidence;
5. Take or cause depositions to be taken;
6. Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
7. Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous
conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
8. Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by
consent of the parties; and
9. Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in
conformity with this chapter.
[The next page is 481]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 481 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for
sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first
securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell,
offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon
the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the
Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license,
wine or beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then
conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred
in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an application
for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform to the applicable law
and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove
the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall
endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application,
necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided
by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 482 -
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor
license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises
covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between
the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on a weekday,
and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock
(6:00) a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit
granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may
sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following
Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control
license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of
eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Monday
when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the
premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two
o’clock (2:00) a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day
before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except
with bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to
its members nor to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving
of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 660 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
6. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
7. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law,
or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
8. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j])
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 483 -
9. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the
Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and
except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate
consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
10. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate,
by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an
original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any
original package which has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
11. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the
licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic
liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of
such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g])
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 484 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 485 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more
packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or
otherwise distributed to consumers.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated
or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover
made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be
construed to include cigars.
3. “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which cigarettes
or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to
consumers.
4. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes are sold, stored
or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
5. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales.
6. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee
of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
7. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or
otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 486 -
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of
a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of
business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can
be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the State
Department of Revenue and Finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be
filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to
the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of
such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment
of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly
the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits
expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application
for a permit, and any permit issued, to the Iowa Department of Public Health within
thirty (30) days of issuance.
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a
refund from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule
of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13)
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 487 -
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give or otherwise
supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from
purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or
employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after
written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such
violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the
amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as
ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit
for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
3. For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of
the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The
notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at
which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1, 1999,
except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in
Section 453A.36 (6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale
cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a
self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity
for a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the
Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit
shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other
person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the
Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the
Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or
suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 488 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 489 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions 122.12 Notice
122.03 License Required 122.13 Hearing
122.04 Application for License 122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees 122.15 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required 122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued 122.17 Rebates
122.08 Display of License 122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City
against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells
or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from
house to house or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of
a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in
the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as
herein provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed
with the Police Chief for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth
the applicant’s name, permanent and local address and business address if any. The
application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s
address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 490 -
and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of two
dollars ($2.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid prior to the
issuance of any license.
1. Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of ten dollars ($10.00) per
year.
2. Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
A. For one day $ 5.00
B. For one week $ 10.00
C. For up to six (6) months $ 20.00
D. For one year or major part thereof $ 25.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a
transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Police Chief evidence that the
applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C
of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the Police Chief finds the application is completed
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found
to be correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license
in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request
of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all
requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such
merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions
of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the
person filing the application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide
that said licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00)
a.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) p.m.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Police Chief
may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 491 -
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order or morals.
122.12 NOTICE. The Police Chief shall send a notice to the licensee at the
licensee’s local address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on
the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the
complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly
violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
122.13 HEARING. The Police Chief shall conduct a hearing at which both the
licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts
alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Police Chief may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.14 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Police Chief shall make and
record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when
upon review of the entire record the Police Chief finds clear and convincing evidence
of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
122.15 APPEAL. If the Police Chief revokes or refuses to issue a license, the
Police Chief shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting.
The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Police Chief by a
majority vote of the Council members present and the Police Chief shall carry out the
decision of the Council.
122.16 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the
licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year
from the date of the revocation.
122.17 REBATES. No licensee is entitled to a rebate of any part of the fee paid.
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the
application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout,
Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer
for sale their own products.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 492 -
4. Students. Students representing the Beckman School System and the
West Dubuque School District conducting projects sponsored by organizations
recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized
representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions
of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute
literature are exempt from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05. All such
organizations are required to submit in writing to the Police Chief the name and
purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names and addresses of the
officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are
to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the
solicitor and the amount thereof. If the Police Chief finds that the organization is a
bona fide charity or nonprofit organization the Police Chief shall issue, free of charge,
a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Police
Chief denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may
appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.15 of this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 493 -
CHAPTER 123
MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES
123.01 Structure Defined 123.06 No Structure to Remain in Street
123.02 Permit Required 123.07 Injury; Repair
123.03 Application 123.08 Public Safety
123.04 Investigation 123.09 Above Ground Wires
123.05 Bond Required
123.01 STRUCTURE DEFINED. The term “structure” as used in this chapter
means any house, building or other object which is to be moved on house movers’
trucks or skids.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall move any structure upon, along,
across or over any street, avenue, alley, highway, sidewalk or other public ground in
the City without first having submitted an application and obtained a permit therefor
as hereinafter provided. Buildings of less than one hundred (100) square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03 APPLICATION. All applications for a permit as herein required shall be
filed in the office of the Clerk and shall be in writing and, among other things, shall
state:
1. Name and Address. The name and address of the house mover and the
house mover’s qualifications, experience and equipment;
2. The dimensions of the structure to be moved and its maximum height
when loaded.
3. The present location and the proposed location of the structure;
4. The route over which the structure is to be moved, the time when the
removal will begin and the approximate length of time necessary to complete
the operation within the limits of the public ways;
5. The time when the structure will be first moved into the limits of the
public way and the length of time the structure will be within the limits;
6. The name and address of the owner of the structure.
123.04 INVESTIGATION. Upon the filing of the application, the City
Administrator shall investigate the statements contained therein. Upon completion of
the investigation, the City Administrator may issue a permit, designating the route and
specifying the time when, the manner in which and the conditions under which the
structure shall be moved, provided, however, that all conditions of this chapter have
been fully met. Upon the refusal of the City Administrator to issue a permit when an
application has been filed in the proper form, the application, accompanied by a
written statement, setting forth the reasons for such refusal, shall be submitted by the
CHAPTER 123 MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 494 -
City Administrator to the Council at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting
called for that purpose, and the City Administrator shall thereafter proceed in
accordance with the instructions of the Council.
123.05 BOND REQUIRED. The City Administrator, as a condition precedent to
the issuance of a permit, may require the person making the application to file a good
and sufficient bond with the City in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
with sureties thereon to be approved by the City Administrator, conditioned that the
applicant will pay any or all damages incurred in the moving operation which may be
caused to any property, either public or private, within the City, whether such damage
or injury is inflicted by the applicant or any agent or employees, and also conditioned
that the applicant will waive and indemnify and hold the City harmless against all
liability, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any wise accrue against the
City, in consequence of the granting of such permit, and will in all things strictly
comply with the conditions of the permit.
123.06 NO STRUCTURE TO REMAIN IN STREET. No structure is allowed to
remain in any street, avenue, alley or other public place in excess of the time fixed in
the permit when issued, except that in case of an unavoidable delay and through no
fault of the holder of the permit, the City Administrator may grant such extension of
time as appears reasonable.
123.07 INJURY; REPAIR. Any injury done to any public facility or improvement
within the limits of the public way shall be promptly repaired by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the City Administrator, and any injury or damage done to any person or
any private property shall be promptly paid, settled and compensated for by the
applicant, and the bond provided for in Section 123.05 of this chapter shall stand as
security therefor.
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in
motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall
maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the
sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the building or
structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee
shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections or channels of
traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.
123.09 ABOVE GROUND WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building
shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed
when necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the
same.
CHAPTER 123 MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 495 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 496 -
CHAPTER 124
ELECTRICIAN PERMITS
124.01 Permit Required 124.04 Insurance
124.02 Exemptions 124.05 Issuance
124.03 Bond 124.06 Group Electrician
124.01 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall do work in the City as an
electrician or electrical contractor without an annual permit issued by the City. The
fee for such permit is set by resolution of the Council. Applicants shall file in the
office of the Clerk an application in writing, giving the name and place of business of
the applicant and stating a willingness to be governed in all respects by the rules and
regulations of the City. Other than as provided in Section 124.06, permits may be
issued only to individual natural persons and may not be issued to partnerships, firms
or corporations. (Ord. 731 – Jun. 07 Supp.)
124.02 EXEMPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to regular
employees of manufacturing or industrial concerns or public utilities or railroads when
said employees are performing electrical work for their employers.
124.03 BOND. Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a bond with two
or more sureties or a corporate surety to be approved by the City in the penal sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
keep harmless the City from all liability for any accidents or damages, claims,
judgments, costs or expenses caused by any negligence or unskillfulness or from any
unfaithful or inadequate work done under such permit.
124.04 INSURANCE. The applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying liability coverage in an amount not less than
$100,000 per person, $300,000 per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall
provide for ten (10) days written notice of cancellation to the City.
124.05 ISSUANCE. Upon the acceptance of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate and the payment of the fee by the applicant, the City shall issue
an annual permit to the individual making application.
CHAPTER 124 ELECTRICIAN PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 497 -
124.06 GROUP PERMIT. Partnerships, firms, or corporations employing more
than 35 electricians may apply for a group permit. The application for a group permit
shall be accompanied by a bond with two or more sureties or a corporate surety to be
approved by the City in the penal sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00),
conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and keep harmless the City from all
liability for any accidents or damages, claims, judgments, costs or expenses caused by
any negligence or unskillfulness or from an unfaithful or inadequate work done under
such permit. The applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying liability coverage in an amount not less than $300,000.00 per
person and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall provide
for ten (10) days written notice of cancellation to the City. Upon the acceptance of the
application, filing of bond and insurance certificate and the payment of the fee to be
established by resolution of the Council, the City shall issue an annual permit to the
partnership, firm or corporation making the application.
(Ord. 731 – Jun. 07 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 498 -
CHAPTER 125
PLUMBER PERMITS
125.01 Permit Required 125.04 Issuance
125.02 Bond 125.05 Water and Sewer Connections
125.03 Insurance
125.01 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall do work in the City as a plumber
without an annual permit issued by the City. The fee for such permit is set by
resolution of the Council. Applicants shall file in the office of the Clerk an
application in writing, giving the name and place of business of the applicant and
stating a willingness to be governed in all respects by the rules and regulations of the
City. Permits may be issued only to individual natural persons and may not be issued
to partnerships, firms or corporations.
125.02 BOND. Application for an annual permit shall be accompanied by a bond
with two or more sureties or a corporate surety to be approved by the City in the penal
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will
indemnify and keep harmless the City from all liability for any accidents or damages,
claims, judgments, costs or expenses caused by any negligence or unskillfulness or
from any unfaithful or inadequate work done under such permit.
125.03 INSURANCE. The applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying liability coverage in an amount not less than
$100,000 per person, $300,000 per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall
provide for ten (10) days written notice of cancellation to the City.
125.04 ISSUANCE. Upon the acceptance of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate and the payment of the fee by the applicant, the City shall issue
an annual permit to the individual making application.
125.05 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS. No person other than a
plumber who is authorized to do business within the City shall make any connections
with or attachments to any water or sewer pipe of the City. Before making any
connection with or attachment to any of said pipes, the plumber must first ascertain
whether a permit has been issued by the City Administrator for the making of said
connection or attachment, and the plumber may lawfully make connections or
attachments only after such permit has been issued.
CHAPTER 125 PLUMBER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 499 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 500 -
CHAPTER 126
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS
IN CONVENIENCE STORES
126.01 Definitions 126.03 Exemptions
126.02 Surveillance Camera Required
126.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Consumer products” means all food which is subject to sales tax and
all food which is not subject to sales tax under Chapter 422 of the Code of
Iowa, except foods prepared for immediate consumption.
2. “Convenience store” means any business which sells at retail both
gasoline and more than 20 consumer products and which routinely remains
open for business 20 to 24 hours a day or between the hours of ten o’clock
(10:00) p.m. and five o’clock (5:00) a.m.
3. “Surveillance camera” means a video tape camera or similar video
recording device.
126.02 SURVEILLANCE CAMERA REQUIRED. Every convenience store shall
be equipped with a functioning surveillance camera between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) p.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. of each day the store is open for
business. The surveillance camera shall be positioned so as to film all persons
entering the establishment and/or all persons approaching within five feet of the cash
register. All proposed installations of surveillance cameras shall be approved in
advance by the Police Department as in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter prior to actual installation. The Police Chief is hereby authorized and directed
to develop departmental rules and regulations setting forth the minimum specifications
for surveillance cameras. The specifications shall be developed with the intent to
require surveillance cameras which are functionally capable of recording visual
activities and reproducing the same with sufficient quality to aid the Police
Department in the apprehension of lawbreakers. A 35 mm camera capable of
activation will satisfy the requirements of this section. Surveillance cameras installed
prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be deemed to be in
compliance with this section.
CHAPTER 126 SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS
IN CONVENIENCE STORES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 501 -
126.03 EXEMPTIONS. A business which is required to install a surveillance
camera by this chapter may apply to the Police Chief for exemption from the
provisions of this chapter. The Police Chief may exempt a business from such
requirement if the Police Chief finds that the business has or will undertake alternate
security procedures which are substantially equal to or more effective in preventing
criminal activity and in assisting in the apprehension of the perpetrators of crime or
for protecting employees, or the Police Chief may authorize alternate procedures on an
experimental basis. The Police Chief may also authorize temporary extensions of the
installation deadline provided in this chapter when a business demonstrates that it is
temporarily unable to comply for good cause shown.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 502 -
CHAPTER 127
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS
127.01 Definition 127.06 Supervision of Blasting
127.02 Applicability of Regulations 127.07 Permit Issuance
127.03 Permit Procedure 127.08 Notice of Storage
127.04 Storage Regulations 127.09 Report of Theft or Loss
127.05 Bond and Insurance 127.10 Disposal Regulated
127.11 Notice of Blasting
127.01 DEFINITION. Where used in this chapter, the word “blasting” means the
act of breaking or tearing to pieces rock or other material by the agency of gunpowder
or other explosives.
127.02 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS. This chapter applies to all
persons, firms, corporations, co-partnerships, governmental agencies, except Federal
agencies, and associations storing, handling or using explosives or blasting agents, and
to the owner or lessee of any building, premises or equipment in or on which
explosives or blasting agents are stored, handled or used.
127.03 PERMIT PROCEDURE. Any person who desires to perform any blasting
operation within the City shall obtain a blasting permit therefor by complying with the
following procedure:
1. By filing with the Council a copy of the commercial license issued by
the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Chapter 101A of the Code of Iowa; and
2. By filing a security bond conditioned upon the payment of all damages
resulting from the blasting operation in an amount of not less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00).
127.04 STORAGE REGULATIONS. It is unlawful for any person to store any
explosive material in a manner not in conformity with regulations promulgated by the
State Fire Marshal. Before applying for a permit, the applicant must read and be
familiar with such requirements. An application for a permit will be denied if, upon
investigation, it is found that storage facilities are inadequate.
127.05 BOND AND INSURANCE. The bond provided for in Section 127.03 shall
be in a form approved by the City Attorney and with an approved surety company as
surety. The Council is authorized to require a bond or certificate of insurance in a
larger amount in cases where the Council deems the same necessary because of the
hazards involved. The Council is further authorized to accept a policy of liability
insurance, with a company authorized to do business in the State as insurer, insuring
the applicant’s liability arising out of such blasting, in lieu of or supplementary to the
bond required in Section 127.03.
CHAPTER 127 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 503 -
127.06 SUPERVISION OF BLASTING. The person in direct supervision of the
blasting shall be a competent person who has had not less than five years’ experience
in the handling and discharge of explosives.
127.07 PERMIT ISSUANCE. Upon compliance by the applicant with the
conditions of this chapter and if the Council finds that the person in immediate charge
of the blasting is a competent and experienced person, the Council shall issue a permit
to the applicant, which permit shall be restricted to the blasting operation described in
the application. Permits shall not be transferable. Permits shall be good only for
thirty (30) days.
127.08 NOTICE OF STORAGE. A permittee shall notify the Fire Chief and the
Police Chief when and where explosive materials will be stored and shall also notify
such authorities when storage is terminated.
127.09 REPORT OF THEFT OR LOSS. Any theft or loss of explosive materials,
whether from a storage magazine, a vehicle in which they are being transported, or
from a site on which they are being used, or from any other location, shall
immediately be reported to the Police Department by the person authorized to possess
such explosives. The local police shall immediately transmit a report of such theft or
loss of explosive materials to the State Fire Marshal.
127.10 DISPOSAL REGULATED. No person shall abandon or otherwise dispose
of any explosives in any manner which might, as a result of such abandonment or
disposal, create any damages or threat of danger to life or property. Any person in
possession or control of explosives shall, when the need for such explosives no longer
exists, dispose of them in accordance with regulations prescribed by the State Fire
Marshal.
127.11 NOTICE OF BLASTING. Prior to performing any blasting operation, the
permittee shall give notice as follows:
1. On the day prior to blasting, the permittee shall attempt to contact, by
telephone, a resident of each residence and an employee of each business
located within 1,500 feet of the blast site, advising them that blasting is
expected to take place the following day or, in the event the following day is a
weekend or holiday, on the day following said weekend or holiday.
2. On the actual day blasting is planned, the permittee shall again attempt
to contact, by telephone, a resident of each residence and an employee of each
business located within 1,500 feet of the blast site, advising them of the
anticipated time of the blast, giving as close an estimate of the time as is
reasonably possible.
3. The permittee shall keep an up-to-date log of all telephone notices
given, showing the person making the call, the person receiving the call, and
the time of said call. The lot shall also show those calls made where there was
no answer or where a message was left on an answering machine.
CHAPTER 127 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 504 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 505 -
CHAPTER 128
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
128.01 Purpose 128.08 Prohibited Employment of Minors
128.02 Definitions 128.09 Illegal Activities on Premises
128.03 Location of Adult Entertainment Facilities 128.10 Inspection
128.04 Exterior Display 128.11 License and Permit Fees
128.05 Viewing Area 128.12 Adult Entertainment Facilities License
128.06 Adult News Racks 128.13 Adult Entertainment Employee Permit
128.07 Display of License and Permit
128.01 PURPOSE. It is recognized that adult entertainment facilities have certain
objectionable side effects which render these facilities incompatible with residential
and family-oriented uses, when the adult facilities are located directly adjacent to such
uses. This chapter seeks to ensure that residential and family-oriented uses and adult
entertainment facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations.
128.02 DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
1. Adult Entertainment Facilities includes but is not limited to the
following:
A. Adult bookstore means an establishment having as the primary
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals
which are substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual
activities and specified anatomical areas.
B. Adult business means any business or establishment where a
specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area is displayed.
C. Adult motel means a motel or similar establishment offering
public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
D. Adult movie theatre means any theatre, arcade or similar
establishment where an enclosed building or open air facility is used
for presenting material in the form of motion picture film, video tape or
similar means which is substantially devoted to the depiction of
specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas, for
observation by persons therein.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 506 -
E. Adult news rack means any coin-operated machine or device
which dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of
specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas.
F. Adult nightclub means any club, cabaret, nightclub, bar,
restaurant or similar establishment where an enclosed building or open
air facility is used for live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas,
for the observation by persons therein.
G. Adult entertainment cabaret means a public or private
establishment that is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages,
which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators
or similar entertainers.
H. Body shop or model studio means any public or private
establishment which describes itself as a body shop or model studio; or
where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who
display “specified anatomical areas” are provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, or where for
any form of consideration or gratuity, nude and seminude dancing,
readings, counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that
present materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas” are provided for observation by or
communication to persons paying such consideration or gratuity.
2. Specified anatomical area means less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitalia, mature human buttocks, and a mature human breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state – even if completely and opaquely
covered.
3. Specified sexual activities means any of the following conditions:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
C. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
D. Minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or simulation of a
prohibited sexual act.
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
activities set forth in subsections (A) through (D) of this definition.
128.03 LOCATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 507 -
1. Prohibited Locations. No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk
or employee, either alone or for any other person, or as an officer of any
corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any Adult
Entertainment Facilities in the following locations:
A. In any residential area of the City, including upon any sidewalk
abutting upon such residential area.
B. Within 2,000 feet of any residentially zoned or used property, or
any property designated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan as
residentially oriented.
C. Within 2,000 feet of any parcel of real property upon which is
located any of the following facilities:
(1) An elementary school, junior high or senior high school.
(2) A church, which conducts religious programs.
(3) Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by
the City, County, County Conservation Board or State.
(4) Federal, State, County, City or special district
governmental offices.
(5) Supermarket or convenience market primarily engaged
in the sale of food or fuel.
(6) Restaurant, fast-food or food establishment catering to
family trade.
D. Within 2,000 feet of any other adult entertainment facility, as
defined herein. For the purpose of this section, adult news rack means
a single coin-operated device and not a machine with a double or triple
dispensing capacity.
2. Measurement of Distance. The distance between any two adult
entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school or public park, government office, supermarket,
restaurant or any property designated for residential use or used for residential
purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard for intervening
structures, from the closest property line of the religious institution, school,
public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant or property designated
for residential use or used for residential purposes.
3. Permitted Areas. Adult Entertainment Facilities in the City of
Dyersville must be a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of the
Zoning Code.
128.04 EXTERIOR DISPLAY. No adult entertainment facility shall be conducted
in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 508 -
relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” by display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any public way or from any
property not licensed as an adult entertainment facility. Furthermore, all on-site
signage shall conform to all restrictions defined in the City of Dyersville Code of
Ordinances.
128.05 VIEWING AREA.
1. It is unlawful to maintain, operate or manage or permit to be
maintained, operated or managed any adult theatre or arcade in which the
viewing areas are not viewable from a continuous main aisle or are obscured
by curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. For the purpose of this section,
viewing area means the area where the patron or customer would ordinarily be
positioned while watching the performance, picture show or film.
2. It is unlawful for more than one person at a time to occupy any
individually partitioned viewing area or booth.
3. It is unlawful to create, maintain or permit to be maintained any holes
or other openings between any two booths or individual viewing areas for the
purpose of providing viewing or physical access between the booth or
individual viewing areas.
4. The opening to the viewing area shall be from the main aisle.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 509 -
128.06 ADULT NEWS RACKS.
1. Identification of News Racks. The owners of adult news racks shall
have their names, addresses and telephone numbers clearly visible on each
news rack located within the City. If the identification is not clearly visible,
that shall be grounds for immediate impoundment of the news rack by the City.
2. Nonconforming Uses. The provisions of this Code of Ordinances
dealing with nonconforming uses are not applicable to the location of adult
news racks existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, but thereafter the location of adult news racks shall be subject to the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Impoundment. Any Police Officer or Enforcement Officer of the City
may impound an adult news rack found in violation of this chapter after the
following actions:
A. A notice of violation has been affixed to the adult news rack
stating the section of this chapter which has been violated and stating
that the adult news rack will be impounded if the violation is not abated
within seven (7) days.
B. A notice of violation has been sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of the adult news rack as identified on
the news rack, if readable, stating the section of this chapter which has
been violated and stating that the adult news rack will be impounded if
the violation in not abated within seven (7) days.
C. The violation has not been abated within seven (7) days after
the posting of the notice of violation or the mailing of the certified
letter, whichever occurs later.
D. The Police Department or other Enforcement Officer has
presented to any magistrate affidavits or other evidence sufficient to
show prima facie violation of the chapter.
E. A magistrate has issued a written order permitting the
impounding of the adult news rack pursuant to this chapter.
4. Filing of Complaint. Whenever an adult news rack is impounded, a
complaint for violation of Section 128.03 must be filed within fourteen (14)
days of the impounding. If a final appealable decision in such action is not
rendered within sixty (60) days after the date of filing this action, the
complaint shall be dismissed; provided, however, no complaint shall be
dismissed because a final appealable decision was not rendered within sixty
(60) days of the filing of the action if the defendant named herein is
responsible for extending the judicial determination beyond the allowable
time.
5. Redemption after Impoundment. The person who provides sufficient
proof of ownership of such adult news rack may have such news rack, together
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 510 -
with all moneys, if any, impounded, returned immediately after the filing of
the complaint for violation of Section 128.03 upon application to the Police
Department or other Enforcement Officer. The person who provides sufficient
proof of ownership of such adult news rack may have the contents of such
news rack returned upon the date that a final appealable decision in such action
is rendered or upon the date the action is dismissed, upon application to the
Police Department or the Enforcement Officer.
6. Minimal Distance Violations. It is recognized that adult news racks
may be jostled or inadvertently moved minor distance by third persons with a
resulting violation of the provisions of Section 128.03. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, such minimal distance violation, not exceeding
five (5) feet, shall not constitute a violation of this chapter, and the City’s
Police Department or other Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the
adult news rack by certified, return receipt requested, mail of the minimal
distance requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of the section, all adult
news racks shall comply with the encroachment permit provisions of the Code
of Ordinances.
128.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND PERMIT.
1. Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place
within the adult entertainment facility so that the same may be readily seen by
persons entering the premises.
2. All persons required under this chapter to obtain an adult entertainment
employee permit pursuant to this chapter must display on request during the
hours of operation of such business and identification card provided by the
City police department containing the legal name and date of birth of the
employee.
128.08 PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS. It shall be unlawful for
any adult use licensee or his/her manager or employee to employ in any capacity
within the adult entertainment facility any person who is not at least 21 years of age.
128.09 ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES. No licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall engage in
any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct
in or about the licensed premises which is prohibited by any ordinance of the City or
law of the State or the United States.
128.10 INSPECTION.
1. An applicant or licensee shall permit Mayor, the City Administrator,
the police department, fire department or any other designated agents to
inspect the premises of the adult entertainment facility for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 511 -
2. A person who operates an adult entertainment facility or his/her agent
or employee violates this chapter if he/she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
128.11 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
1. Adult Entertainment Facility License. The license fee for an adult
entertainment facility establishment shall be one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) per year, or any part thereof.
2. Employee Permit. The permit fee for any persons purporting to engage
in the providing of goods or services to the public in connection with the adult
entertainment facility shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per year,
or any part thereof.
3. Payment of Fees; Refunds. All fees are payable to the City Clerk’s
office upon application and are nonrefundable.
128.12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES LICENSE.
1. Adult Entertainment Facility License Required. It shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of
an adult entertainment facility, without first having obtained a separate license
from the City.
2. Application for an Adult Entertainment Facility License. Any person
desiring a license to operate an adult entertainment facility shall file a written
application with the City Clerk’s office on a form to be furnished by the City
Clerk’s office. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of
the correct license fee, as provided in Section 128.11 and shall, in addition,
furnish the following personal information concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business:
A. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number, including area code.
B. Written proof of age consisting of a birth certificate.
C. Height, weight and color of hair and color of hair and eyes.
D. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application regarding the applicant’s request
for a license.
E. The applicant shall keep and maintain liability insurance in an
amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and shall provide
evidence of such insurance upon application for or renewal of each
license.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 512 -
F. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the information contained in the application is true and correct,
with such declaration being duly dated and signed at the City Clerk’s
office.
3. Approval of Application.
A. Upon receiving the application for an adult entertainment
facility license, the Mayor and/or designated agent shall preliminarily
review the application and shall within fourteen (14) days refer the
copies of such application to the City Administrator, the police
department, fire department, zoning department or any other designated
agents.
B. These officials and/or designated agents shall within 30 days
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as an adult entertainment
facility or, in case of the police department, conduct a background
investigation of the applicant and all such officials shall make
recommendations to the Mayor and/or designated agent concerning the
premises’ and the applicant’s compliance with the matters coming
within the jurisdiction of the aforesaid officials and/or designated
agents.
C. Within ten days of receiving the recommendation of the
aforesaid officials and/or designated agents, the Mayor and/or
designated agent will render his/her approval or denial of the
application to the City Council. The City Council must give final
approval prior to any issuance or denial of license.
4. Issuance or Denial of Adult Entertainment Facility License. The
Mayor and/or designated agent shall issue an adult entertainment license
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the application, unless he/she finds the
following:
A. The correct license fee has not been tendered to the City and, in
the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon
presentation.
B. The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted would
not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
City’s zoning, building and health regulations.
C. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the application for the permit or in any
document required by the City in connection therewith.
D. The applicant has operated an adult entertainment facility and
has had a license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the causes
set forth in subsections (a) through (c) of this section by the City or any
other State or local agency.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 513 -
E. The applicant principally in charge of the operation of the
business is under twenty-one (21) years of age.
F. The applicant is a person who is not of good moral character
and reputation in the community in which he/she resides.
G. The applicant has been convicted of any the following offenses,
unless upon investigation the Mayor and/or designated agent finds that
such convictions occurred at least ten years (10) prior to the date of the
application, that the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and
has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public
trust:
(1) A felony under federal laws or the laws of this or any other
state.
(2) Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping
a place of prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, pimping,
obscenity, selling harmful material or having a tie in the sale of
obscene publications to distributors, under the laws of this state
or equivalent laws or codes of the United States or any other
state or city, or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality.
H. The City Council has denied the license.
5. License Administration.
A. Term of License.
(1) Each license shall be issued for one year beginning
January 1 and said license will expire on December 31 after it
was issued and may be renewed only by making application as
provided in this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made
to the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be
affected.
(2) If the Mayor and/or designated agent deny renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1)
year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the
Mayor and/or designated agent find that the basis for denial of
the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license.
B. Suspension.
(1) The Mayor and/or designated agent may suspend a
license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if, after a
hearing pursuant to subsection (5)(F) hereof, it determines that
a licensee or an employee of a licensee:
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 514 -
(a) Violated or is not in compliance with any section
of this chapter;
(b) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult
entertainment facility premises as authorized by this
chapter; and/or,
(c) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on
the adult entertainment facility premises.
(2) If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been
found guilty in a court of law or under the City’s code hearing
procedures, of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is
necessary prior to suspension of the license under this
subsection.
C. Revocation.
(1) The Mayor and/or designated agent shall revoke a license
without a hearing provided by subsection (5)(F) hereof, if a
cause of suspension in subsection (5)(B) above occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12)
months, or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal
activity.
(2) The Mayor and/or designated agent shall revoke a license
if it determines, after such a hearing, that a licensee or an
employee of a licensee:
(a) Gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;
(b) Has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of a controlled substances on the premises;
(c) Has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
(d) Knowingly operated the adult use during a
period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended;
(e) Has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
other sex act to occur in or on the licensee premises;
(f) Is delinquent in payment to the city, county or
state for any taxes or fees past due;
(g) Has knowingly or intentionally facilitated
another in the commission of the offense of public
indecency.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 515 -
(3) If the Mayor and/or designated agent revoke a license,
the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee
shall not be issued an adult entertainment facility license for
one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. If
subsequent to revocation, the Mayor and/or designated agent
find that the factual basis for the revocation did not occur, the
applicant may be granted a license.
(4) After denial of an application, or denial or a renewal of
an application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the
applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
D. Transfer of License. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license
to another nor shall a licensee operate an adult entertainment facility
under the authority of a license at any place other than the address on
the license.
E. Business Records. The Mayor and/or designated agent may
direct an adult entertainment facility establishment to file a verified
report with the City showing the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts
paid to employees during the preceding calendar year. In addition, all
adult entertainment facilities shall maintain and retain for a period of
five (5) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed,
including independent contractors, by the licensee.
F. Hearing. Upon a written allegation that licensee has violated
any provision of this chapter, the licensed premises shall immediately
suspend all business pending a hearing conducted by the Mayor and/or
designated agent upon seven (7) days’ notice to the licensee; provided,
however, that no hearing shall occur later than fifteen (15) days from
the date of suspension of business operations.
6. Adult Entertainment Facilities—Restrictions. All dancing and other
performances shall occur on a stage intended for that purpose which is separate
and apart from the general public and unobstructed from all horizontal views
within the building. No dancing or other performances shall occur closer than
three (3) feet to any patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or
otherwise touch any patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise
touch any performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
performer and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
Gratuities may be indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the
stage.
7. Hours of Operation. No adult entertainment facility shall be open for
business between 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., seven (7) days per week.
128.13 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT EMPLOYEE PERMIT.
1. Required; Application; Issuance; Term.
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 516 -
A. Any person, including but not limited to a licensee and a
performer, who actually engages in the providing of goods or services
to the public in connection with the adult entertainment facility shall
file an application for an adult entertainment employee permit with the
police department upon a form provided by the police department and
shall tender the correct permit fee, as provided in Section 128.11 to the
City Clerk who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the
application filed with the police department.
B. The application for an adult entertainment employee permit
shall contain substantially the same information as the application for
an adult entertainment facility license under Section 128.12 of this
chapter, except for personal information concerning the manager or
other person principally in charge of the operation of the business and
the keeping and maintenance of liability insurance.
C. The Mayor, City Administrator, Police Chief, and/or designated
agents may issue an adult entertainment employee permit within
fourteen (14) days following the application, unless he/she finds that
the applicant would not have been eligible for an adult entertainment
permit under the terms of Section 128.12(4) of this chapter.
D. Every adult entertainment employee permit issued pursuant to
this section will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of
its issuance and/or from the date the employee is no longer employed
with the adult entertainment facility licensee, whichever comes first
unless sooner revoked.
2. Revocation or Suspension.
A. Any adult entertainment employee permit may be revoked or
suspended by the Mayor and/or designated agent if the Mayor and/or
designated agent shall find the following:
(1) That the permittee has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter regulating adult entertainment facilities.
(2) The permittee has knowingly furnished false or
misleading information or withheld relevant information on any
application for any license or permit required by this chapter or
knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or withhold
such information on his/her behalf.
B. Any adult entertainment employee permit shall be revoked by
the Mayor and/or designated agent if the Mayor and/or designated
agent shall find that the permittee has committed any of the offenses
listed in Section 128.12(4) of this chapter.
C. The Mayor and/or designated agent in revoking or suspending
an adult entertainment employee permit shall give the permit holder
written notice specifying the grounds therefor. Such person may within
CHAPTER 128 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 517 -
ten (10) days of such revocation or suspension file a written request
with the Mayor and/or designated agent for a public hearing before the
Mayor and/or designated agent at which time the permittee may present
evidence bearing upon the question.
D. The Mayor and/or designated agent may in his/her discretion
conduct such hearing concurrently with a hearing pursuant to Section
128.12(5) of this chapter for the adult entertainment facility license,
unless it shall appear that such a joint hearing would prejudice the
rights of the licensee or the permittee involved.
3. Licensee’s Duty to Ensure Employees Have Permits. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee for the adult entertainment facility or the
employer of any persons purporting to engage in the providing of goods or
services to the public in connection with the adult entertainment facility to
ensure that each such person shall first have obtained a valid adult
entertainment employee permit pursuant to this chapter.
4. Transfer of Permit. A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to
another nor shall a permittee operate under the authority of a permit at any
place other than the address on the application.
5. Employee Permit Restrictions. All permittees must be fully clothed
while off the dance floor and/or stage and while amongst the patrons.
Furthermore, all permittees must wear no less than G-strings and pasties while
on the dance floor and/or on the stage. Pasties are not to be see through.
(Ch. 128 – Ord. 707 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
[The next page is 525]

CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 525 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.09 Excavations
135.04 Playing In 135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to
willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any
lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other
light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or
dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control
thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to
obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit
on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the
storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on
streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful
for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily
closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or
permission of any City official, police officer or member of the fire department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place,
temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage,
exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public
sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 526 -
equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a
business. This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own
vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish
or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street
or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb
any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
1. Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit therefor. A written application for such permit shall be
filed with the City and shall contain the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number,
in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the
excavation is to be made;
C. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion
date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the
City by the permit holder/property owner.
4. Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in
the minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a surety
company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee
the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property,
and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of administration of
this section. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) may be filed with the City.
5. Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in
effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and
employees for the following minimum amounts:
A. Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per
accident.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 527 -
B. Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a
manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property
owner.
7. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street
or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is
desired.
8. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley
be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24)
hours after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is
improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work
and charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
9. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10. Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide
Notification Center and provide the center with the information required under
Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
11. Permit Fee. A permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be payable at the
time of filing the application with the City. A separate permit shall be required
for each excavation.
12. Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be
issued.
13. Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all
other pertinent provisions.
14. Emergency Action. In the event of an emergency situation which
immediately endangers the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the
person, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under
this chapter, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or
remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and
safety of individuals. However, such person shall apply for an excavation
permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 528 -
Clerk’s office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent
repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit under this chapter.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the
responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood
on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely
mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[1c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting
property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a
reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against
the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or
place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property,
sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct
gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives
in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 529 -
snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s
expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access
to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be
obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and,
in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs.
If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost
shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property
as by law provided.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 530 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 531 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.10 Repairing Defective Sidewalks
136.02 Definitions 136.11 Notice of Inability to Repair or Barricade
136.03 Standard Sidewalk Specifications 136.12 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Permits for Construction or Removal 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 Failure to Obtain Permit; Remedies 136.14 Debris on Sidewalks
136.06 Inspection and Approval 136.15 Cleaning of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
136.07 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.16 Notice of Assessment for Repair or Cleaning Costs
136.08 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements 136.17 Hearing and Assessment
136.09 Ordering Sidewalk Improvements 136.18 Billing and Certifying to County
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to clarify the responsibilities of
the City and the owners of abutting property for the maintenance, repair, replacement
or reconstruction of sidewalks.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or
more of the following characteristics:
A. Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
B. Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
C. Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more
and at least four (4) inches in diameter.
D. Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of the surface of a single
square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half
(½) inch or more.
E. Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of
the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (¾)
inch or more.
F. A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no
part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
G. A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
H. A change from the design or construction grade equal to or
greater than three-fourths (¾) inch per foot.
2. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title or the contract
purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes,
“owner” includes the lessee, if any.
3. “Sidewalk improvements” means the reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 532 -
136.03 STANDARD SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS. The City Administrator
shall prepare complete plans and specifications for the construction, reconstruction
and repair of sidewalks and driveway crossings in the sidewalk which, upon approval
of the Council, shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk. The specifications shall
include descriptions and location of barricades and warning lights. All sidewalk
improvements in public property, whether performed by the owner of the abutting
property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the
City Administrator, and in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted in
accordance with this chapter.
136.04 PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL. No person shall
make any sidewalk improvements unless such person obtains a permit from the City
Administrator. The permit shall state that the person will comply with this Code of
Ordinances and with the specifications for sidewalks adopted by the City. The permit
also shall state that the work will be done under the direction and approval of the City
Administrator. All such permits shall be issued without charge and a copy thereof,
with the application, shall be filed and preserved in the office of the City
Administrator. The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when
the work is to be completed. The time of completion for the sidewalk improvements
may be extended by the City Administrator. All permits for sidewalk improvements
not ordered by resolution of the Council shall be issued in compliance with this
chapter. The City Administrator may withhold the issuance of any permit for any
sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for the
proposed improvements or when weather conditions will adversely affect the sidewalk
improvements.
136.05 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES. Whenever any sidewalk
improvements are made that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and with
the specifications, or when any sidewalk improvements are made without a permit, the
City Administrator shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and
upon the contractor doing the work. If the sidewalk is in the course of construction,
the notice shall order the work to stop
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 533 -
until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the specifications.
If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain a permit immediately
and perform any needed corrections within five (5) days after receipt of the permit. If
the owner fails to comply with this notice, the City Administrator shall have the work
completed and the costs assessed to the property owner.
136.06 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. Upon final completion, the City
Administrator shall inspect the work and may order corrections if the work does not
meet specifications. When the work does not meet all requirements of this chapter,
the specifications, and the permit, the City Administrator shall indicate this on both
copies of the permit.
136.07 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Proper warning lights and
barricades shall be placed to protect persons from materials, equipment and dangerous
conditions. Placement and maintenance of adequate warnings are the responsibility of
the constructor, the owner and the lessee of the property.
136.08 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person
shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or
approach thereto while it is in the process of being improved or upon any portion of
any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all
of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any
sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this
chapter.
136.09 ORDERING SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. The City Administrator
may order the reconstruction, repair or replacement of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City. Notice of this order shall be sent to the owner by certified
mail. The notice shall include the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the
Council within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice.
136.10 REPAIRING DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS. It is the duty of the abutting
property owner at any time, or upon receipt of thirty (30) days’ notice from the City,
to repair, replace or reconstruct all broken or defective sidewalks in the street right-ofway
abutting his or her property. If, after the expiration of the thirty (30) days as
provided in the notice, the required work has not been done or is not in the process of
completion, the City Administrator shall proceed to repair, replace, or reconstruct the
sidewalk. Upon completion of the work, the City Administrator shall submit to the
Council an itemized and verified statement of expenditures for material and labor, and
the legal description of the property abutting the sidewalk on which work has been
performed. These costs shall be assessed to the property as taxes.
136.11 NOTICE OF INABILITY TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty
of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk or of the contractor or agent of the
owner to notify the City immediately in the event the owner is unable to make
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 534 -
necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect warnings and barricades as
required by this chapter.
136.12 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain
any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission
by resolution of the Council.
136.13 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.14 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit
on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.15 CLEANING OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the duty
of the owner to keep sidewalks abutting the property clear of the natural
accumulations of snow or ice. If the owner fails to do so within a reasonable time, the
City Administrator may have the natural accumulations of snow or ice removed
without notice to the property owner. The City Administrator shall give the Council
an itemized and verified statement of the costs and a legal description of the property.
The costs shall be assessed against the property as taxes.
136.16 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT FOR REPAIR OR CLEANING COSTS.
When the City Administrator submits a bill for sidewalk improvements
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 535 -
or for removal of accumulations as provided in this chapter, the Clerk shall send a
notice of such facts to the owner of the abutting property. The notice may be given
either by personal service or by certified mail to the last known address of the owner.
The notice shall contain a statement of the work performed, the cost of the work that is
being assessed, a description of the property affected, and the fact that the person may
pay the amount assessed by a certain date without interest or penalty. The notice also
shall indicate that the person may object to such assessment and give the place and
time at which Council will hear such objections. The time set for hearing shall be at
least fifteen (15) days after the service or mailing of the notice.
136.17 HEARING AND ASSESSMENT. At the time and place designated in the
notice, the Council shall consider all objections to the assessment, correct all errors or
omissions, and adopt a corrected list as to the amounts to be assessed against the
property.
136.18 BILLING AND CERTIFYING TO COUNTY. Thirty (30) days after the
Council’s decision, the Clerk shall certify any unpaid amounts to the County
Treasurer. The unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien against the property and
shall be collected by the County Treasurer in the same manner as other taxes. Any
assessment that exceeds $100.00 may be paid in installments as set by the Council, not
to exceed ten, in the same manner and at the same interest rates as for special
assessments under Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. No interest shall be charged for
assessments, or parts thereof, paid within thirty (30) days of the time the Council
determined the final amounts.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 536 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 537 -
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Power to Vacate 137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it
would be in the best interest of the City to vacate a street or alley or portion
thereof, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to
vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further
consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written report
including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date
the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to
be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to
vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall
be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not
needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public
expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners
of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.15)
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the
judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of
a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, the Council may do so in accordance
with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 538 -
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of a
vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets and/or alleys and remain in
full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
471
501 9-19-83
503 10-17-83
505 11-7-83
507 1-3-84
520 7-1-85
521 7-15-85
522 10-21-85
540 4-18-88
541 4-18-88
545 6-6-88
547 6-6-88
548 10-17-88
549 11-7-88
566 1-15-90
584 3-4-91
605 11-2-92
648 11-18-96
665 3-15-99
673 12-20-99
676 6-5-00
678 10-2-00
681 12-4-00
754 8-31-09
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 539 -
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks,
which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified
and established as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all
established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have
been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
396
414
454
598
666 4-5-99
CHAPTER 138 STREET GRADES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 540 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 541 -
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets 139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in
accordance with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution,
change the name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or
changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County
Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as
shown on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified
by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following
words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in
Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Dyersville, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be
entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved
by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date),
by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official
Street Name Map: (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the Clerk.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 542 -
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.04 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
140.02 Definition 140.05 Parking Restricted
140.03 Access Controls Imposed
140.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER. This chapter shall be deemed an
exercise of the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general
welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02 DEFINITION. The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or
street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a
controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their
property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED. There are hereby fixed and established
controlled access facilities on Primary Road No. 136, within the City, described as
follows:
On present route of Iowa Highway No. 136 from the north corporation line
Station 41+39 to the south corporation line Station 783+07
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance
with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. P-1111 and Project No.
FN-378, on file in the office of the Clerk, except that this chapter does not apply to
existing facilities.
140.04 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY. It is
unlawful for any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
1. Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb,
central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled
access facilities.
2. Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an
opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or
line.
CHAPTER 140 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 543 -
3. Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for
that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing
curb, separation, section or line.
4. Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility
from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose
in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such
service road from the controlled access facility property.
140.05 PARKING RESTRICTED. It is unlawful to permit any parking on Iowa
Highway No. 136 within the City limits and for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet back
of sidewalk line of intersecting street approaches.
[The next page is 555]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 555 -
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building 145.07 Right to Demolish
145.04 Notice to Owner 145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City Administrator is responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures which are structurally
unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard
to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All
such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in
this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home
meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (b) faulty construction;
(c) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building; (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 556 -
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause
sickness or disease.
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal
or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be
examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged
and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects
thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises,
within forty-eight (48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to
commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the
building or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety
(90) days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If
necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be
vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are
completed, inspected and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3h])
1. Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to
the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if the
owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the City limits
such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or certified mail. The
designated period within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply
with the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner
receives such notice.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 557 -
2. Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may request
a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing
within the time provided in the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date,
time and place of hearing.
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate.
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF
DYERSVILLE, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition,
or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of
the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with
the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of
the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the
work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special
assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be
certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 558 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for
the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX of this Code
of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you review
the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow his
or her recommendation carefully.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 559 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 562 -
CHAPTER 147
FIRE ZONE
147.01 Fire Zone Established 147.06 Special Permit
147.02 Plans Submitted 147.07 Removal of Buildings
147.03 Buildings Prohibited 147.08 Storage of Materials Restricted
147.04 Construction Standards 147.09 Flammable and Combustible Liquids
147.05 Reconstruction Prohibited
147.01 FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED. A Fire Zone is established to include all of the following
territory:
All that part of the City not zoned as R-1, R-2 and A-1 in accordance with the
City’s Zoning Ordinance.
147.02 PLANS SUBMITTED. It is unlawful to build, enlarge or alter any structure, building
or part thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with a
statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who shall, if in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for the proposed work.
147.03 BUILDINGS PROHIBITED. The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or
additions thereto, or substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are
prohibited in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
147.04 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The construction standards for all buildings,
structures, or parts thereof within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum,
Type III - 1 hour fire resistant - construction, as specified in the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code.
147.05 RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED. Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which may hereafter be damaged by fire,
CHAPTER 147 FIRE ZONE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 563 -
decay, or otherwise, shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
147.06 SPECIAL PERMIT. The Council may, by four-fifths (4/5) vote, issue a special permit
to improve any property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on
condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance or the fire
hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or move in any building or
structure for temporary purposes for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months from the
date of such permission.
147.07 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS. Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone,
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to
remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within
thirty (30) days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the same
to be removed or taken down. The Mayor shall report an itemized bill of the expense to the
Clerk, and the same shall be charged to the person owning such building. The Clerk shall
present the bill to the owner of the property and if the bill is not paid within ten (10) days
from the date it is presented, the amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the
County Treasurer, as a lien against the property and collected the same as other taxes.
147.08 STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED. No person shall have or deposit any grain
stack, pile of rubbish, explosives, hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance within
the Fire Zone, nor shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within the
Fire Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum amount of
such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited on any lot or part of a
lot within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one of the buildings allowed by this
chapter. No person shall build or allow any fires, whether trash fires or otherwise, within
the Fire Zone as described in this chapter.
147.09 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS. The following restrictions apply to the
outside above ground storage of Class I and Class II Flammable and Combustible Liquids
within the following specified zoned areas:
R-1 No storage
R-2 No storage
CHAPTER 147 FIRE ZONE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 564 -
A-1 On special condition by Fire Chief and with permit
C-1 No storage
C-2 No storage
I-1 500 gallon storage by permit
I-2 500 gallon storage by permit
I-3 500 gallon storage by permit
[The next page is 571]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 571 -
CHAPTER 148
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
148.01 Definitions 148.03 Foundation Requirements
148.02 Conversion to Real Property
148.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or after June 15, 1976,
and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field or tract of land
under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the manufactured home community.
3. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the
public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will
permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more
persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a
motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June 15,
1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code and which contains no State
or Federal seals.
4. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of
these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
CHAPTER 148 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 572 -
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be construed
to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily
maintained by any individual, educational institution or company on their own premises and
used exclusively to house their own labor or students. The manufactured home community
or mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in
effect.
148.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or manufactured home which is
located outside a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be converted
to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real
estate taxes except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
1. Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property
as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human
habitation.
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home which is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
148.03 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS. A mobile home or manufactured home located
outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be placed on a
permanent frost-free foundation system which meets the support and anchorage
requirements as recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code.
The foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems of
surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)
CHAPTER 148 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 573 -
[The next page is 581]

CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 581 -
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.04 Even/Odd Numbers
150.02 Owner Requirements 150.05 Prefixes
150.03 Building Numbering Map
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the
following numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number
to the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be
installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a
conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than three (3) inches high and
two (2) inches wide and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of ten (10) days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned
number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING MAP. The Clerk shall be responsible for
preparing and maintaining a building numbering map.
150.04 EVEN/ODD NUMBERS. On streets or avenues extending north and south,
the even numbers shall be on the west side of the street or avenue and the odd
numbers on the east side of the street or avenue. On all streets or avenues
CHAPTER 150 BUILDING NUMBERING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 582 -
extending east and west, the even numbers shall be on the north side and the odd
numbers on the south side of the street or avenue.
150.05 PREFIXES. Streets or avenues extending east and west from the base line
shall bear the prefix “East” or “West.” Streets or avenues extending north and south
from the base line shall bear the prefix “North” or “South.”
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 584 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Definition 151.05 Disease Control
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.07 Trees Near Intersections Prohibited
151.04 Trimming Trees to be Supervised
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street,
avenue or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the
curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying between
the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No person shall plant any trees or shrubs within the
parking unless said person agrees to plant and maintain the trees and shrubs according to an
approved site plan and further agrees to be responsible for any and all liability arising from
the planting of trees and shrubs within the parking. The work must be done by a
responsible, insured contractor approved by the Council. Requests for such approval shall
be made to the Council in writing and include a site plan showing the varieties and
placement of the trees and shrubs to be planted within the parking and who is to do the
work. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be ordered to remove the
trees or shrubs, or removal shall be done by the City at the planter’s cost.
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the
trees on or overhanging the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least fifteen (15)
feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting
property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property
owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days. If such action is not taken
within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 585 -
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED. Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is
unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is
done under the supervision of the City.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub which may
harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected
any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and
such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1. City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public
property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property,
the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal. The
Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which
interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon.
2. Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such
condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining
property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council shall notify by
certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct
such condition by treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said
notification. If such owner, occupant or person in charge of said property fails to
comply within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the
condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
151.07 TREES NEAR INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED. All owners of corner lots within the City
are prohibited from planting or maintaining trees, shrubs, vines or other plant life at the
corner of such lots nearest the intersection of streets bounding such lots, which trees,
shrubs or vines obstruct the view of motorists operating their automobiles at such
intersections so that a clear view of the intersecting street cannot be had by the approaching
motorists for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet along such intersecting street. In the event
any person plants or maintains shrubs, trees, vines or other plant life at such corners which
obstruct the view of motorists at such intersections, the same shall be trimmed or removed
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 586 -
so that motorists approaching such intersection on both streets may have a clear view of the
intersection.
[The next page is 587]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 587 -
CHAPTER 152
WATER WELL PROTECTION
152.01 Shallow Well Protection 152.04 Designating Authority
152.02 Deep Well Protection 152.05 Existing Structure or Facilities
152.03 Applicability
152.01 SHALLOW WELL PROTECTION. No structure or facility of the following enumerated
types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth from a shallow public well
within the City.
1. Well house floor drains to ground surface – 5 feet;
2. Water treatment plant wastes to ground surface – 50 feet;
3. Sanitary and industrial discharges to ground surface – 200 feet;
4. Floor drains from well house to surface:
A. None within 5 feet;
B. 5 to 10 feet, water main materials enclosed in concrete permitted;
C. 10 to 25 feet, must be water main material;
D. 25 to 75 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;
5. Floor drains to sewers, water plant wastes, storm or sanitary sewers or
drains:
A. None permitted within 25 feet;
B. 25 to 75 feet, must be water main material;
C. 75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;
CHAPTER 152 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 588 -
6. Sewer force mains:
A. None permitted within 75 feet;
B. If within 200 feet, must be water main materials;
7. Land application of solid waste – 200 feet;
8. Irrigation of wastewater – 200 feet;
9. Concrete vaults and septic tanks – 200 feet;
10. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants – 200 feet;
11. Cesspools and earth pit privies – 200 feet;
12. Soil absorption fields – 200 feet;
13. Lagoons – 200 feet;
14. Chemicals:
A. Application to ground surface – 200 feet;
B. Above ground storage – 200 feet;
C. On or underground storage – 200 feet;
15. Animal pasturage – 50 feet;
16. Animal enclosure – 200 feet;
17. Animal wastes:
A. Land application of solids – 200 feet;
B. Land application of liquid or slurry – 200 feet;
CHAPTER 152 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 589 -
C. Storage tank – 200 feet;
D. Solids stockpile – 200 feet;
E. Storage basin or lagoon – 200 feet;
18. Earthen silage storage trench or pit – 200 feet;
19. Basements, pits, sumps – 10 feet;
20. Flowing streams or other surface water bodies – 50 feet;
21. Cisterns – 100 feet;
22. Cemeteries – 200 feet;
23. Solid waste disposal sites – 200 feet.
152.02 DEEP WELL PROTECTION. No structure or facility of the following enumerated
types shall be located within the distances hereinafter set forth from a deep public well
within the City.
1. Well house floor drains to ground surface – 5 feet;
2. Water treatment plant wastes to ground surface – 50 feet;
3. Sanitary and industrial discharges to ground surface – 200 feet;
4. Floor drains from well house to surface:
A. None within 5 feet;
B. 5 to 10 feet, water main materials enclosed in concrete permitted;
C. 10 to 25 feet, must be water main material;
D. 25 to 75 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;
CHAPTER 152 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 590 -
5. Floor drains to sewers, water plant wastes, storm or sanitary sewers or
drains:
A. None permitted within 25 feet;
B. 25 to 75 feet, must be water main material;
C. 75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;
6. Force mains:
A. None permitted within 75 feet;
B. If within 200 feet, must be water main materials;
7. Land application of solid waste – 100 feet;
8. Irrigation of wastewater – 100 feet;
9. Concrete vaults and septic tanks – 100 feet;
10. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants – 200 feet;
11. Cesspools and earth pit privies – 200 feet;
12. Soil absorption fields – 200 feet;
13. Lagoons – 200 feet;
14. Chemicals:
A. Application to ground surface – 100 feet;
B. Above ground chemical or mineral storage – 100 feet;
C. On or underground chemical or mineral storage – 200 feet;
15. Animal pasturage – 50 feet;
CHAPTER 152 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 591 -
16. Animal enclosure – 100 feet;
17. Animal wastes:
A. Land application of solids – 100 feet;
B. Land application of liquid or slurry – 100 feet;
C. Storage tank – 100 feet;
D. Solids stockpile – 200 feet;
E. Storage basin or lagoon – 200 feet;
18. Earthen silage storage trench or pit – 100 feet;
19. Basements, pits, sumps – 10 feet;
20. Flowing streams or other surface water bodies – 50 feet;
21. Cisterns – 50 feet;
22. Cemeteries – 200 feet;
23. Private wells – 200 feet;
24. Solid waste disposal sites – 200 feet.
152.03 APPLICABILITY. Proscriptions as set forth in Sections 152.01 and 152.02 shall apply
to all public water wells existing within the City except public water wells formerly
abandoned for use by resolution of the Council.
152.04 DESIGNATING AUTHORITY. The Council shall designate each water well within the
City as being a “shallow well” or “deep well” for the purposes of this chapter.
152.05 EXISTING STRUCTURES OR FACILITIES. The use of structures or facilities existing at
the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even
CHAPTER 152 WATER WELL PROTECTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 592 -
though such use may not conform with the regulations of this chapter. However, such
structure or facility may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or substituted subsequent
to adoption of such ordinance.†
[The next page is 601]
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 689 restricting the location of potential sources of contamination
within close proximity to public water wells within the City was adopted by the Council on October 15,
2001, and published in the Dyersville Commercial on October 17, 2001.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 601 -
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
165.01 Title 165.23 R-2 Residential District
165.02 Purpose 165.24 C-1 Central Business District
165.03 Interpretation of Standards 165.25 C-2 Commercial District
165.04 Definitions 165.26 I-1 Industrial District
165.05 Districts Established 165.27 I-2 Industrial District
165.06 Official Map 165.28 I-3 Industrial District
165.07 Annexations 165.29 Public Access Drives
165.08 Water Areas 165.30 Public and Private Parking Lots
165.09 Conformance Required 165.31 Storage and Parking of Vehicles in
165.10 Nonconforming Uses R-1 and R-2 Districts
165.11 Discontinuance of Nonconforming Uses 165.32 Exceptions and Interpretations
165.12 Damaged Nonconforming Buildings 165.33 Board of Adjustment
165.13 Accessory Buildings 165.34 Approval and Issuance of Building Permits and
165.14 Corner Lots Certificates of Compliance
165.15 Front Yard 165.35 Certificate of Occupancy
165.16 Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced 165.36 Nonconforming Uses; Certificates
165.17 Building Lines on Approved Plats 165.37 Application for Building Permit; Procedure
165.18 Frontage and Access 165.38 Notification of Completion
165.19 Recreational Vehicle Parking 165.39 Amendments
165.20 D-1 Delaware Agricultural District 165.40 Floodway and Floodway Fringe Districts
165.21 A-1 Rural Restricted District 165.41 Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
165.22 R-1 Single-family Residential District 165.42 Towers and Antennas
165.01 TITLE. This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the
“zoning ordinance” of the City of Dyersville, Iowa.
165.02 PURPOSE. The Council deems it necessary in order to lessen
congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to
promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks and other public requirements; to conserve the value of buildings and
property; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City
with reasonable consideration, and in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
165.03 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS. The provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law, or
by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Where for specific land, the requirements of any other ordinances of
the City are more stringent or restrictive than the requirements set forth in this
chapter, nothing herein shall be construed to waive compliance with the
provisions of such other ordinance.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 602 -
165.04 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and
words are hereby defined.
1. “Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure subordinate
to the principal use of the building on the lot, and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
2. “Advertising signs” includes all structures, regardless of the
material used in the construction of the same, that are erected,
maintained, or used to advertise a business or attraction.
3. “Alley” means a public way for the use of vehicles affording a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
4. “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms, with toilet and
culinary accommodations, used or designed for use as a single
housekeeping unit, located in a building containing two or more such
rooms or suites, or in a building devoted primarily to nonresidential use.
5. “Basement” means a story having part, but not more than onehalf,
of its height below grade. A “basement” is counted as a story.
6. “Beginning of construction” means the incorporation of labor and
materials within the foundation walls of the building or buildings.
7. “Board” means the Board of Adjustment.
8. “Boardinghouse” means a building other than a hotel or
restaurant, where meals are regularly served for compensation to more
than five persons not members of the family there residing.
9. “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls for shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
When separated by division walls from the ground up without openings,
each portion of such structure shall be deemed a separate building.
10. “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the
average, natural grade at the building line, to the highest point of the
coping of flat roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge
for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
11. “Building, principal” means a nonaccessory building in which a
principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
12. “Building setback line” means a line within a lot or other parcel of
land parallel to a public road, street or highway right-of-way line
defining that minimum distance between the building and property line
upon which buildings or structures may not be placed.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 603 -
13. “Building wall” means the wall of the principal building forming
a part of the main structure. The foundation walls of unenclosed porches
or piazzas, steps, walks and retaining wall or similar structure shall not
be considered as building walls under the provisions of this chapter.
14. “Bulk station” means distributing stations commonly known as
bulk or tank stations used for the storage and distribution of flammable
liquids or liquefied petroleum products.
15. “Carport” means space for the housing or storage of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides by walls, and attached
to the principal building.
16. “Cellar” means that portion of a building having more than onehalf
of its height below grade. A “cellar” is not counted as a story.
17. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission.
18. “Convalescent home” means a building or premises in or on
which care is provided for four or more invalid, infirm, aged,
convalescent, or physically disabled or injured persons, not including
insane or other mental cases, inebriate, or contagious cases. Nursing
homes are “convalescent homes.”
19. “District” means a section or sections of the City within which the
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, or the height
and area of buildings and premises, are uniform.
20. “Dwelling” means any building, or portion thereof, which is
designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.
21. “Dwelling unit” means a building or portion of a building which
is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters.
22. “Dwelling, single-family” means a dwelling designed for or
occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family or
housekeeping unit.
23. “Dwelling, two-family” means a dwelling designed for or
occupied exclusively by two families, or housekeeping units, living
independently of each other.
24. “Dwelling, multi-family” means a dwelling designed for, or
occupied by more than two families, or housekeeping units, living
independently of each other.
25. “Family” means a group of one or more persons occupying a
premises and living as single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 604 -
group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel as defined in
this chapter.
26. “Frontage” means all the property on one side of a street between
two intersecting streets measured along the line of the street, or if the
street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
27. “Garage, private” means an accessory building not over one story
of fifteen feet in height used for parking or storage of vehicles as may be
required in connection with the permitted use of the principal building.
However, the storage of one commercial vehicle not exceeding threefourths
ton may be permitted.
28. “Garage, public” means a building or portion of a building in
which motor vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, stored or kept
for remuneration, hire or sale.
29. “Grade” means:
A. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the
elevation of the regularly established sidewalks grade at the center
of the wall adjoining the street;
B. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street,
the average of the elevation of the regularly established sidewalk
grades at the center of all walls adjoining the street;
C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the
average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the buildings.
30. “Gasoline service station” means a building or portion of a
building used chiefly in connection with tanks, pumps and other
appliances, for supplying motor vehicles with gasoline, oil, compressed
air, water and similar supplies, but not for the purpose of making repairs.
When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor vehicle fuel at
retail is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage.
31. “Home occupation” means a business operated as an accessory
use to a residential dwelling unit and subject to these provisions:
A. No home occupation may be operated in such a manner as
to create offensive noise, odor, smoke, heat, vibration, electronic
interference or other interference with the appropriate use and
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 605 -
enjoyment of adjacent properties or otherwise constitute a
nuisance or safety hazard to adjacent persons or properties.
B. No outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation shall be permitted.
C. No more than twenty-five percent of the total floor area of
a dwelling unit may be devoted to the home occupation.
D. No internal or external alteration which would change the
basic characteristic of the building as a residential dwelling shall
be permitted.
E. No nonresident employee may be employed on the
premises at any time. A home occupation may be carried on by
members only of the immediate family.
F. No public display of goods shall be allowed.
G. A permitted home occupation may be operated or
maintained as an accessory use only in the principal building.
H. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
I. No motor vehicle repair is permitted for customers.
If a home occupation which is operated as a nonconforming use, as
defined by Section 165.10, becomes subject to the terms and provisions
of Section 165.11 or 165.12, then the home occupation shall also be
subject to all of the provisions of this section.
32. “Hotel” means a building in which lodging or boarding and
lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation, and in
which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside
lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours.
33. “Junkyard” means any area where waste, discarded, or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or
handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places
or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment, automobile, tractor, or machinery wrecking and
used parts yards, but not including areas where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including the
processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials as part of the
manufacturing operation.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 606 -
34. “Lodginghouse” means a building or portion thereof, other than a
hotel or motel, providing rooms or sleeping accommodations for five or
more persons for compensation, including rooming houses.
35. “Lot” means a parcel of land occupied, or intended for occupancy,
by one main building, together with its accessory buildings officially
approved.
36. “Lot area” means the area of a horizontal plane bordered by the
front, side and rear lot lines.
37. “Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection.
38. “Lot, depth of” means the mean horizontal distance between the
front and rear lot lines.
39. “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having a frontage on two
nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
40. “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
41. “Lot lines” are the lines bounding a lot.
42. “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat
of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
Dubuque/Delaware County, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Dubuque/Delaware
County prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 285 on July 9, 1962.
43. “Lot width” means the width of a lot measured at the building line
and at right angles to its depth.
44. “Major thoroughfare” means a street on which preference is given
to the through movement of traffic at the expense of cross-traffic, by the
utilization of stop signs and/or other control devices on intersecting
streets.
45. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or
so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed,
constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a
place for human habitation by one or more persons; but shall also include
any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in
Iowa.
46. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon
which two or more occupied mobile homes are harbored, either free
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 607 -
of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of such mobile home park. “Mobile home park” shall not be
construed to include mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures
temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution, or
company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own
labor or students.
47. “Modular home” means a factory-built structure which is
manufactured or constructed to be used as a place for human habitation,
but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other
device allowing it to be attached or towed behind a motor vehicle, and
which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any
wheels or axles.
48. “Motel” or “auto court” means a building, or group of attached or
detached buildings, containing individual sleeping or living units for
overnight auto tourists, with garage attached, or parking facilities
conveniently located near each such unit.
49. “Nonconforming building” means a building or portion thereof,
existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or
amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter or to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
50. “Nonconforming use” means a use which lawfully occupied a
building or land at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter, or
amendment thereto, became effective, and which does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located.
51. "Open porch" means a roofed structure attached to the principal
building open on two or more sides, projecting not more than eight feet
within the front yard, not more than three feet within a side yard, and not
more than eight feet within a rear yard.
52. “Parking lot” means an area of land, a yard or other open space on
a lot used for or designed for use by standing motor vehicles together
with a driveway connecting the parking lot with a public place.
53. “Parking space” means a surfaced area of not less than two
hundred fifty square feet, either within a structure or in the open,
exclusive of the driveway or access drives, for the parking of a motor
vehicle, and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway
which provides satisfactory ingress for automobiles.
54. "Premises" means a parcel of land.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 608 -
55. "Recreational vehicle" means all those small mobile units
principally designed for recreation pastime such as motor homes, camper
trailers, pickup campers, pop-up tent trailers, and similar camping-type
vehicles or trailers.
56. "Setback" means the required distance between a lot line and the
nearest wall of conforming structure on the lot.
57. "Sign" means a publicly displayed board, placard, etc., bearing the
same information as advertisement.
58. "Sign area" means the area of the surface of a sign, billboard,
placard, etc., bounded by the top, bottom and sides.
59. “Story” means that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there
is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling or roof
next above it.
60. “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the
line of intersection of roof decking and the wall face not more than four
feet above the top floor level. A half story containing independent
apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
61. “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel
of land and a contiguous street.
62. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of
which requires location on the ground or attached to something having
location on the ground, but not including fences or poles and
appurtenances thereto used for the provisions of public utilities.
63. “Structure alterations” means any replacement or change in the
type of construction or in the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance, as may be required for the
safety of the building.
64. “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of the structure from the
ground upward, excepting as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a
lot for the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard, or the depth
of a rear yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main
building shall be used.
65. “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the
lot and measured between the rear lot line and the principal building or
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 609 -
any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies, or porches. On
corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. The rear yard shall, in all cases, be
at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
66. “Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to the
rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the principal
building, or any projection thereof.
165.05 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED. In order to classify, regulate and
restrict the location of trade, industries, and the location of buildings designed
for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot
areas, and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts, and other open
spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the City is divided into eleven
districts. The use, height, and area regulations are uniform in each class of
district, and the districts shall be known as:
D-1 Delaware Agricultural District
A-1 Rural Restricted District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
C-1 Commercial District
C-2 Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Industrial District
I-3 Industrial District
FW Floodway
FF Floodway Fringe
165.06 OFFICIAL MAP.
1. The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning
map of the City, which map is made a part of this chapter by references.
The zoning map and all the notations, references, and other matters
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the notations,
references, and other matters set forth by the map were all fully described
herein; the original of which is properly attested, and is on file in the
Council Chambers in City Hall.
2. The district boundaries are either lot lines, or the centerlines of
streets and alleys, unless otherwise shown, and where the districts
designated are bounded approximately by street, alley, or lot lines, and
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 610 -
are not dimensioned otherwise, the lot lines or centerlines of streets and
alleys shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
3. The official zoning map which is on file in the Council Chambers
in City Hall shall be entitled “Official Zoning Map” and bear the date of
adoption and shall bear certification of its authenticity by the Mayor and
be attested to by the signature of the City Clerk, together with the date of
their signing.
4. Amendments to the map shall identify the area affected by legal
description and identify the zoning district as the same existed and the
new district designation applicable to said property. A certified copy of
the amendatory ordinance, however, shall not repeal or reenact said map,
but only amend it. The official zoning map, together with amending
ordinances, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of
land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City. (See
EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending
the zoning map.)
5. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of use and the number of
attachments, the Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning
map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new
official zoning map may integrate the amendments and correct drafting
or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning
ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official
zoning map shall be identified by the date and the signature of the Mayor
attested by the Clerk under the following words: “This is to certify that
this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map
adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of Chapter 165
of the City’s Code of Ordinances.”
165.07 ANNEXATIONS. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to
the City shall be considered as being in the A-1 Rural Restricted District until
changed by ordinance, but a final zoning plan shall be adopted within six
months of the annexation following the procedures of this chapter.
165.08 WATER AREAS. All areas within the corporate limits of the City
which are under water, and not shown as included within any district, shall be
subject to all regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water
area, and to extend to the centerline of the water.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 611 -
165.09 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED. Except as hereinafter specified, no
building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved
or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used which does not
comply with all of the district regulations established by this chapter for the
district in which the building or land is located.
165.10 NONCONFORMING USES. The lawful use of a building or land
existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be
continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no
structural alterations are made, the nonconforming use of a building may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same, or of a more restricted
classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
restricted use, or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed
to a less restricted use. The nonconforming use of building may be hereafter
extended throughout those parts of a building which were manifestly arranged
or designed for such use at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified
in this chapter.
165.11 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE. No
premises, building or portion thereof, used in whole or part for nonconforming
purposes according to the provisions of this chapter, which hereafter become
and remain vacant for a continued period of two calendar years, shall again be
used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such
building or premises is situated.
165.12 DAMAGED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS. No building
which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, to
the extent of more than sixty-five percent (65%) of the fair market value of the
building immediately prior to damage, shall be restored except in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. If a building is damaged by less than sixtyfive
percent (65%) of the fair market value, it may be repaired or reconstructed,
and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs and
reconstruction are done within twelve months of the date of such damage.
165.13 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. No accessory building shall be erected
in any required court, or in any yard other than a rear yard except as provided in
this section. Accessory buildings shall be at least five (5) feet from lot lines of
adjoining lots which are in any R district; on a corner lot they shall conform to
the setback regulations on the side street; there shall be at least five (5) feet
from any other separate building or structure on the same lot, and at least five
(5) feet from any alley line, except that when any entrance to an accessory
building faces the alley, the accessory building shall be at least twenty (20) feet
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 612 -
from any alley line. Accessory buildings may be erected or may be connected
thereto by a breezeway, or similar structure, and such accessory building shall
be considered as part of the principal building for all yard requirements. A
carport or garage for a residence may be in a side yard, provided that a full
required side yard is provided between the garage or carport and the side lot
line. An accessory building within sixty (60) feet of the front lot line shall have
a full side yard between it and the side lot line. Accessory buildings which are
not a part of the main building shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%)
of the rear yard, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; however, this
regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a six hundred
twenty-five (625) square foot garage on a minimum rear yard.
165.14 CORNER LOTS. For corner lots platted after the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, the side street yard shall be equal in width
to the setback regulation of the lots to the rear having frontage on the
intersecting street. If there are no lots to the rear having frontage on the
intersecting street, the side yard shall be not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
front yard requirement. On corner lots platted and of record on the eighth day
of July, 1962, the same regulations shall apply, except that this regulation shall
not be so interpreted as to reduce the width of the area for construction on a
corner lot facing an intersecting street to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, nor to
prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
165.15 FRONT YARD. In any R district there shall be a minimum front yard
required as stated in the yard requirement for the particular district; provided,
that in no case shall the front yard depth be less than the smallest front yard
depth of an existing principal building adjacent to either side lot line.
165.16 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED. No lot shall be
reduced in size so as to make the width or total area of the lot, or any yard, or
any other open space, less than the minimum required by this chapter. No part
of a yard, or other open space provided about a building or structure for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter, shall be included as a
part of a yard, or other open space required under this chapter for another
building or structure. Off-street parking and loading areas may occupy all or
part of any required yard or open space, except as otherwise specified in this
chapter.
165.17 BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS. Whenever the plat
of a land subdivision approved by the Commission, and on record in the office
of the County Recorder, shows a setback building line along any frontage for
the purpose of creating a front or side yard line, the building line thus shown
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 613 -
shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in this
chapter, unless specific yard requirements in this chapter require a greater
setback.
165.18 FRONTAGE AND ACCESS. Lots containing any building used in
whole or in part for residence purposes shall abut for at least forty (40) feet on
at least one street, unless it has an exclusive, unobstructed, private easement of
access or right-of-way at least twenty (20) feet wide to said street; and there
shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage or easement
unless there is a common easement of access at least fifty (50) feet wide for two
or more such single-family, or for one or more two-family or multiple
dwellings.
165.19 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING. Recreational vehicle
parking shall be governed as follows:
1. No front yard storage is allowed exceeding forty-eight hours.
2. Storage or parking of recreational vehicles is allowed in the rear
yard. If the rear yard is not accessible, the recreational vehicle can be
stored in the side yard but must continue to meet zoning side yard
requirements.
3. Any recreational vehicle which exceeds forty (40) feet in length or
fourteen (14) feet in height shall not be permitted for storage in any
residential area.
4. Recreational vehicles must have current registration.
(Ord. 749 – Sep. 09 Supp.)
165.20 D-1 DELAWARE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot and Yard Requirements.
A. Single-family Dwelling (without public sewer/water):
(1) Minimum Lot Area: 1 acre
(2) Minimum Lot Width: no minimum
(3) Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front ...................................50 feet
Each Side............................15 feet
Rear ....................................50 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot.......40 feet
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 614 -
B. Single-family Dwelling (with central sewer/water):
(1) Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
(2) Minimum Lot Width: no minimum
(3) Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front................................... 30 feet
Each Side ........................... 8 feet
Rear.................................... 35 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot ...... 40 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Bulletin boards or signs not exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area pertaining to the construction, lease or sale of a
building or premises, which board or signs shall be removed as soon as
the premises are leased, sold, or construction completed, are permitted.
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Agricultural and horticultural purposes None
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces
Public and private forests and wildlife reservations None
Public utility structures and equipment necessary for
their operation
1 space/employee
Two-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, or
mobile home park provided they are served by
municipal or community water supply and sewage
disposal systems
2 spaces per unit
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the
residential uses set out in subsection 3 are allowed. They shall,
however, abide by the applicable yard requirements for the
principal use;
B. Private garage;
C. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction
work provided they are promptly removed upon completion of
work.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 615 -
D. Home occupation.
165.21 A-1 RURAL RESTRICTED DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area
Dwelling .............................1 acre
Other Uses ..........................no minimum
B. Minimum Lot Width
Dwelling .............................no minimum
Other Uses ..........................no minimum
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front ...................................50 feet
Each Side............................15 feet
Rear ....................................50 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot.......40 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements:
All uses ...............................2½ stories or 35 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Bulletin board and signs pertaining to the lease,
or sale of a building or premises, or signs pertaining to any material that
is grown or treated within the district are permitted; provided, however,
that such signs shall be located upon or immediately adjacent to the
building, or in the area in which such materials are treated, processed or
stored.
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Single-family dwelling 1 space/unit
Farms, providing no animals raised or sheltered within
one hundred feet of a residential district
None
Churches, institutions of religious, philanthropic or
charitable nature (excluding penal or correctional
institutions) AND
Public schools, parks, playgrounds
1 space/5 seats in auditorium,
or if no auditorium,
1 space/office and classroom
Public and private forests and wildlife reservations None
Public utility structures and equipment necessary for
their operation
1 space/employee
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 616 -
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any
of the uses set out in subsection 3 of this section;
B. Private garage;
C. Home occupation.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. The following uses and
structures are permitted subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment:
A. Transient amusement enterprises (carnival, circus; rides
and shows);
B. Extraction of minerals or raw material;
C. Outdoor advertising signs and billboards;
D. Refreshment stand in conjunction with a park or recreation
area;
E. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction
work provided they are promptly removed upon completion of
construction work.
165.22 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area
Dwelling............................. 7500 square feet
Other Uses.......................... 10,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width
Dwelling............................. 60 feet
Other Uses.......................... 80 feet
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Dwellings:
Front................................... 30 feet
Each Side ........................... 8 feet
Rear.................................... 35 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot ...... 15 feet
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 617 -
Other Uses:
Front ...................................35 feet
Each Side............................8 feet
Rear ....................................35 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot.......15 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements:
Principal Structure..............2½ stories or 35 feet
Accessory Structure............1 story or 15 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Bulletin boards or signs not exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area pertaining to the construction, lease, or sale of a
building premises, which boards or signs shall be removed as soon as the
premises are leased, sold, or construction completed, are permitted.
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Single-family dwelling 1 space/unit
Churches, public and private schools and other
educational institutions
1 space/5 seats in auditorium,
or if no auditorium,
1 space/office and classroom
Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, community
buildings owned or operated by public or semipublic
agencies
None
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any
of the uses set out in subsection 3 of this section. Such uses shall
conform to the regulations of Sections 165.13.
B. Home occupation.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. The following uses and
structures are permitted subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment:
A. Agriculture, including truck gardening, but not the raising
of livestock for commercial purposes, or of such that would be
offensive for reason of noise or odor to the surrounding area;
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 618 -
165.23 R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area
Two-family Dwelling......... 3000 square feet/unit
Multi-family....................... 2500 square feet/unit plus
1000 square feet for each
additional unit over 3
Other Uses.......................... 6,000 square feet
B. Minimum Lot Width
Two-family ........................ 60 feet
Multi-family....................... 70 feet
Other Uses.......................... 50 feet
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Dwellings:
Front................................... 30 feet
Each Side ........................... 6 feet
Rear.................................... 30 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot ...... 15 feet
Other Uses:
Front................................... 30 feet
Each Side ........................... 6 feet
Rear.................................... 30 feet
Side Street, Corner Lot ...... 15 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements:
All uses .............................. 2½ stories or 35 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Bulletin boards or signs not exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area, pertaining to the construction, lease, or sale of a
building or premises, which boards or signs shall be removed as soon as
the premises are leased, sold, or construction completed, are permitted.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 619 -
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Single-family dwelling 1 space/unit
Two-family and multi-family dwelling 1 space/unit
Funeral home and mortuary 1 space/4 seats in chapel
Boarding and lodging homes 1 space/rentable room
Churches, public and private schools and other
educational institutions
1 space/5 seats in auditorium,
or if no auditorium,
1 space/office and classroom
Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes 1 space/4 beds
Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, community
buildings owned or operated by public or semipublic
agencies None
Mobile home park 1 space/unit
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any
of the uses set out in subsection 3 of this section;
B. Private garage for not more than three cars.
Such uses shall conform to the regulations of Section 165.13.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures —Mobile Home Parks.
A. Area and Width Requirements. Mobile home parks shall
have a lot area of one-half acre and a lot width of one hundred
(100) feet. Mobile home courts shall provide the minimum of
twelve hundred fifty (1250) square feet of space, excluding drives,
automobile parking places, and accessory buildings for each and
every mobile home accommodated. Each mobile home space
shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide and shall provide a
yard not less than five (5) feet wide on every side of the mobile
home. Other requirements for the trailer court are:
(1) Yard Requirements:
Front ...................................30 feet
Side.....................................15 feet each
Rear ....................................20 feet
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 620 -
(2) Sanitary Facilities. Connection with the municipal
sewer system or adequate private sewage disposal facilities
is required.
(3) Streets. Each mobile home lot shall have direct
access to a park street. The minimum roadway width of
interior park streets shall be as follows:
One-way, no parking..................... 11 feet
One-way, parking one side ........... 18 feet
One-way, parking both sides ........ 24 feet
Two-way, no parking.................... 24 feet
Two-way, parking one side........... 27 feet
Two-way, parking both sides........ 34 feet
Such streets shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete or
Portland cement according to City specifications for
residential streets and maintained in good condition and
lighted at night.
(4) Parking. Minimum requirements are as follows:
off-drive parking, two parking spaces for each “home”
space.
(5) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided from the
entrance of each mobile home to the service facilities.
These walks shall be constructed of concrete or asphaltic
concrete.
(6) Landscaping — Unused Area. All areas not used
for access, parking, circulation, buildings and service shall
be completely and permanently landscaped and the entire
site maintained in good condition. A landscaped strip of
land not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be established
and maintained within the mobile home park along its
exterior boundaries.
(7) Concrete Slab. Each mobile home unit lot shall be
equipped with a concrete slab of sufficient size to support
the wheels and the front parking jack. The slab shall have
a minimum horizontal dimension of eight by ten (8 x 10)
feet and minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
(8) Recreation Areas. There shall be provided within
each mobile home park an adequate site or sites for
recreational use by residents. The minimum area provided
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 621 -
for such recreation site or sites shall consist of an aggregate
of one hundred (100) square feet for each mobile home
space in the park. The recreation sites shall be of
appropriate design and provided with appropriate
equipment.
(9) Length of Occupancy. No mobile home shall
remain in a mobile home park for a period exceeding
fifteen (15) days without connection to the permanent
sanitary sewer system of the park.
(10) Drainage. The streets and all other areas of the park
shall be provided with drains and other provisions for
proper drainage of the park and the disposal of the drainage
shall be in a manner approved by the City such that public
and private property will not be damaged by storms or
water.
B. Location of Mobile Homes. It is unlawful for any person
to park or place any mobile home on a street, alley, highway, or
public place, or on any private land within the City, except as is
provided by State law and this chapter. This section shall not
apply to mobile homes parked or placed within mobile home
parks, or upon private property as part of a dealer’s or a
manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation.
C. Permanent Occupancy. A mobile home shall not be used
as a permanent dwelling place or for indefinite periods of time
except in a mobile home park, except those so used on December
1, 1975. Any mobile home removed from property not a mobile
home park shall not be replaced by a mobile home, unless
permitted by this chapter at such place.
D. Special Permits for Location of Mobile Homes Outside
Mobile Home Parks. No mobile home shall be placed or parked
outside of mobile home parks, except by a permit granted by the
Council as set forth in this section. The Council, upon application
of a mobile home owner of a mobile home located outside a
mobile home park as permitted under this section, may issue a
special permit for the location of a mobile home outside mobile
home parks. Not more than one mobile home shall be permitted
to be located on the same premises outside mobile home parks.
The Council shall issue such special permits when it appears that
location within local mobile home parks is impracticable and
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 622 -
public health, safety, and welfare interests will not be seriously
affected by granting the permit. Special permits shall not be
granted for periods in excess of one year, but upon expiration of
the special permit reapplication may be made.
165.24 C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area
Motels and Auto Courts..... 1/2 acre
Other Uses.......................... none
B. Minimum Lot Width
Motels and Auto Courts..... 100 feet
Other Uses.......................... none
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Motels and Auto Courts:
Front................................... 30 feet
Each Side ........................... 15 feet
Rear.................................... 20 feet
Other Uses: None, except where adjacent to
an R District, rear and side yards of 10 feet are required.
D. Maximum Height Requirements:
All uses .............................. 3 stories or 35 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Outdoor advertising signs and billboards are
permitted, provided that no such sign or billboard is permitted where the
majority (more than 50%) of the buildings on the block are exclusively
residential on both sides of the street, or which sign or billboard faces the
front or side lot line of any lots in an R district used for residential
purpose or which faces any public parkway, square, or entrance to any
public park, school, church, or similar institution within three hundred
(300) feet thereof. No sign shall be located in such a manner or place as
will constitute a hazard to endanger or impair the safety of pedestrians or
motorists. No flashing signs are allowed on the sides of lots adjacent to a
residential district.
3. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
A. Clothing and apparel services, including laundry pickup,
automatic laundry, dressmaking, millinery, tailor shop and shoe
repair shop;
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 623 -
B. Food services including grocery, meat market, bakery,
restaurant, delicatessen and fruit market, ice-o-mats and similar
self-serve units, but not including any business of a drive-in
nature;
C. Personal services, including barbershop and beauty salon,
medical and dental clinics, music studios, banks and saving and
loan association;
D. Retail services, including drug store, hardware, gift shop,
and dry goods and notions store.
E. Retail home centers and building materials.
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any
permitted principal use;
B. Parking lots and storage garages.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. Subject to approval by the
Board of Adjustment, the following are permitted provided there is no
offensive emission of noise, odor, dust or vibration:
A. Dairy product manufacturing;
B. Commercial bakeries;
C. Cleaning, drying, laundry works;
D. Food and fiber products manufacturing;
E. Sign painting shop;
F. Truck terminals, plus related services;
G. Wood products manufacturing;
H. Movie theater, excluding drive-in theater;
I. Tavern;
J. Single and multi-family dwellings provided that one offstreet
on premise parking space must be provided for each
dwelling unit;
K. Any use permitted in the C-2 District Zone Regulations
shall apply.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 624 -
165.25 C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area ............ None
B. Minimum Lot Width .......... None
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front......................................................... 40 feet
Each Side: None, except while
abutting an A or R District....................... 25 feet
Rear: None, except where
abutting an A or R District....................... 40 feet
Corner Lot, Side Yard.............................. 12 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements:
All uses .................................................... 35 feet
2. Permitted Signs. Billboards pertaining only to a use conducted or
product sold on the premises are permitted.
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Drive-in eating establishments
Automobile, trailer or farm implement establishment
for sales and repair
50% of floor area
Gasoline service stations, truck terminals, including
servicing
50% of floor area
Motels and auto courts
1 space/room plus
1 space/employee
Restaurants and cafes 200% of floor area
Taverns 200% of floor area
Ballrooms and dance halls 200% of floor area
Bowling alleys 5 spaces/alley
Skating rinks, golf driving ranges, other open-air
recreation
Principal uses permitted in the C-1 District
Funeral home and mortuary 1 space/4 seats in chapel
Churches, public and private schools and other
educational institutions
1 space/5 seats in auditorium,
or if no auditorium,
1 space/office and classroom
Hospitals and clinics 1 space/4 beds
Non-commercial parks, playgrounds, community
buildings owned or operated by public or semi-public
agencies
None
(Ord. 646 - Mar. 98 Supp.)
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 625 -
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any
permitted principal use;
B. Temporary buildings used in construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly on completion of such
work.
Such uses shall conform to the regulations of Section 165.13 of this
chapter.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. The following uses and
structures are permitted, subject to positive recommendation from the
Board of Adjustment.
A. Well-drilling services, including the storage and use of
equipment for wells not to exceed ten (10) inches in inside
diameter. The request for special use shall be accompanied by a
site plan showing the location of all buildings and all outside
storage areas. The outside storage areas shall be enclosed, with
the type of enclosure, either manmade or landscaped, to be
indicated on said site plan.
165.26 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area.............None
B. Minimum Lot Width...........None
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front .........................................................40 feet
Side...........................................................None
Rear ..........................................................15 feet
Rear, double-frontage lot..........................40 feet
Rear and Each Side: Where adjacent
to an R District .........................................100 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements: Not in excess of the
distance measured to the nearest right-of-way.
2. Permitted Signs. Billboards pertaining only to a use conducted or
product sold on the premises are permitted.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 626 -
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Any use permitted in the C-2 District
Grain elevators
Light foundry casting
Iron works (ornamental)
Paper products manufacturing AND
Plastic products manufacturing (previously prepared
material)
1 space/3 employees of
maximum working shift
Contractor’s storage yard
Well-drilling service
Seed corn processing
Lumber yards
(Ord. 700 – Jun. 03 Supp.)
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Any accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use;
B. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with
construction, provided such buildings are promptly removed upon
completion of the work;
C. Parking lots and storage garages.
Such uses shall conform to the regulations of Section 165.13 of this
chapter.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. Subject to the provisions
of Section 165.33 and other provisions contained herein, the Board of
Adjustment may permit other uses similar to the principal uses provided
they are not obnoxious or offensive for reasons of emission of odor, dust,
smoke, gas, noise, vibrations, refuse matter, or water-carried waste.
165.27 I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area ............ None
B. Minimum Lot Width .......... None
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front......................................................... 40 feet
Side .......................................................... None
Rear.......................................................... 15 feet
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 627 -
Rear, double-frontage lot..........................40 feet
Rear and Each Side: Where adjacent
to an R District .........................................100 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements: Not in excess of the
distance measured to the nearest right-of-way.
2. Permitted Signs. Billboards pertaining only to a use conducted or
product sold on the premises are permitted.
3. Permitted Principal Uses —Off-Street Parking.
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Any use permitted in I-1 District
Machine shop
Heavy foundry casting
Plastic products manufacturing
1 space/3 employees of
minimum working shift
Forging plant
Wood-working mill
Die casting
Feed manufacturing
The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse or watercarried
waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust,
smoke, gas, or noise shall be employed.
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Any accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use;
B. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with
construction, provided such buildings are promptly removed upon
completion of work;
C. Parking lots and storage garages.
Such uses shall conform to the regulations of Section 165.13.
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. None.
165.28 I-3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
1. Lot, Yard and Height Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area.............None
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 628 -
B. Minimum Lot Width .......... None
C. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front......................................................... 40 feet
Side .......................................................... None
Rear.......................................................... 15 feet
Rear, double-frontage lot ......................... 40 feet
Rear and Each Side: Where adjacent
to an R District......................................... 100 feet
D. Maximum Height Requirements: Not in excess of the
distance measured to the nearest right-of-way.
2. Permitted Signs. Billboards pertaining only to a use conducted or
product sold on the premises are permitted.
3. Permitted Principal Uses — Off-Street Parking. Providing
positive recommendation is received from the Commission and approved
by the Council, the following uses are permitted:
Permitted Principal Uses and Structures Minimum Required
Off-street Parking
Slaughterhouses, stockyards
Acid manufacture and wholesale storage
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacturing
Chemical or explosive manufacturing
Distillation of bones, fat rendering
1 space/3 employees of
maximum working shift
Fertilizer and rubber goods manufacturing
Petroleum products, refining or wholesale storage
Quarrying, gas manufacturing
Principal uses permitted in the I-2 District
Grain processing
4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures are permitted:
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any
of the uses listed in subsection 3 of this section;
B. Dwelling, school, hospital clinics or other institution of
human care clearly incidental to the permitted principal use;
C. Parking lots and storage garages.
Such uses shall conform to the regulations of Section 165.13 of this
chapter.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 629 -
5. Special Exception Uses and Structures. Subject to approval by the
Board of Adjustment the following uses and structures are permitted:
A. Junkyards, provided that such activity is completely
enclosed within a building, wall, or fence at least six (6) feet high
obscuring the activity from any place off the premises. This shall
also require approval by the Commission and Council.
B. All uses, permitted principal or otherwise, shall utilize the
best practical means known for disposal of refuse or water-carried
waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke,
gas, or noise.
165.29 PUBLIC ACCESS DRIVES. Where a lot does not abut on a public
or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive
not less than eight (8) feet in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than
sixteen (16) feet in width in all cases leading to the loading or unloading spaces
and parking or storage areas required hereunder.
165.30 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS. Every parcel of land
hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial
parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. No part of any parking space shall be closer than five (5) feet to
any established street right-of-way, or alley line.
2. Any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot,
for more than two vehicles shall be surfaced with a material approved by
the City Engineer, so as to provide a durable surface; shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the
area; and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and
safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of self-propelled
vehicles.
3. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area,
including any commercial parking lot, shall be so arranged as to reflect
the light away from adjoining premises in any residential district.
4. Storm drainage improvements shall conform to Section 166.07 (2)
(G).
165.31 STORAGE AND PARKING OF VEHICLES IN R-1 AND R-2
DISTRICTS.
1. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined:
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 630 -
A. “Storage of motor vehicles” in the R-1 and R-2 Residential
Zone means the placing of motor vehicles, whether licensed or
not, in an open parking space.
B. “Open parking space” means an area in a rear yard of not
more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet in the open, per
vehicle, exclusive of a hard-surfaced driveway not exceeding
thirty (30) feet in length and twenty (20) feet in width.
C. “Owner” means the record holder of legal title.
2. Storage of Motor Vehicles Prohibited. It is unlawful for any
property owner to place in storage within an R-1 and R-2 Residential
District any motor vehicle (except those permitted by Section 165.19)
within an open parking space without first obtaining written permission
from the Police Chief or designated authority.
3. Permitted Open Parking Spaces. There shall be permitted a
maximum of two (2) open parking spaces per residential lot, or combined
lots if dwelling is constructed on more than one lot, in both the R-1 and
R-2 zones. For multi-family dwellings in excess of two units, there may
be two open parking spaces per unit.
4. Storage and Parking of Equipment Prohibited. No equipment
shall be parked or stored in an open parking space in an R-1 or R-2 Zone
without first obtaining written permission from the Police Chief or
designated authority. For purposes of this section, “equipment” is
defined as any device which may be driven, transported or pulled upon a
highway or street other than a passenger vehicle, van or pickup truck.
165.32 EXCEPTIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS. The regulations
specified in this chapter are subject to the following exceptions and
interpretations.
1. Use of Existing Lots of Records. In any district where dwellings
are permitted, a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot or plot
of official records as of the effective date of this chapter irrespective of
its area or width; provided, however:
A. Each side yard width of any such lot shall not be less than
ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, and in no case less than
five (5) feet.
B. The depth of the rear yard of any such lot shall be not less
than twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, but in no case
less than twenty-five (25) feet.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 631 -
2. Structures Permitted Above Height Limit. The building height
limitations of this section shall be modified as follows:
A. Chimneys, fire towers, monuments, water towers,
ornamental towers and spirals, radio or television towers, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in
excess of the height regulations shown for a particular district,
provided that a report and recommendation is made by the
Commission, and final approval for such exception is granted by
the Council.
B. Public, semipublic, or public service buildings, hospitals,
or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height
in excess of the height allowed in the district, provided that the
building is set back from each property line at least one foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit in
the district.
3. Area Requirements. In any district where public or central water
supply or public sanitary sewer is more than 250 feet from any property
line, the lot area requirements are one acre, exclusive of rights-of-way,
and lot width at the building line shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
4. Double Frontage Lots. Buildings on through lots and extending
through from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both
streets.
5. Exceptions to Prohibited Uses.
A. The Board of Adjustment may, by special permit after
public hearing, authorize the location of any of the following
buildings or uses in any district from which they are prohibited by
this section:
(1) Any public building erected and used by any
department of the City, County, State, or Federal
government;
(2) Airport or landing field;
(3) Community building or recreation field;
(4) Country clubs or golf courses;
(5) Public and private cemeteries.
B. Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above
buildings or uses, the Board shall refer the proposed application to
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 632 -
the Commission, which shall make a report within thirty (30) days
regarding the effect of such proposed building or use upon the
character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility
facilities, and other matters pertaining to the general welfare. No
action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed building
or use above referred to until and unless the report of the
Commission has been filed, provided, however, that if no report is
received within thirty (30) days, it shall be assumed that the
approval of the application has been given by the Commission.
6. Utilities and Railroads. Existing utilities and railroads may
continue to be operated and maintained in residential and commercial
districts, but no new utility or railroad structure other than the usual
poles, wires, and underground utilities, shall be established in such
districts, except when so authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
7. Fences. In any residential district, no fence or continuous planting
over three (3) feet in height shall be maintained in any front yard; no
fence or continuous planting over four (4) feet in height shall be
maintained in any side yard; and no fence or continuous planting over
eight (8) feet in height shall be maintained in a rear yard. In addition, in
any residential district, no fence or continuous planting shall be
maintained within thirty (30) feet of any corner lot street line intersection
which would impair the sight distance of the operator of a motor vehicle.
No fence shall be constructed or reconstructed without a building permit
issued pursuant to Section 165.37 of this chapter. No fences are
permitted in the public street right-of-way.
8. Front Setback Exception. The front setback requirement
(minimum yard requirement) for the following property is hereby
changed from forty (40) feet to twenty (20) feet:
Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1)
of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One
(1) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of
Section 31, Township 89 North, Range 2 West of the 5th P.M.
and
Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1)
of Lot One (1) of Lot One (1) of Lot Two (2) of the Southeast Quarter
(SE¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section 31, Township 89
North, Range 2 West of the 5th P.M.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 633 -
165.33 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1. Board Created. A Board of Adjustment is established, which shall
consist of five (5) members appointed by the Council and two (2)
members appointed as provided in Section 414.23 of the Code of Iowa.
The terms of office of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
as provided by statute.
2. Meetings. The meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held
at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may
determine. Such Chairperson or, in his/her absence, the acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this
Code of Ordinances or with the Code of Iowa, and may select or appoint
such officers as it deems necessary. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of
its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Clerk, and shall be a public record.
The presence of five (5) members shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum.
3. Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by
any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or board of the City
affected by any decision of the Council. Such appeal shall be taken
within ten (10) days by filing with the Council, and with the Board of
Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The City
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
4. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Council certifies to
the Board, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in their opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Board, or by a court of record on application on notice to the Council,
and on due cause shown.
5. Notice of Hearing; Fee. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing on the appeal or application, give public notice thereof, as well
as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same in reasonable
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 634 -
time. Before the appeal or application is filed with the Board of
Adjustment, the appellant shall pay a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
to the City for costs due to notifications and publications.
(Ord. 704 – Apr. 04 Supp.)
6. Jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers set
out in this section, and it shall be its duty to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Council in the enforcement of this chapter.
7. Exceptions. In hearing and deciding appeals, the Board shall have
the power to grant an exception in the following instances:
A. Permit the extension of district where the boundary line of
a district divides a lot of record held in a single ownership.
B. Grant a variation in the regulations when a property owner
can show that the property was acquired in good faith, and where
by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property, or where by reason of topographical
conditions, or other extraordinary situations, the strict application
of the terms of this chapter actually prohibits the use of the
property in a manner reasonably similar to that of other property
in the district, and where the Board is satisfied under the evidence
before it that the granting of such variation will alleviate a clearly
demonstrable hardship, provided, however, that all variations
granted under this clause shall be in harmony with the intended
spirit and purpose of this chapter.
C. Permit the erection and use of a building, or the use of
premises for a railroad, or public utility purposes.
D. Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building
which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the
public enemy to the extent of more than sixty-five percent (65%)
of its fair market value, where the Board finds some compelling
necessity requiring a continuance. The primary purposes of
continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly.
E. Reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the
districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to
make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading
facilities, or where such regulations would impose an
unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with
merely granting an advantage or a convenience;
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 635 -
F. Determine the district in which a commercial venture or
industry should be located where such commercial venture or
industry is not specifically mentioned in this chapter. Such
classification shall be based upon comparison with other similar
uses specifically mentioned, and on an evaluation of its operation
and effect upon uses within the surrounding district, or districts;
8. Exceptions in Floodway or Floodway Fringe Districts. A variance
from strict compliance of floodway or Floodway Fringe Overlay District
regulations may be granted only if the structure is to be erected on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size and such lot is contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation, or the structure is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places to be restored or reconstructed. Variances from strict compliance
of the overlay district regulations shall not be issued except upon:
A. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
B. A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
C. A determination that the variance issuance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local or State
laws or ordinances.
Variances from strict compliance of the overlay districts regulations may
only be issued upon a determination that the applicant requesting a
variance shall meet the minimum necessary standards of the regulations
to afford relief. The Board of Adjustment will notify the applicant that
the issuance of a variance to locate a structure at an elevation below the
one hundred year flood level will result in increased actuarial rates for
flood insurance coverage.
9. Standards for Decisions of Board. In considering all appeals, and
all proposed exceptions or variations to this chapter, the Board shall,
before making any exceptions or variations, first determine that it will
not impair the safety and welfare of the occupants of adjoining and
surrounding property, that health has been adequately safe-guarded, that
it will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property,
shall not increase congestion in the public streets, and shall not diminish
or impair established property values in surrounding areas. The
concurring vote of five members of the Board shall be necessary to
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 636 -
reverse any order or decision of the Council, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is authorized by this section to
render a decision.
10. Limitations on Board. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to give or grant to the Board of Adjustment the power of
authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map, such power
and authority being reserved to the Council in the manner provided in
Section 165.39 of this chapter.
11. Notice. The Board shall make no finding except in a specific
case, and after a public hearing conducted by the Board. A notice of the
time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a Dubuque
County publication of general circulation in the City at least seven (7)
days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the address or
location of the property for which variation, or other ruling by the Board,
is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal.
12. Records. The action of the Board shall not become effective until
after the resolution of the Board, setting forth the full reason for its
decision, and the vote of each member participating therein, has been
recorded in the minutes. Such resolution, immediately following the
Board’s final decision, shall be filed in the office of the Board, and it
shall be open to public inspection. Every variation and exception granted
or denied by the Board shall be supported by a written testimony, or
evidence submitted in connection therewith.
13. Review by Council. The Council may review variances and
exceptions granted by the Board of Adjustment prior to the effective date
of the variance or exception. No variance or exception shall become
effective prior to the next regularly scheduled Council meeting after the
granting of the variance or exception. The Council may remand a
decision of the Board of Adjustment to grant a variance or exception to
the Board of Adjustment for further study. The effective date of the
variance or exception is delayed for thirty (30) days from the date of the
remand.
14. Court Appeal. Any taxpayer, or any officer, department, or board
of the City, or any person or persons jointly or separately aggrieved by
any decision of the Board, may present to a court of record a position to
be verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole, or part,
specifying the ground of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented
to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board. Upon the presentation of such petition the court may
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 637 -
direct the Board to review such decision of the Board, and shall prescribe
therein the time within which a return thereto shall be made, which shall
be not less than ten (10) days, and be extended by the court.
15. Court Writ. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings
on the decisions appealed from, but the court may, on application, upon
notice to the Board, and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. If
upon the hearing it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary
for proper disposition of the matter, it may take such evidence, or appoint
a referee to take such evidence, as it may direct, and report the same to
the court with the findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the
court shall be made.
16. Court Costs. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be
allowed against the Board, unless it shall appear to the court that the
Board acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in
making the decision appealed from.
165.34 APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND
CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE. Building permits must be approved
before the beginning of construction, and a certificate of compliance shall be
issued within ten (10) days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building
is completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
administrative officer, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person
having a proprietary, or tenancy interest in the building affected.
165.35 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. No land shall be occupied or
used, and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied
or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of
occupancy is issued by the Council, stating the building and use comply with
the provisions of this chapter and other building and health ordinances of the
City. No change of use shall be made in any building, or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected, or structurally altered, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
be issued to make a change and unless the changes are in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
165.36 NONCONFORMING USES; CERTIFICATES. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use as herein
authorized, unless a discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or
property. Certificates of occupancy shall be given to each nonconforming use
indicating its status as a lawful, nonconforming use as of the time when it
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 638 -
legally became a nonconforming use, and requiring that any change in use
requires a new permit and certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy
for the nonconforming use shall be transmitted by the owner to any succeeding
owner of the property in order to confirm its legal existence.
165.37 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT; PROCEDURE. To
obtain a building permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in
writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
lot, block tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction;
5. Be accompanied by a plat, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the
building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this chapter;
6. Be signed by the permittee or authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
7. Within designated flood prone areas, be accompanied by
elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor
(including basement) or in the case of floodproofed nonresidential
structures, the elevation to which it has been floodproofed.
Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by
the City Administrator;
8. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Council such as:
A. A typical valley showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, crosssectional
areas to be corrupted by the proposed development and
higher water information,
B. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 639 -
and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary
facilities, photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation
upstream and downstream, soil types and other pertinent
information,
C. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or
flow line of the stream.
The Council shall review all building permit applications to determine if the site
of the proposed development is reasonably safe from flooding and that all
necessary permits have been received as required by Federal or State law
(including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S. Code 1334) and make recommendations for development in all
locations which have flood hazards.
165.38 NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION. Any party having obtained
a building permit shall notify the Council when the erection or alteration of the
building is completed. The certificate of compliance shall then be issued
according to Section 165.34 if the building is found to be in compliance with
this chapter and any other building requirements of the City.
165.39 AMENDMENTS.
1. Initiation. The Council may from time to time, on its own motion
or petition, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal by ordinance
the boundaries of districts or regulations, or restrictions established in
this chapter. Any proposed amendments, supplement, change,
modification or repeal shall be filed with the Clerk. Such proposed
amendment, supplement, modification or change shall clearly describe
the property and its boundaries and to which district the amendment,
supplement, modification or change is desired, with the ownership of the
property sworn to under oath by the applicant.
2. Petition. When the proposed amendment, supplement,
modification, or change is by petition it shall be duly signed by the
owners of fifty percent (50%) of all real estate included within the
boundaries of the area petitioned for change and in addition, be duly
signed by the owners of fifty percent (50%) of the area of all real estate
lying outside of said tract, but within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
boundaries thereof, intervening streets and alleys not to be included in
computing such two hundred fifty (250) feet. The Council shall refer the
proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal to the
Commission for its recommendations and report.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 640 -
3. Commission Report. If the Commission makes no report within
thirty (30) days, it shall be considered to have made a report approving
the proposed amendment, supplement or modification.
4. Hearing. After the recommendations and the report of the
Commission have been filed, the Council shall before enacting any
proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal, hold a
public hearing in relation thereto, giving at least seven days’ notice of the
time and place of such hearing, which notice shall first be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the City.
5. Council Vote. If the Commission recommends against, or if a
protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal is presented in writing to the Clerk, duly signed by
the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in
the rear thereof extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed two
hundred (200) feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto,
extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed two hundred (200) feet
from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment,
supplement, change, modifications, or repeal shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of all members of the Council.
6. Renewal after Denial. Whenever a petition for an amendment,
supplement, modification or change of the zoning or regulations herein
contained, or subsequently established, shall have been denied by the
Council, then no new petition covering the same property, or the same
property and additional property, shall be filed with or considered by the
Council until one year shall have elapsed from the date of the filing of
the first petition.
7. Application Fees.
A. Rezoning Petition. Before any action shall be taken as
provided in this chapter, the party which petitions for a change in
the district regulations or district boundaries shall pay an
application fee of one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125.00)
for costs due to printing of notifications, publications and legal
fees encountered by the City. Under no circumstance shall said
sum, or any part thereof, be refunded for failure of the change to
be adopted by the Council.
B. Final Subdivision Plat. Before any action shall be taken on
a final subdivision plat, the party which submits such plat shall
pay an application fee based on the following schedule for costs
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 641 -
due to printing of notifications and legal fees encountered by the
City. Under no circumstance shall said sum, or any part thereof,
be refunded for failure of the plat to be adopted by the Council.
(1) Plats consisting of public streets or utilities - $200.00
(2) Plats with no public streets or utilities - $125.00
(Ord. 704 – Apr. 04 Supp.)
165.40 FLOODWAY AND FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICTS.
1. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation. The flood
hazard areas of the City are subject to inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. General Causes of These Flood Losses. These flood losses are
caused by:
A. The cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing
increases in flood heights and velocities;
B. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flood damages.
3. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This section uses a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series
of interrelated steps.
A. Selections of a regulatory flood which is based upon
engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such
flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area
inundated, and the depth of inundation. The regulatory flood
selected for this section is representative of large floods known to
have occurred in this region and which are reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular
streams subject to this section. It is in the general order of a flood
which could be expected to occur on the average once every one
hundred years or has a one percent chance of occurrence in any
one year, as delineated on the Flood Insurance Study and
Illustrative Material (FIRM) dated June 2, 1995.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 642 -
B. Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood;
C. Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood
without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point;
D. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which
no obstruction is permitted which would cause any increase in
flood height;
E. Delineation of the floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside
the floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to
inundation by the regulatory flood.
4 Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described herein by provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flood or cause increased flood
heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection
at the time of initial construction;
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited
for intended purposes because of flood hazard;
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in
the community to purchase flood insurance in the Federal Flood
Insurance Program.
5. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This section does not imply that areas
outside floodways and floodway fringe district boundaries or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City, or
any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result
from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 643 -
6. Definitions.
A. “Actuarial rates” or “risk premium rates” are those rates
established by the Administrator pursuant to individual
community studies and investigations which are undertaken to
provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014 and
the accepted actuarial principles. Actuarial rates include
provisions for operating costs and allowances.
B. “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
C. “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse of
perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and
conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. “Channel
flow” is that water which is flowing within the limits of a defined
channel.
D. “Crawl space” means any open space located within the
foundation of a structure and under the lowest habitable floor of
said structure, not to exceed three and one-half feet in height.
E. “Development” means any manmade change to improved
or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
F. “Flood” means a temporary rise in a stream’s flow or stage
that results in water overlapping its banks and inundating areas
adjacent to the channel; an unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff or surface waters from any source.
G. “Flood elevation determinations” means a determination of
the water surface elevations of the one-hundred-year flood; that is,
the level of flooding that has a one percent chance of occurrence
in any given year.
H. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official
map prepared by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration for a community
delineating where flood insurance may be sold and the risk
premium zones applicable to such area.
I. “Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means the official report
provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report
contains flood profiles and water surface elevations for various
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 644 -
flood frequencies as well as the boundaries and water surface
elevations of the one-hundred-year flood.
J. “Flood plain management” means the operation of an
overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plan, flood-control works and flood plain
management regulations.
K. “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the
entry of water. Structural components shall have the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy.
L. “Flood protection system” means those physical structural
works constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to
reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a
special flood hazard. Such a system typically includes levees or
dikes. These specialized modifying works are those constructed
in conformance with sound federal engineering standards.
M. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent portion of the flood plain that must
be reserved in order to discharge the one-hundred-year flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot at any point assuming equal conveyance reduction
outside the channel from the two sides of the flood plain.
N. “Floodway Fringe” means that area of the flood plain,
outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to be flooded
once every one hundred years (i.e., that has a one percent chance
of flood occurrence in any one year).
O. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area
in a building, including a basement except when all the following
criteria are met:
(1) The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings
that satisfy the provisions of subsection (13)(D)(1) of this
section, and
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 645 -
(2) The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted,
drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential
uses such as building access, parking or storage, and
(3) Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water
heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the
enclosed area are located at least one (1) foot above the
one-hundred-year flood level.
(4) The floor of the enclosed area is not subgrade on all
sides.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria (1), (2),
(3), and (4) above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest
enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
P. “Factory built home” means any structure, designed for
residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made,
fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
installation or assembly and installation, on building site. For the
purpose of this section, factory built homes include mobile homes,
manufactured homes and modular homes, and also include park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site
for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Q. “Factory built home park” means a parcel or continuous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory built home lots
for rent or sale.
R. “New construction” means those structures where new
construction or substantial improvement of which is begun after
December 31, 1974, or the effective date of the FIRM, whichever
is later.
S. “One-hundred-year flood” means the base flood having a
one percent chance of annual occurrence.
T. “Overlay District” means a district which acts in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
U. “Regulatory flood elevation” means elevation indicated on
the FIRM as the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
V. “Regulatory flood protection elevation” means an elevation
one foot higher than the water surface elevation of the regulatory
flood.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 646 -
W. “Storm cellar” means a space below grade used to
accommodate occupants of a structure and emergency supplies as
a means of temporary shelter against severe tornado or similar
wind storm activity.
X. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure
to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Y. “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
“substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by twenty-five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed
after November 19, 1980, shall be added to any proposed addition
in determining whether the total increase in original floor space
would exceed twenty-five percent (25%).
Z. “Violation” means a failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the City’s flood plain
management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in this section is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
7. Overlay Districts; Generally. In addition to the nine (9) classes of
districts, the mapped flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this
section are divided into the two following districts:
A. A Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Floodway Fringe
Overlay District (FF) identified in the Flood Insurance Study
[flood boundary and floodway map(s)]. The boundaries of these
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 647 -
districts shall be shown on the official zoning map. Within these
districts all uses not meeting the standards for the Floodway
Overlay District and the Floodway Fringe Overlay District and
those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be
prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered
and unnumbered “A” zones as identified on the official FIRM and
identified in the Flood Insurance Study provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration.
8. Overlay Districts; Boundaries. The boundaries of the Floodway
and Floodway Fringe Overlay Districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the official zoning map (zone plan). Where interpretation is
needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown
on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the
enforcement official shall make the necessary interpretation. In such
cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will
resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in
question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on
the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case to the
Board and to submit technical evidence, if said person so desires.
9. Permitted Uses; Floodway Overlay District. The following uses
shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not
prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and
provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built
homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of materials or equipment,
excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial/commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking
and horseback riding trails.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 648 -
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and
play areas.
E. Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.
10. Conditional Uses; Floodway Overlay District. The following uses
which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of
materials or equipment may be permitted only upon issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in
subsection 16 of this section. Such uses must also meet the applicable
provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
A. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
B. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement
enterprises.
C. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands,
signs, and billboards.
D. Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.
E. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves.
F. Utility transmission lines, underground pipelines.
G. Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection
9 or this subsection 10 which are consistent with the provisions of
subsection 11 and the general spirit and purpose of this section.
11. Performance Standards; Floodway Overlay District. All
Floodway District uses allowed as a Permitted or Conditional Use shall
meet the following standards:
A. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100 year flood level.
Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels
shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of
development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
B. All uses within the Floodway District shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 649 -
(3) Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage
ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
D. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.
12. Permitted Uses; Floodway Fringe Overlay District. Any use
permitted in subsections 9 and 10 and in other zoning districts shall be
permitted in the Floodway Fringe Overlay District. No uses shall be
permitted in the district unless the standards of subsection 13 are met.
13. Performance Standards; Floodway Fringe Overlay District. All
uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
shall meet the following applicable performance standards.
A. All structures shall (i) be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, (ii) be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage, and (iii) be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
B. Residential Buildings — All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basements, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year
flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year
flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable
consideration by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources and
the Board of Adjustment and issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors
preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstanding the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 650 -
C. Nonresidential Buildings — all new and substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall have the first floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is
utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and
that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Council.
D. All new and substantially improved structures:
(1) Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided,
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot above grade,
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
(2) New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 651 -
(3) New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
E. Factory-built homes — Factory-built homes including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivision
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
and shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above
the 100-year flood level.
F. Utility and Sanitary Systems:
(1) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize and eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the system as well as the discharge of
effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to
or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
(2) On-site disposal systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or
contamination from the system during flooding.
(3) New or replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities
shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or
greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
(4) Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage to the system and the risk associated with such
flood damaged or impaired systems.
G. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited
unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood
level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be
anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 652 -
readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
H. Flood control structural works such as levees, floodwalls,
etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year
flood with a minimum of 3 foot of design freeboard and shall
provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural
flood control works shall be approved by the Department of
Natural Resources.
I. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage
ditch, or other drainage facility or system.
J. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage. Development associated with
subdivision proposals shall meet the applicable performance
standards. Subdivision proposals intended for residential
development shall provide all lots with a means of vehicular
access that will remain dry during occurrence of the 100-year
flood.
K. The exemption of detached garages, utility sheds, no larger
than 24' x 24' and similar sized structures from the 100-year flood
elevation requirements may result in increased premium rates for
insurance coverage of the structure and contents, however, said
sheds and similar accessory type structures are exempt from the
100-year flood elevation requirements when:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters.
(4) Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure’s service facilities, such as electrical
and heating equipment, if any, shall be elevated or
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 653 -
floodproofed to at least one foot above the 100-year flood
level.
(6) For garages (not sheds) a conditional permit has
been granted by the Board of Adjustment.
14. Flood Proofing Certification. Where a nonresidential structure is
intended to be made water-tight below the base flood level, a registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section,
and a record of such certificates which includes the specific elevation to
which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained with the
Council.
15. Administration.
A. The Council shall:
(1) Review all flood plain development permit
applications to insure that the provisions of this section will
be satisfied.
(2) Review all flood plain development permit
applications to insure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from Federal, State or local governmental
agencies.
(3) Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in
relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest
floor of all new or substantially improved buildings or (ii)
the elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
(4) Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and
the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
(5) Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and
such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to
the administration of this section.
(6) Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an
annual report concerning the community’s participation,
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 654 -
utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
(7) Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any
annexations or modifications to the community’s
boundaries.
(8) Review subdivision proposals to insure such
proposals are consistent with the purpose of this section.
B. Permit Required. A Flood Plain Development Permit
issued by the Council shall be secured prior to initiation of any
flood plain development (any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations) including the placement of factory-built
homes.
C. Application for Permit. Application for a Flood Plain
Development Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the City
and shall include the following information:
(1) Description of the work to be covered by the permit
for which application is to be made.
(2) Description of the land on which the proposed work
is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar
description) that will readily identify and locate the work to
be done.
(3) Identification of the use or occupancy for which the
proposed work is intended.
(4) Elevation of the 100-year flood.
(5) Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical
Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
buildings or of the level to which a building is to be
floodproofed.
(6) For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the
estimated cost of improvements and market value of the
building prior to the improvements.
(7) Such other information as the Council deems
reasonably necessary for the purpose of this section.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 655 -
D. Action for Permit Application. The Council shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed
flood plain development meets the applicable provisions and
standards of this section and shall approve or disapprove the
application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in
writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Council shall not
issue permits or conditional uses or variances except as directed
by the Board of Adjustment.
E. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and
Plans. Flood Plain Development Permits issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and
no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as
appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of
this section, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
16. Exceptions and Modifications. No variance shall be granted for
any development within the Floodway District. The requirements and
standards of the floodway fringe area overlay district shall be complied
with, or a variance shall be granted by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with Section 165.33(7) of this chapter provided that:
A. The application for variance has been approved by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
B. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood
levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of
development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
C. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
section, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the
signature of the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment that (i)
the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 656 -
insurance coverage, and (ii) such construction increases risks to
life and property.
165.41 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
1. Violation and Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction,
shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances, and each day that a
violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. The Council
is designated and ordered to enforce this chapter.
2. Enforcement. In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or
any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the
Council, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action or
proceedings in the name of the City, to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance,
or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business, or use in or about said premises.
165.42 TOWERS AND ANTENNAS. The provisions of this section are
intended to regulate the location of towers and antennas. The
Telecommunications Act of 1996 restructured and deregulated many aspects of
the country’s communications industry. New wireless telecommunication
providers entering the market desire to build a network that may require
additional wireless telecommunications towers and antennas mounted on
existing buildings and other structures. The purpose of these regulations is to
encourage the use of the new technologies while protecting the safety and
aesthetics of the community.
1. Definitions:
A. “ANSI” means American National Standards Institute.
B. “Antenna array” means a grouping of antennas that
encompasses both transmitters and receivers of a single wireless
telecommunications provider.
C. “Antenna” means any exterior transmitting, reception or
receiving device mounted on a tower, building or freestanding
structure and used in transmission or reception of electromagnetic
waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or
other communication signals.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 657 -
D. “FAA” means Federal Aviation Administration.
E. “FCC” means Federal Communication Commission.
F. “Support facilities” means support buildings, boxes,
cabinets or similar structures containing electrical or mechanical
equipment and developed for the reception or transmission of
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication
signals or other communication signals.
G. “Tower height” means the distance measured from the
grade level at the base of the tower to the highest point on the
tower, including any antenna mounted on the tower.
H. “Tower” means any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term also includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, cellular telephone towers,
alternative tower structures, and other similar structures, and the
term includes the structure and any support thereto.
2. Applicability. Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
shall be regulated pursuant to this section and not regulated as essential
service, public utility or private utility. This section applies to all towers
and antennas except the following:
A. Individually owned residential receive-only antennas.
B. Satellite receiving dishes not larger than five (5) feet in
diameter (see accessory structures).
C. Existing or new public safety structures necessary for
broadcast of emergency communications or warning sirens
operated by governmental subdivisions.
3. Towers.
A. No tower or its associated support facilities shall be
constructed except in accordance with the following requirements:
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 658 -
ZONING
DISTRICTS
USE SETBACKS HEIGHT COLOR LIGHTING
Agricultural,
Residential,
Commercial
Conditional
Use Permit
required
Equal to the
height of the
tower in all
directions
Single users: not
more than 75 feet
Two or more
users: not more
than 150 feet
Towers shall
be finished in
a neutral color
to reduce
visual impact
subject to
applicable
FAA
regulations
No lighting of
tower unless
required by
FAA or other
governmental
regulations
Industrial Permitted
Use
Height allowed by
district in which
tower is located
B. Applicants proposing to construct a tower higher than
allowed by paragraph A may apply for a variance to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
C. Guys and support facilities must comply with setback
requirements for the district in which they are located.
D. Towers are prohibited in any public parks or recreation
areas.
E. Towers are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any historically
designated sites.
F. Application Requirements For Site Plan Review. Site
plans for towers shall be considered a major site plan. The
following information shall be submitted with the site plan:
? Site and landscape plans drawn to scale;
? A report, including a description and visual depiction of the tower, with
technical reasons for its design and an explanation of why existing towers
or other structures cannot be utilized;
? Engineered plans for the structure and foundation;
? The general capacity of the tower, and information necessary to assure
that ANSI standards are met;
? A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased;
? Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it;
? Copies of any easements necessary; and
? An analysis of the area containing existing topographical contours.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 659 -
4. Antennas. Antennas, and their essential support facilities, shall be
allowed as a permitted use in any zoning district subject to the following:
A. A simple site plan shall be submitted for each antenna or
antenna array providing the following information:
? Mounting location of proposed antenna or antenna array on host structure.
? Description of antenna or antenna array height and width, including a
photo (if available) or other visual representation.
? Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it.
B. The antenna does not extend more than thirty (30) feet
above the highest point of the host structure.
C. Antennas may be mounted on nonresidential structures,
including, but not limited to existing towers, traffic signals, street
lights, water towers, billboards, telephone tower and emergency
signal poles, bridges, and parking deck structures.
D. Antennas or antenna arrays shall comply with the
maximum height requirement of the zoning district in which they
are located. Applicants proposing an antenna higher than allowed
by the zoning district in which it will be located may apply for a
variance to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
E. No antenna or antenna array may, by virtue of this section,
occupy, encroach or “overhang” any public right-of-way without
the expressed approval of the City.
F. Each antenna installation shall require a separate building
permit.
5. Support Facilities. Support facilities shall be of a color and
construction that is compatible with surrounding development. Support
facilities shall not be more than four hundred (400) square feet of gross
floor area and more than twelve (12) feet in height. Setbacks for support
facilities shall be the same as the setbacks required for other structures in
the zoning district in which they are located.
6. Landscaping and Screening Requirements for Towers and Support
Facilities.
A. Support facilities and tower bases shall be landscaped with
a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens from view the
tower base and any support facilities from adjacent property or
street. The plantings installed shall be of a size and species that
can achieve a height of six (6) feet and seventy-five percent (75%)
opacity within three (3) growing seasons.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 660 -
B. In locations where the visual impact of the tower and
support facilities would be minimal, the landscape requirement
may be reduced or waived by the City.
C. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
property shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Natural growth around the property perimeter may be considered
a sufficient buffer for a proposed tower and support facilities, as
determined by the City.
7. Application Requirements for Conditional Use Permits. An
applicant proposing a tower that requires a conditional use permit for
construction in the zoning district for which it is proposed shall submit
the following information, in addition to requirements established in this
section:
? Site and landscape plans drawn to scale;
? A report, including a description and visual depiction of the tower, with technical
reasons for its design and an explanation why existing towers or other structures
cannot be utilized, including pre-approved City-owned locations;
? The general capacity of the tower and information necessary to assure that ANSI
standards are met;
? A statement of intent on whether the excess space will be leased; proof of
ownership of the proposed site or authorization to use it; copies of any easements
necessary; and
? An analysis of the area containing existing topographical contours.
8. Nonconforming Towers or Antennas. Any existing tower or
antenna which becomes nonconforming on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section†
A. New antennas and support facilities may be mounted on a
nonconforming tower.
or becomes nonconforming at any
future date shall be regulated according to the rules set forth in Section
165.36 of this chapter, except as follows:
B. A nonconforming tower within one thousand (1,000) feet
of a historic preservation district shall be considered a legal
nonconforming tower. As such, the tower may remain until it has
been abandoned.
C. Should any lawful nonconforming tower be destroyed by
any means to an extent of more than seventy-five percent (75%)
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 669 establishing regulations for the placement of towers and
antennas was adopted by the Council on July 7, 1999.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 661 -
of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may only be
reconstructed in conformance with the provisions of this section,
provided that the destruction was caused by an accident or act of
God occurring after the adoption of the ordinance codified herein,
and such reconstruction does not increase the degree of
nonconformity that existed prior to destruction.
9. Abandonment. The operator of a tower shall provide the City
with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations. The
operator shall have ninety (90) days from the date of ceasing operations
to remove the tower and support facilities. Any antenna or tower that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within ninety (90) days of issue date of the notice to
remove the tower or antenna. A maximum of two (2) twelve-month
extensions may be granted by the City Administrator if the tower
operator is actively seeking tenants for the subject tower. If the owner of
a tower fails, after notice, to remove the tower, the City shall begin the
civil citation process.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 662 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 165.06 of this chapter and have not been included as a part
of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal and are
in full force and effect.
Ordinance No. Date Adopted Ordinance No. Date Adopted
538 12-21-87 651 9-2-97
543 5-16-88 654 11-3-97
546 6-6-88 655 11-3-97
552 12-5-88 663 5-18-98
567 4-2-90 664 7-20-98
571 6-18-90 670 7-19-99
575 8-6-90 674 2-14-00
576 8-6-90 677 10-2-00
577 9-6-90 680 11-6-00
581 11-5-90 703 3-29-04
590 8-5-91 709 8-2-04
592 12-16-91 713 4-4-05
597 8-3-92 722 6-2-06
599 9-8-92 723 10-26-06
610 5-17-93 735 1-7-08
614 6-21-93 748 4-6-09
619 5-2-94 750 8-3-09
621 9-19-94 751 8-3-09
623 11-21-94 762 8-2-10
628 3-20-95 765 9-7-10
629 3-20-95
631 4-17-95
633 6-19-95
639 4-29-96
640 4-29-96
643 9-3-96
644 9-3-96
649 3-17-97
650 5-19-97
[The next page is 671]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 671 -
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
166.01 Title 166.06 Design Standards
166.02 Purpose 166.07 Required Improvements
166.03 Establishing Jurisdiction to Review 166.08 Plans and Data
166.04 Definitions 166.09 Violations and Penalties
166.05 Plats
166.01 TITLE. This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the “Land
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Dyersville, Iowa.”
166.02 PURPOSE. This chapter is to provide for the harmonious development of
the City; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or
planned streets or with other features of the City Plan of Dyersville; for adequate open
space for traffic, recreation, light and air; and for a distribution of population and
traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience
and prosperity.
166.03 ESTABLISHING JURISDICTION TO REVIEW.
1. Pursuant to the authority of Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, the City
does hereby extend its authority to review subdivisions outside the City’s
boundaries for a distance of two miles from the City’s boundaries.
2. All subdivisions of land within two miles of the boundaries of the City
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
166.04 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein
are defined as follows.
1. “Alley” means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
2. “Arterial streets and highways” means those which are used primarily
for fast or heavy traffic.
3. “Collector streets” means streets which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
4. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
City.
5. “Marginal access streets” means minor streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through-traffic.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 672 -
6. “Minor streets” means those streets which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
7. “Streets” means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
8. “Subdivision” means the division of a parcel of land into three or more
lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land;
provided, that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of
five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a
subdivision. “Subdivision” includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to
the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or the land subdivided.
166.05 PLATS.
1. Plat Required. It is unlawful for the owner, agent, or persons having
control of any land within the corporate limits of the City, or within two miles
thereof of its corporate limits, to subdivide or lay out such land into lots,
blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds, unless by plat in
accordance with the laws of the State of Iowa and the provisions of this
chapter. The owner of any tract or parcel of land, which has been subdivided
or shall hereafter be subdivided, surveyed or platted into two (2) or more parts,
for any purpose, shall cause a plat of such area to be made in the form, and
containing the information, as hereinafter set forth, before sale or conveyance
of any lot, before commencing construction on any lot therein and/or before
recording the plat. No tract or parcel of land shall be divided into three (3) or
more parts, whether the result of a single division or series of divisions, unless
such plats follow the subdivision procedures and requirements as prescribed by
this chapter. For purposes of this section, a tract or parcel shall be considered
to have been subdivided if there has been any previous division of the original
40 acre aliquot part, as defined by Iowa Code Section 354.2, in which the tract
or parcel is located in whole or in part. A plat of a tract or parcel containing
more than one lot which is reconfigured into a tract or parcel containing the
same number or fewer lots shall follow the subdivision procedures and
requirements as prescribed by this chapter. However, if the tract or parcel was
not
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 673 -
subject to the approval of the Council when previously divided, or if the tract
or parcel is reconfigured into a tract or parcel containing either one or two lots,
the plat shall follow the simple division procedures and requirements as
prescribed by this chapter.
A. Present a plat prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor under
the laws of the State of Iowa.
B. The City shall receive a copy of the recorded plat.
C. The plat shall bear the endorsement of:
(1) Owners and proprietors, and spouses, if any.
(2) Dyersville Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) Mayor and City Clerk.
(4) County Auditor.
(5) County Assessor.
(6) Clerk of the District Court.
(7) County Treasurer.
(8) County Recorder.
(9) Certification of Examination of Abstract.
(10) Resolution by the City approving said plat.
Provided, however, the owner of existing lots of record, where all
improvements, such as streets and utilities have been installed by the developer
and accepted by the City, may convey a portion of said existing lot of record
by a metes and bounds description if such description is found to be acceptable
by the County Recorder and the County Auditor. Such conveyance must leave
the remaining property with sufficient property to meet existing setback
requirements for any existing buildings on said property or uses of said
property.
2. Plans and Data. Previous to the filing of an application for conditional
approval of the preliminary plat (general subdivision plan), the subdivider shall
submit to the Commission plans and data as specified in Section 165.08 of this
chapter. This step does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat
with the Commission. Within thirty (30) days the Commission shall inform
the subdivider that the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do not
meet the objectives of these regulations. When the Commission finds the
plans
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 674 -
and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations it shall give its reasons
therefor.
3. Procedure for Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat. The
procedures for conditional approval of a preliminary plat are as follows:
A. Preparation of Materials. On reaching conclusions informally
as recommended in subsection 2 regarding the general program and
objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat,
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as
specified in Section 165.08 of this chapter.
B. Copies and Written Application. Five copies of the preliminary
plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the
Commission with written application for conditional approval at least
five days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Commission Conditional Approval. Following review of the
preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to
these regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes
deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made
by the subdivider, the Commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act
thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved, the Commission
shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the
conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its
disapproval and its reasons therefor.
D. Location of Copies of Decision. The action of the Commission
shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and
attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to
the subdivider and the other retained by the Commission.
4. Limitations. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute approval of the final plat (subdivision plat). Rather, it shall be
deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary
plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for
approval of the Commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the conditional
approval, if any.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 675 -
5. Procedure for Approval of Final Plat. The procedures for approval of a
final plat are as follows:
A. Conforming of Final Plat. The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
B. Application. Application for approval of the final plat shall be
submitted in writing to the Commission at least seven days prior to the
meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Limitations. Five copies of the final plat and other exhibits
required for approval shall be prepared as specified in Section 165.08,
and shall be submitted to the Commission within twelve months after
approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, such conditional approval
shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for
and granted by the Commission.
D. Final Approval. Within thirty (30) days after application for
approval of the final plat, the Commission shall approve or disapprove
it. If the Commission approves, it shall affix its seal upon the plat
together with the certified signature of its Chairperson and Secretary.
If it disapproves, it shall state its reasons in its own records and provide
the applicant with a copy. After approval of the final plat by the
Commission, and the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, one copy shall be submitted to the Clerk for approval by
the Council.
E. Action of the Council. Upon receipt of the certification by the
Clerk, the Council shall, within a reasonable time, either approve or
disapprove the final plat.
(1) In the event that the plat is disapproved by the Council,
such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point
out wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
(2) In the event that the plat is found to be acceptable and in
accordance with this chapter, the Council shall accept the same.
(3) The passage of a resolution by the Council accepting the
plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area
shown on the final plat. The subdivider or owner shall cause
such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
the County where the land to be subdivided is located, and shall
file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the
Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full
force and effect. However, said resolution shall not be
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 676 -
delivered to the subdivider for recording until such time as the
subdivider signs acceptance of the terms of the resolution and
provides the required security to the City.
166.06 DESIGN STANDARDS.
1. Streets. Design standards for streets are as follows:
A. Conformity. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade,
and location of all streets shall conform to the general community
master plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and
safety and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the land
to be served by such streets.
B. Alternatives. Where such is not shown in the general
community master plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision
shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or
adopted by the Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance of
conformance to existing streets impracticable.
C. Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be laid out to be used
primarily for access to the abutting properties.
D. Subdivision Abutments. Where a subdivision abuts or contains
an existing or proposed arterial street, the Commission may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained
in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with
rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
E. Right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the
Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each
side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use
of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or
for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements
of approach grades and future grade separations.
F. Controlling Access Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely
placed in the City under conditions approved by the Commission.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 677 -
G. Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty-five feet shall be avoided where possible.
H. Tangents. A tangent at least one hundred feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial collector streets.
I. Deflecting Streets. When connection street lines deflect from
each other at any point by more than ten degrees, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance
of not less than one hundred feet for minor and collector streets, and of
such greater radii as the Commission shall determine for special cases.
J. Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles and no street at less than sixty (60)
degrees.
K. Street Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in
the general community master plan and where not shown therein shall
be not less than sixty-six feet.
L. Half-streets Prohibited. Half-streets are prohibited, except
where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where
the Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of
the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a
half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 678 -
M. Dead-end Streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be so
permanently, shall not be longer than five hundred (500) feet and shall
be provided at the close with a turn-around having an outside roadway
diameter of at least eight feet and a street property line diameter of at
least one hundred (100) feet.
N. Street Names. No street names shall be used which duplicate or
may be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Commission.
O. Street Grades. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not
exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical
curves: maximum six percent on arterial and collector, eight percent
on minor. No street grade shall be less than 0.4 percent.
2. Alleys. Design standards for alleys are as follows:
A. Alleys Provided. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and
industrial districts except that the Commission may waive this
requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for
service access such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
B. Alley Width. The width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet.
C. Alley Intersections. Alley intersections and sharp changes in
alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut
off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement.
D. Dead-end Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where
possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead-end as determined by the Commission.
3. Easements. Design standards for easements are as follows:
A. Utility Easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or
side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be
at least twelve feet wide.
B. Storm Water Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided
a storm water assessment or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width
or construction or both as will be adequate for
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 679 -
the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.
4. Blocks. Design standards for blocks are as follows:
A. Length, Width and Shape. The length, width and shape of
blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
(1) Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the type of use contemplated;
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and
safety of street traffic;
(4) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Block Length Limitations. Block lengths shall not exceed one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet or be less than three hundred thirty
(330) feet.
C. Pedestrian Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten
feet wide shall be required where deemed essential to provide
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.
5. Lots. Design standards for lots are as follows:
A. Lot Size and Shape. The lot size, width, depth, shape, and
orientation and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and
use contemplated.
B. Minimal Standards on Lot Sizes. Lot dimensions shall conform
to the requirements of Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances, and:
(1) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide
for the off-street service and parking facilities by the type of use
and development contemplated.
C. Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra
width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to
both streets.
D. Lot Access. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to
provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to
an existing public street.
E. Double or Reverse Frontage. Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots should be avoided.
F. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right
angles or radial to street lines.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 680 -
6. Public Sites and Open Spaces. Where a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use shown in a general community master plan is
located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Commission may require the
dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision in those cases in
which the Commission deems such requirements to be reasonable.
166.07 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
1. Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate points as shall be
required by the Council.
2. Utility and Street Improvements. Utility and street improvements shall
be as follows:
A. Public Water. Water mains shall be installed by the subdivider
at the subdivider’s expense in accordance with State regulations and
stubbed into each lot line with a shut-off valve at the end of the stub.
The additional material cost for pipe size and fittings exceeding six
inches shall be paid for by the City. Fittings, pipe and hydrants for fire
protection use shall be installed to City standards by the subdivider at
the subdivider’s expense. Installation of all main fittings shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider. Construction must be under the
supervision of the City Administrator or designee and approved by the
Council in writing. Plans for water mains shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer and shall be approved by the Council. In place plans
must be filed with the City Administrator before final approval is
given.
B. Sanitary Sewer. Sanitary sewer mains shall be installed at the
subdivider’s expense in accordance with City and State regulations and
shall be stubbed into each lot at the time of installation of the sewer
mains. Sanitary sewer will be installed in the center of the street as
near as practical with manholes at each intersection but in no case shall
manholes be more than four hundred (400) feet apart. Plans and
specifications for sanitary sewer shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer and shall be
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 681 -
approved by the Council. All improvements shall be under the
supervision of a qualified inspector.
C. Streets. Arterial streets shall be of width as approved by the
Council. Collector streets shall be a minimum width of sixty-six (66)
feet with a minimum forty-one (41) foot roadway. Minor streets shall
be a minimum width of sixty-six (66) feet with a minimum thirty-seven
(37) foot roadway.
D. Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be installed at the
subdivider’s expense according to plans and specifications prepared by
a licensed engineer and approved by the Council.
E. Surfacing.
(1) All streets will be constructed to grade and have
controlled drainage through the use of concrete curb and gutter.
(2) All streets shall be hard-surfaced with Asphaltic Cement
Concrete Pavement (ACC) or Portland Cement Concrete
Pavement (PCC). The Council reserves the right to determine
the pavement surface at the Council’s discretion. Any street
improvement may be waived by a vote of three-fourths of all
members of the Council.
(3) Pavement design shall be certified by a Civil Engineer
licensed in the State of Iowa and designed to the minimum
standards as listed:
MINOR
STREETS
ACC Pavement
Surface
Subbase shall be a minimum of eight inches
of crushed stone. Subbase type shall be of
adequate design to support traffic on a two
and one-half (2½) inch asphaltic concrete
surface.
(37 feet wide) PCC Pavement
Surface
Subgrade of adequate strength to support
traffic on a six-inch concrete surface.
MAJOR
STREETS
ACC Pavement
Surface
Subbase shall be a minimum of ten inches of
crushed stone. Subbase type shall be of
adequate design to support traffic on a three
(3) inch asphaltic concrete surface.
(41 feet wide)
PCC Pavement
Surface
Subgrade of adequate strength to support
traffic on a six-inch concrete surface.
Additional thickness may be required if the
street is deemed as an arterial way.
(4) The City will participate in the cost of pavement
construction up to the maximum allocated amount, as
determined by resolution, and as follows:
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 682 -
MINOR STREET — ACC Pavement................ 0%
PCC Pavement 60%
(up to the maximum allowance)
MAJOR STREET — ACC Pavement 10%
(up to the maximum allowance)
PCC Pavement 60%
(up to the maximum allowance)
An allowance for a 30-inch curb and gutter will be deducted and shall not be eligible
for cost-sharing.
(5) The Council shall determine by resolution the maximum
allowance per square yard and the total available revenue for
street improvements on an annual basis. Requests for funds
shall be handled on a first come, first served basis according to
the date of the final plat. Approved requests in excess of
allocated amounts will be deferred until such time funds have
been allocated for such use and shall have priority over
subsequently approved requests.
F. Alleys. Alleys shall be constructed to grade and surfaced full
width with three inches of crushed rock at the subdivider’s expense.
G. Storm Sewer. Storm sewer system and other drainage
improvements shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense in
accordance with plans and specifications prepared by a licensed
engineer and approved by the Council Storm drainage systems shall
take into consideration two separate design storms (1) minor storm of
ten (10) year recurrence interval to size storm sewer pipes, inlets, street
gutters and small swales; (2) major storm of 100 year recurrence
interval to analyze flows in excess of the minor system facilities and
which are designed to protect against loss of life or serious substantial
property damage.
H. Sidewalks. Permanent sidewalks shall be installed in new
subdivisions according to Chapter 136 of this Code of Ordinances, but
only by resolution and by a favorable vote of three members of the
Council.
I. Street Trees. Street trees may be planted in park lines
according to City specifications.
J. Standards in Flood Hazard Areas. In a Floodway or Floodway
Fringe Overlay District new or replacement water to supply systems
and/or sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems
shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination
from beyond applicable environmental control limits during flooding.
3. Improvement Inspection. All improvements set out in this section shall
be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 683 -
4. Optional Special Assessments. A subdivider may file a petition with
the Council, pursuant to Section 384.41 of the Code of Iowa, requesting that
the City enter into an agreement under which special assessments will be
levied to pay the cost of any or all of the improvements required under this
section. If a petition is approved by the Council, the agreement provided for in
the petition will substitute for the requirement in this section that the
subdivider provide the improvements which are covered by the agreement.
Any agreement will be subject to the following requirements:
A. The Council may agree to include or exclude in a special
assessment agreement any of the required improvements named in this
section, and may establish standards different from those shown in this
section for any of the required improvements which will be specially
assessed.
B. The City may not have more than $300,000 in special
assessments outstanding from agreements with subdividers.
C. Special assessments will be levied for a maximum of five (5)
years.
D. A subdivider may not have more than $100,000 in special
assessments outstanding at any time.
E. A subdivider may request special assessments against no less
than ten (10) and more than thirty (30) lots within a subdivision.
F. If a proposed subdivision contains more than thirty (30) lots, the
entire subdivision must be platted, but special assessment financing
will be provided for a maximum of thirty (30) lots.
G. A subdivider must agree to waive: (a) the limitation provided
in Section 384.62 of the Code of Iowa that an
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 684 -
assessment may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the value of
the property assessed and (b) the right to request the deferment of
special assessment installments against agricultural property provided
in that section.
H. A subdivider must agree that a special assessment against a
given lot will be paid in full whenever that lot is sold.
I. In addition to agreeing to be specially assessed, a subdivider
must agree to reimburse the City for any costs it incurs in connection
with the planning for or construction of the improvements which will
be specially assessed, including, but not limited to, design, engineering,
legal services, preparation of bidding documents, etc., provided that, at
the time a subdivider submits the petition to the Council, the subdivider
shall present to the Clerk a certified check, payable to the City, in an
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to be held by the Clerk
until the Council and the subdivider enter into a contract for
construction of improvements. If the subdivider withdraws the
petition, the money held as security shall be used to make payment of
the costs incurred by the City. If additional funds are needed at the
time of petition withdrawal, the subdivider shall pay to the City the
balance due. If funds remain after payment of costs incurred, the
balance shall be returned to the subdivider. After the contract is duly
signed by all parties, the City shall return the certified check to the
subdivider.
J. Any requirement of this section may be waived by a vote of
three-fourths of all the members of the Council.
166.08 PLANS AND DATA. Preapplication plans and data shall be as follows:
1. General. The application shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to
supplement the drawings required in subsection 2 of this section. This
information may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and
available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the
subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and
depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, and other public
areas, proposed covenants, utilities and improvements.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 685 -
2. Plans. A plan or topographic survey may be presented and show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be freehand pencil sketch
made directly on a print of the topographic survey. In any event the sketch
plan shall include either the existing topographic data listed in subsection 3, or
such of these data as the Commission determines necessary for its
consideration of the proposed sketch plan.
3. Plans and Data for Conditional Approval. The items set out in this
subsection are required for a preliminary plat to be considered.
A. Topographic Data. Topographic data required as a basis for the
preliminary plat shall include existing conditions as follows except
when otherwise specified by the Commission:
(1) Boundary lines: bearings and distances;
(2) Easements: location, width and purpose;
(3) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-ofway
width and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing;
and legally established centerline elevations; walks, curbs,
gutters, culverts, etc.;
(4) Utilities on and adjacent to tract location: size and
invert elevation of sanitary storm and combined sewer; location
and size of water mains; location of gas lines; fire hydrants,
electric and telephone poles, and street light; if water mains and
sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the directions
and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing invert
elevation of sewers;
(5) Ground elevations on the tract, based on a datum plane
approved by the Council: for land that slopes less than
approximately two percent show spot elevations at all breaks in
grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected
points not more than one hundred feet apart in all directions; for
land that slopes more than approximately two percent, either
show contours with an interval of not more than five feet if
ground slope is regular and such information is sufficient for
planning purposes, or show contours with an interval of not
more than two feet if necessary because of irregular land or
need for more
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 686 -
detailed data for preparing plans and construction drawings;
(6) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes,
rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot
or more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks, and other significant
features.
B. Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer at a scale of two hundred feet to one inch (200' = 1")
or larger, preferred scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"). It
shall show all existing conditions required in subsection A above, and
shall show proposals including the following:
(1) Streets: names, right-of-way and roadway widths;
approximate grades and gradients; similar data for alleys, if
any;
(2) Other right-of-way or easements; location, width and
purpose;
(3) Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits;
(4) Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers;
(5) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, or other public uses;
(6) Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping
centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings;
(7) Minimum building setback lines;
(8) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical
lot size, and acres in parks, etc.;
(9) Title, scale, north arrow, and date;
(10) A certification by an attorney that the land is free and
clear or that the holders of liens and mortgages agree to
platting.
C. Other Preliminary Plans. When required by the Commission,
the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing
ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision;
typical cross-sections of the
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 687 -
proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plan of
proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with grades and sizes
indicated. All elevations shall be based on a datum plan approved by
the Council.
D. Draft of Protective Covenants. The subdivider shall file all
proposals to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect
the proposed development.
4. Plans and Data for Final Plat Approval. The items set out in this
section are required for final plat approval.
A. Final Plat. The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer on sheets suitable for reproduction twenty-four (24) inches
wide by thirty-six (36) inches long and shall be at a scale of one
hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") or larger (preferred scale of fifty
feet to one inch [50' = 1"]). Where necessary, the plat may be on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in continuous sections satisfactory to the
Commission. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(1) Primary control points, approved by the Council, or
descriptions and “ties” to such control points, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall
be referred;
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets,
easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of
residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflections angles, and radii, arcs, and central
angles of all curves;
(3) Name and right-of-way width of each street or other
right-of-way;
(4) Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements;
(5) Number to identify each lot or site;
(6) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved;
(7) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other
sites;
(8) Location and description of monuments;
(9) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted lands;
(10) Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to
accuracy of survey and plat;
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 688 -
(11) Certification of title showing that applicant is the
landowner;
(12) A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with their free consent and is in accordance with
the desire of the owner and spouse. This certificate must be
signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some
officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds;
(13) Statement by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and
any sites for public uses;
(13) Title, scale, north arrow, and date;
(14) A complete abstract of title and an opinion from an
attorney at law showing that the fee title is in the proprietor and
that the land platted is free from encumbrance, or is free from
encumbrance other than that secured by a bond as provided in
Section 354.11 of the Code of Iowa;
(15) A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free
from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the
land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special
assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
(16) A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council
and for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
(17) A cost estimate from the design engineer or construction
contracts for all required improvements.
B. Cross-sections and Profiles. Cross-sections and profiles of
streets showing grades approved by the Council are required. The
profiles shall be drawn to City standard scales and elevations and shall
be based on a datum plan approved by the Council.
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 689 -
C. Certificate by Engineer and Clerk. There shall be a certificate
certifying that the subdivider has complied with the following:
(1) A certificate by a professional engineer that all
improvements have been designed and installed in accord with
the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the
Commission giving conditional approval of the preliminary
plat; and
(2) A certificate by the Clerk certifying that a bond,
certified check or irrevocable letter of credit equal to 100% of
the Engineer’s estimate of cost or 110% of the total
construction contracts has been posted which is available to the
City to assure the completion of all required improvements.
D. Protective Covenants in Form for Recording. The protective
covenants set out in this section, in form for recording, are required.
(1) Other Data. Such other certificates, affidavits,
endorsements, or deductions as may be required by the
Commission in the enforcement of these regulations.
(2) Engineer’s Assurance in Floodway Fringe Overlay
District. If the subdivision is located in a Floodway Fringe
Overlay District, an assurance by the engineer that:
(a) The subdivision design is consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated,
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards;
(d) If the proposal for development is of five acres
or fifty lots, whichever is less, include the regulatory
flood elevation.
(3) Maintenance Bond. Prior to final approval by the City,
the subdivider shall file a maintenance bond equal to 10% of the
Engineer’s estimate of cost for the project
CHAPTER 166 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
- 690 -
which guarantees all required improvements for a period of two
years after final acceptance of the subdivision by the City.
(4) As-built Drawings. As-built drawings showing the
location of all public utilities and service lines are required prior
to final acceptance of the subdivision.
166.09 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Whoever, being the owner or agent of
the owner of any land located within or adjacent to the City, knowingly or with intent
to defraud, transfers or sells by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat
of subdivision of such land before the final plat has been approved by the
Commission, shall forfeit and pay the penalty of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each lot so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and a
description by metes and bounds shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 1
INDEX TO CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
ABANDONED ANIMALS ......................................................................... Sec. 55.04
ABANDONED VEHICLES ....................................................................... Ch. 80
Authority to Take Possession
Definitions
Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
Duties of Demolisher
Extension of Time
Fees for Impoundment
Notice by Mail
Notification in Newspaper
Proceeds from Sales
See also IMPOUNDING VEHICLES........................................................ Sec. 70.06
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES .............................................................. Ch. 50
ABATEMENT OF TAXES........................................................................ Ch. 8
ACCESS CONTROLLED ......................................................................... Ch. 140
ACCOUNTING RECORDS ...................................................................... Sec. 7.07
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES............................................ Ch. 128
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION.......................... Ch. 45
Misrepresentation of Age
Persons Under Legal Age
Public Consumption or Intoxication
See also Open Containers in Motor Vehicles ............................................... Sec. 62.08
See also LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND
BEER PERMITS................................................................. Ch. 120
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES ........................... Ch. 75
Accident Reports
Definitions
General Regulations
Negligence
Places of Operation
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 2
ANIMAL CONTROL ........................................................................Ch. 55
Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
Animal Neglect
Annoyance or Disturbance
At Large Prohibited
At Large: Impoundment
Confinement
Damage or Interference
Definitions
Disposition of Animals
Impounding Costs
Impoundment
Livestock
Livestock Neglect
Owner’s Duty
Prohibited Animals
Rabies Vaccination
Trapping of Animals Prohibited
Vicious Dogs
See also DOG LICENSES ..................................................................Ch. 56
APPOINTMENTS
By Council .................................................................................Sec. 17.05
By Mayor ...................................................................................Sec. 15.03
ASSAULT............................................................................................Sec. 40.01
See also PUBLIC PEACE
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR ON PUBLIC PROPERTY....................Sec. 69.06(2)
BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES .................................Sec. 41.08
BEER, LIQUOR AND WINE CONTROL ......................................Ch. 45
See ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
See also LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE
BEER PERMITS..........................................................Ch. 120
BICYCLE REGISTRATION............................................................Ch. 77
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 3
BICYCLE REGULATIONS..............................................................Ch. 76
Carrying Articles
Double Riding Restricted
Emerging from Alley or Driveway
Equipment Requirements
Improper Riding
Parking
Paths
Riding on Sidewalks Downtown
Special Penalty
Speed
Towing Prohibited
Traffic Code Applies
Two Abreast Limit
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.............................................................Sec. 165.33
BONDS
City Officials .............................................................................Sec. 5.02
Moving Structures .....................................................................Sec. 123.05
Streets ........................................................................................Sec. 135.09(4)
Transient Merchants .................................................................Sec. 122.06
BOUNDARIES....................................................................................Ch. 3
Division Into Wards and Precincts
Joint City – Delaware County Precinct Number 13
Ward 1
Ward 2
Ward 3
BUDGET AMENDMENTS
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT..................................................Sec. 7.06
BUDGET PREPARATION
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT..................................................Sec. 7.05
BUILDING MOVERS........................................................................Ch. 123
See also MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 4
BUILDING NUMBERING................................................................Ch. 150
Even/Odd Numbers
Map
Owner’s Requirement
Prefixes
BUILDING PERMITS.......................................................................Sec. 165.37
BURNING ...........................................................................................Sec. 105.05
See also SOLID WASTE CONTROL
BURNING ON STREETS AND ALLEYS.......................................Sec. 135.08
CABLE TELEVISION
Franchise Granted......................................................................Ch. 112
Rules and Regulations ...............................................................Ch. 113
CAR WASHING ON STREETS.......................................................Sec. 135.07
CHANGE FUND.................................................................................Sec. 7.03(4)
CHARTER .........................................................................................Ch. 2
CIGARETTE PERMITS...................................................................Ch. 121
Application
Definitions
Fees
Issuance and Expiration
Permit Required
Permit Revocation
Persons Under Legal Age
Refunds
Self-service Sales Prohibited
CITY ADMINISTRATOR ................................................................Ch. 21
CITY ATTORNEY.............................................................................Ch. 20
Appointment and Compensation
Council Meetings
Ordinance Preparation
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 5
CITY ATTORNEY (continued) .........................................................Ch. 20
Power
Prepare Legal Documents
Provide Legal Opinion
Representation of City Employees
Review and Comment
CITY CHARTER ...............................................................................Ch. 2
CITY CLERK.....................................................................................Ch. 18
Appointment
Attendance at Meetings
City Seal
Elections
Issue Licenses and Permits
Maintain Records
Powers and Duties
Publication Requirements
Recording Measures
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY COORDINATOR
See CITY ADMINISTRATOR..........................................................Ch. 21
CITY COUNCIL ................................................................................Ch. 17
Appointments
Compensation
Exercise of Power
Meetings
Number and Term
Powers and Duties
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY ELECTIONS............................................................................Ch. 6
Adding Name By Petition
Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
Nominating Method to Be Used
Nominations by Petition
Persons Elected
Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES ...........................................Ch. 5
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES...............................................Ch. 5
Bonds
Books and Records
Conflict of Interest
Duties
Gifts
Meetings
Oaths
Removal of Appointed Officers
Resignations
Transfer to Successor
Vacancies
CITY TREASURER...........................................................................Ch. 19
Appointment
Compensation
Duties
CLERK................................................................................................Ch. 18
See also CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES ................................................................Ch. 1
Altering Code
Amendments
Catchlines and Notes
City Powers
Definitions
Extension of Authority
General Standards for Action
Indemnity
Personal Injuries
Rules of Construction
Severability
Standard Penalty
Warrants
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 7
COMPENSATION
Changes in .................................................................................Sec. 17.02(7)
City Administrator .....................................................................Sec. 21.02
City Attorney .............................................................................Sec. 20.01
City Clerk...................................................................................Sec. 18.01
Council Members ......................................................................Sec. 17.06
Mayor.........................................................................................Sec. 15.04
Mayor Pro Tem..........................................................................Sec. 16.04
Set by Council............................................................................Sec. 17.02(7)
Treasurer....................................................................................Sec. 19.02
CONFLICT OF INTEREST .............................................................Sec. 5.07
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.........................................Ch. 140
Access Controls Imposed
Definitions
Parking Restricted
Unlawful Use
CORPORATE LIMITS .....................................................................Ch. 3
COUNCIL ...........................................................................................Ch. 17
See also CITY COUNCIL
COUNCIL MEETINGS.....................................................................Sec. 17.04
See also CITY COUNCIL
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS .............................................................Ch. 145
Cost Assessed
Defined
Enforcement Officer
Hearing
Notice to Owner
Posting Signs
Right to Demolish
DEPOSITS AND INVESTMENTS...................................................Sec. 7.03(2)
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 8
DEPOSIT FOR UTILITIES..............................................................Sec. 92.08
DISORDERLY CONDUCT ..............................................................Sec. 40.03
See also PUBLIC PEACE
DOGS...................................................................................................Ch. 55
See also ANIMAL CONTROL
DOG LICENSES ................................................................................Ch. 56
Annual License Required
Duplicate Tags
Immunization
Kennel Dogs
Late Payment Fee
License Fees
License Records
License Tags
Transfers
DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.................................................................Sec. 135.13
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA ..............................................................Ch. 43
ELECTIONS.......................................................................................Ch. 6
See also CITY CLERK.......................................................................Sec. 18.12
See also CITY ELECTIONS
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE.................................................................Ch. 111
ELECTRICIAN PERMITS...............................................................Ch. 124
EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICE................................................Sec. 35.15
ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSIONS BRAKES.................Sec. 62.12
EXCAVATIONS
Sewer .........................................................................................Sec. 96.04
Streets ........................................................................................Sec. 135.09
Water .........................................................................................Sec. 90.09
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS ....................................Ch. 127
Applicability of Regulations
Bond and Insurance
Definition
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 9
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS (continued).................Ch. 127
Disposal Regulated
Notice of Blasting
Notice of Storage
Permit Issuance
Permit Procedure
Report of Theft or Loss
Storage Regulations
Supervision of Blasting
FINANCE OFFICER.........................................................................Sec. 7.02
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
FINANCES..........................................................................................Ch. 7
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
FINANCIAL REPORTS....................................................................Sec. 7.08
FIRE DEPARTMENT .......................................................................Ch. 35
Authority to Cite Violations
Calls Outside City
Chief
Compensation
Constitution
Emergency Rescue Service
Insurance
Mutual Aid
Organization
Training
FIRE ZONE ........................................................................................Ch. 147
Buildings Prohibited
Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Minimum Standards
Plans Submitted
Reconstruction Prohibited
Removal of Buildings
Special Permit
Storage of Materials Restricted
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 10
FIREWORKS .....................................................................................Sec. 41.12
FISCAL MANAGEMENT ................................................................Ch. 7
Accounting
Budget Amendments
Budget Preparation
Cash Controls
Finance Officer
Financial Reports
Fund Control
FLOOD PLAIN ADVISORY BOARD.............................................Ch. 25
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS....................................................Sec. 165.40
FRAUD ................................................................................................Sec. 42.05
FUNDS.................................................................................................Sec. 7.04
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL ...............................Ch. 105
and Ch. 106
See also SOLID WASTE
GAS FRANCHISE..............................................................................Ch. 110
GIFTS, CITY OFFICIALS................................................................Sec. 5.11
HANDICAPPED PARKING
See Persons With Disabilities Parking .................................................Sec. 69.08
HARASSMENT..................................................................................Sec. 40.02
See also PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ....................................Sec. 41.04
See also PUBLIC PEACE
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS.............................................Ch. 36
HAZARDOUS WASTE .....................................................................Sec. 105.09
See also SOLID WASTE CONTROL
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX.......................................................................Ch. 9
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 11
HOUSE MOVERS
See MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES.............................................Ch. 123
HOUSE NUMBERS ...........................................................................Ch. 150
IMPOUNDING
Animals......................................................................................Sec. 55.15
Vehicles .....................................................................................Sec. 70.06
and Sec. 80.02
INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION..................................................Ch. 8
Amounts Eligible
Applications
Approval
Definitions
Dual Exemptions Prohibited
Limitations
Period of Exemptions
Repealed
INVESTMENTS AND DEPOSITS...................................................Sec. 7.03(2)
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES ........................................................Ch. 51
Definitions
Exceptions
Notice to Abate
Nuisance
LAWNS (over 6 inches)......................................................................Sec. 50.02(13)
LIBRARY............................................................................................Ch. 22
Annual Report
Contracting With Other Libraries
Expenditures
Injury to Property
Nonresident Use
Notice Posted
Powers and Duties
Theft
Trustees
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 12
LICENSES
Adult Entertainment Facilities...................................................Sec. 128.12
Animals......................................................................................Ch. 56
Liquor ........................................................................................Ch. 120
Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants ...........................Ch. 122
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE
AND BEER PERMITS ...........................................................Ch. 120
General Prohibition
License or Permit Required
Prohibited Sales and Acts
LITTERING........................................................................................Sec. 105.07
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, VEHICLES.................Ch. 66
Load Limits on Bridges
Load Limits on Streets
Permits
Temporary Embargo
Truck Routes
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES.................................Ch. 148
Conversion to Real Property
Definitions
Foundation Requirements
See also ZONING REGULATIONS
MAYOR...............................................................................................Ch. 15
Appointments
Compensation
Powers and Duties
Term of Office
Voting
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
MAYOR PRO TEM...........................................................................Ch. 16
Compensation
Powers and Duties
Voting Rights
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 13
MINORS..............................................................................................Ch. 46
Cigarettes and Tobacco
Contributing to Delinquency
See also Misrepresentation of Age ...............................................Sec. 45.03
See also: Persons Under Legal Age...............................................Sec. 45.01
See also: Persons Under Legal Age...............................................Sec. 121.07
MOBILE HOMES..............................................................................Ch. 148
See MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
See also ZONING REGULATIONS
MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES ...................................................Ch. 123
Above Ground Wires
Application
Bond Required
Injury; Repair
Investigation
No Structure to Remain in Street
Permit Required
Public Safety
Structure Defined
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS..........................................................Ch. 4
Alternative Relief
Civil Citations
Criminal Penalties
Environmental Violation
Penalties
NAMING OF STREETS....................................................................Ch. 139
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE.........................................................Ch. 110
NOISE..................................................................................................Ch. 40A
and Sec. 40.03(2)
See also Quiet Zones ............................................................................Sec. 62.05
See also Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes................................Sec. 62.12
See also Truck Parking .........................................................................Sec. 69.09(2)
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 14
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE ....................................Ch. 50
Abatement by City
Collection of Costs
Emergency Abatement
Failure to Abate
Hearing
Method of Service
Notice to Abate
Nuisance Defined
Nuisances Enumerated
Other Conditions
OATH OF OFFICE............................................................................Sec. 5.01
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS............................................Ch. 98
See also SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC........................................................................Ch. 68
OPEN BURNING ...............................................................................Sec. 105.05
See also SOLID WASTE CONTROL
OPEN MEETINGS.............................................................................Sec. 5.06
OPERATING PROCEDURES..........................................................Ch. 5
PARADES REGULATED.................................................................Sec. 60.08
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION.................................Ch. 24
PARK REGULATIONS ....................................................................Ch. 47
Camping
Fires
Keg Beer
Littering
Parks Closed
Use of Drives Required
See also Noise Disturbance Prohibited (Sound Equipment in Park)....Sec. 40A.05
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 15
PARKING REGULATIONS.............................................................Ch. 69
Angle Parking
Illegal Purposes
Limited Parking
Park Adjacent to Curb
Persons With Disabilities Parking
Prohibited Places
R-1 or R-2 Residential Zones
Snow Emergency
Snow Routes
Truck Parking Limited
See also Storage of Motor Vehicles .....................................................Sec. 165.31
See also Recreation Vehicle Parking....................................................Sec. 165.19
PEACE OFFICERS
Qualifications ............................................................................Sec. 30.03
See also POLICE DEPARTMENT
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS.................................................Ch. 122
Bond Required
Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
Definitions
License Required
Revocation of License
Time Restrictions
PEDESTRIANS ..................................................................................Ch. 67
PENALTY, STANDARD...................................................................Sec. 1.14
See also MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
PERMITS
Adult Entertainment Employees................................................Sec. 128.13
Beer and Wine ...........................................................................Ch. 120
Building .....................................................................................Sec. 165.37
Cigarette.....................................................................................Sec. 121.02
Electricians ................................................................................Ch. 124
Explosives and Blasting Agents ................................................Sec. 127.03
Fireworks ...................................................................................Sec. 41.12
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 16
PERMITS (continued)
Flood Plain Development ..........................................................Sec. 165.40
House Mover .............................................................................Sec. 123.02
Noise..........................................................................................Sec. 40A.07
On-site Wastewater System.......................................................Sec. 98.04
Open Burning ............................................................................Sec. 105.05
Open Dumping ..........................................................................Sec. 105.08
Sewer Connection......................................................................Sec. 96.01
Sidewalks...................................................................................Sec. 136.04
Street Excavation.......................................................................Sec. 135.09
Vehicles, Excess Size and Weight.............................................Sec. 66.02
Water System Connection .........................................................Sec. 90.05
See also LICENSES
PETTY CASH FUND.........................................................................Sec. 7.03(3)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION..................................Ch. 23
Appointed
Compensation
Powers and Duties
Term of Office
Vacancies
PLUMBER PERMITS.......................................................................Ch. 125
POLICE DEPARTMENT..................................................................Ch. 30
Compensation
Organization
Peace Officers Appointed
Peace Officer Qualifications
Police Chief Duties
Rules
Summoning Aid
Taking Weapons
Training
PRECINCTS, VOTING.....................................................................Ch. 3
PRIVATE PROPERTY .....................................................................Ch. 42
See also PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 17
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS
See ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.....................................Ch. 98
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT....................................................Ch. 8
See also INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY...................................................Ch. 41
Abandoned Appliances
Antenna and Radio Wires
Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
Discharging Weapons
Distributing Dangerous Substances
False Reports to and Communications with
Public Safety Entities
Fireworks
Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
Horseback Riding
Interference with Official Acts
Refusing to Assist Officer
Throwing or Shooting
Urinating and Defecating
PUBLIC OFFENSES
See PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY;
PUBLIC PEACE; and PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
PUBLIC PEACE.................................................................................Ch. 40
Assault
Disorderly Conduct
Failure to Disperse
Harassment
Noise Disturbance Prohibited
Unlawful Assembly
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY............................................Ch. 42
Criminal Mischief
Defacing Proclamations or Notices
Fraud
Theft
Trespassing
Unauthorized Entry
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 18
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS .................Ch. 94
PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS ................................................Sec. 18.05
See also CITY CLERK
RAILROAD REGULATIONS..........................................................Ch. 81
Crossing Maintenance
Obstructing Streets
Speed Limits
Warning Signals
RECYCLING......................................................................................Ch. 107
REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES ................................................................Sec. 5.09
RESCUE SERVICE ...........................................................................Sec. 35.15
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM – BUILDING SEWERS
AND CONNECTIONS............................................................Ch. 96
Abatement of Violations
Adoption of Chapter 10 and Appendix H of
Uniform Plumbing Code
Connection Charge
Connection Requirements
Excavations
Inspection Required
Interceptors Required
Permit
Plumber Required
Property Owner’s Responsibility
Sewer Tap
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM –
GENERAL PROVISIONS......................................................Ch. 95
Director
Owner’s Liability Limited
Prohibited Acts
Right of Entry
Service Outside City
Sewer Connection Required
Special Penalties
Use of Easements
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 19
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM – ON-SITE
WASTEWATER SYSTEMS..................................................Ch. 98
Compliance with Regulations
Discharge Restrictions
Disposal of Septage
Maintenance of System
Minimum Lot Area
Permit Required
Systems Abandoned
When Prohibited
When Required
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM –
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES .............................................Ch. 99
Lien for Nonpayment
Payment of Bills
Private Water Systems
Rates
Service Charges Required
Special Agreement
Special Rates
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM –
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS...................................................Ch. 97
Control Manhole
Prohibited Discharges
Restricted Discharges
Special Facilities
Storm Water
Surface Water Exceptions
Testing of Wastes
SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
(Bear Creek Interceptor Sewer) ............................................................Ch. 100
SEWER RATES..................................................................................Ch. 99
See also SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM –
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
SEWERS
See SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 20
SEX OFFENDERS, RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.....................Ch. 49
SIDEWALKS......................................................................................Ch. 136
Barricades and Warning Lights
Billing and Certifying to County
Cleaning of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
Debris on Sidewalks
Definitions
Encroaching Steps
Failure to Obtain Permit; Remedies
Hearing and Assessment
Inspection and Approval
Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
Notice of Assessment for Repair or Cleaning Costs
Notice of Inability to Repair or Barricade
Openings and Enclosures
Ordering Sidewalk Improvements
Permits for Construction or Removal
Repairing Defective Sidewalks
Standard Sidewalk Specifications
See also Vehicles on Sidewalks............................................................Sec. 62.03
SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND ROLLER SKATES............Ch. 76A
SNOW REMOVAL
From Sidewalks .........................................................................Sec. 136.15
From Streets...............................................................................Sec. 135.12
Parking during Snow Emergency ..............................................Sec. 69.10
Snow Routes..............................................................................Sec. 69.11
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES...................Ch. 75
Accident Reports
Definitions
General Regulations
Negligence
Places of Operation
SOLICITORS .....................................................................................Ch. 122
See also PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 21
SOLID WASTE CONTROL – COLLECTION..............................Ch. 106
Bulky Rubbish
Collection Fees
Collection Service
Contract Requirements
Frequency
Lien for Nonpayment
Loading
Right of Entry
Solid Waste Collection Containers and Dumpsters
Vehicles
SOLID WASTE CONTROL – GENERAL PROVISIONS............Ch. 105
Definitions
Landscape Waste Dump Site Designation
Littering Prohibited
Open Burning Restricted
Open Dumping Prohibited
Prohibited Practices
Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
Sanitary Disposal Required
Toxic and Hazardous Wastes
Waste Storage Containers
SOLID WASTE CONTROL – UNIT BASED PRICING...............Ch. 107
SPEED REGULATIONS...................................................................Ch. 63
Controlled Access Facilities
General
Minimum Speed
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.........................................................Ch. 65
School Stops
Stop Before Crossing Sidewalks
Stop or Yield
Traffic Obstructed
Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
Comment [ST1]: Page: 27
For Generic, see model\big\altindex.ind
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 22
STREET AND ALLEY VACATION AND DISPOSAL.................Ch. 137
Disposal By Gift Limited
Disposal Procedure
Findings Required
Hearing
Planning and Zoning Commission
Power to Vacate
STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES ............................................Ch. 138
Established
Record Maintained
STREET NAMES...............................................................................Ch. 139
Changing Name
Naming New Streets
Recording Names
Street Name Map
STREETS AND ALLEYS..................................................................Ch. 135
Burning on Prohibited
Driveway Culverts
Dumping of Snow
Excavations
Maintenance of Parkings and Terraces
Obstructing and Defacing
Placing Debris on
Playing in
Removal of Warning Devices
Traveling on Barricaded Prohibited
Use for Business Purposes
Washing Vehicles on
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS .....................................................Ch. 166
Definitions
Design Standards
Establishing Jurisdiction to Review
Plans and Data
Plats
Required Improvements
Violations and Penalties
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 23
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS IN CONVENIENCE STORES....Ch. 126
SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES...............................................Ch. 146
TAX ABATEMENT...........................................................................Ch. 8
See also INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION
TERMS OF OFFICE
City Administrator .....................................................................Sec. 21.01
Clerk ..........................................................................................Sec. 18.01
Council.......................................................................................Sec. 2.04
and Sec. 17.01
Mayor.........................................................................................Sec. 2.05
and Sec. 15.01
Treasurer....................................................................................Sec. 19.01
THEFT.................................................................................................Sec. 42.06
TOWERS AND ANTENNAS............................................................Sec. 165.42
TRAFFIC CODE
See ONE-WAY TRAFFIC; PARKING REGULATIONS;
PEDESTRIANS; SPEED REGULATIONS;
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED; LOAD AND WEIGHT
RESTRICTIONS; TURNING REGULATIONS;
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
TRAFFIC CODE – ADMINISTRATION OF.................................Ch. 60
Administration and Enforcement
Definitions
Obedience to Peace Officers
Parades Regulated
Peace Officer’s Authority
Power to Direct Traffic
Traffic Accidents: Reports
TRAFFIC CODE – ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES................Ch. 70
Arrest or Citation
Impounding Vehicles
Parking Violations
Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
Scheduled Violations
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 24
TRAFFIC CODE – GENERAL REGULATIONS..........................Ch. 62
Careless Driving
Clinging to Vehicles
Emergency Road Closure and Barricades
Funeral Processions
Obstructing View at Intersections
Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
Play Streets Designated
Quiet Zones
Reckless Driving
Tampering with Vehicle
Vehicles on Sidewalks
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.....................................................Ch. 61
Compliance
Crosswalks
Installation
Moving or Damaging Devices
Necessity of Signs
Standards
Traffic Control Devices
Traffic Lanes
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS............................................................Ch. 122
See also PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
TREASURER......................................................................................Ch. 19
See also CITY TREASURER
TREES .................................................................................................Ch. 151
Definitions
Disease Control
Duty to Trim
Inspection and Removal
Planting Restrictions
Trees Near Intersections Prohibited
Trimming to be Supervised
Comment [ST2]: Page: 30
For Generic, see model\big\altindex.ind
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 25
TRESPASSING...................................................................................Sec. 42.01
See also PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
TRUCK PARKING LIMITED .........................................................Sec. 69.09
See also PARKING REGULATIONS
TRUCK ROUTES ..............................................................................Sec. 66.05
See also LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
TURNING REGULATIONS.............................................................Ch. 64
L-turn for Parking Prohibited
Turning at Intersections
U-turns
URBAN RENEWAL ..........................................................................Ch. 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION............................................................Ch. 11
URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC............................Sec. 41.11
VACANCIES IN OFFICE.................................................................Sec. 5.10
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
VACATING STREETS OR ALLEYS..............................................Ch. 137
VETO
Council May Override ...............................................................Sec. 17.03
Mayor’s Authority .....................................................................Sec. 15.02(4)
VOTING PRECINCTS......................................................................Ch. 3
WARDS ...............................................................................................Ch. 3
WATER SERVICE – CONNECTION TO
NORTHEAST BOOSTER PUMP NO. 1 .........................................Ch. 93
WATER SERVICE – CONNECTIONS...........................................Ch. 90
Abandoned
Backflow Preventer
Completion by the City
Compliance with Plumbing Code
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 26
WATER SERVICE – CONNECTIONS (continued) .......................Ch. 90
Connection Charge
Curb Valve
Excavations
Failure to Maintain
Inspection and Approval
Interior Valve
Mandatory Connection and Use of Private Wells
Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
Permit Required
Plumber Required
Property Owner’s Responsibility
Shutting Off Water Supply
Tapping Mains
Water Service Pipe Specifications
WATER SERVICE – METERS........................................................Ch. 91
Locations
Maintenance Test
Providing of Meter and Setting
Repairs
Right of Entry
Sprinkler System
Testing
Use of
WATER SERVICE – RATES...........................................................Ch. 92
Billing Procedure
Customer Deposits
In City
Lien Exemption
Lien for Nonpayment
Lien Notice
Service Charges
Service Discontinued
See also CONNECTION TO NORTHEAST BOOSTER
PUMP NO. 1...................................................................Ch. 93
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 27
WATER WELLS, USE OF PRIVATE WELLS .............................Section 90.03
WATER WELL PROTECTION ......................................................Ch. 152
Applicability
Deep Well Protection
Designating Authority
Existing Structure or Facilities
Shallow Well Protection
WEAPONS..........................................................................................Sec. 41.09
WINE
See ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
and LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
YIELD REQUIRED...........................................................................Ch. 65
See also STOP AND YIELD REQUIRED
ZONING REGULATIONS................................................................Ch. 165
A-1 Rural Restricted District
Accessory Buildings
Amendments
Annexations
Application for Building Permit; Procedure
Approval and Issuance of Building Permits
and Certificates of Compliance
Board of Adjustment
Building Lines on Approved Plats
C-1 Central Business District
C-2 Commercial District
Certificate of Occupancy
Conformance Required
Corner Lots
D-1 Delaware Agricultural District
Damaged Nonconforming Buildings
Definitions
Discontinuance of Nonconforming Uses
Districts Established
Exceptions and Interpretations
Floodway and Floodway Fringe Districts
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, DYERSVILLE, IOWA
INDEX - 28
ZONING REGULATIONS (continued) ............................................Ch. 165
Front Yard
Frontage and Access
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Industrial District
I-3 Industrial District
Interpretation of Standards
Nonconforming Uses
Nonconforming Uses; Certificates
Notification of Completion
Official Map
Public Access Drives
Public and Private Parking Lots
R-1 Single-family Residential District
R-2 Residential District
Recreational Vehicle Parking
Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced
Storage and Parking of Vehicles
in R-1 and R-2 Districts
Towers and Antennas
Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
Water Areas