
Denison, IA Code of Ordinances


CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF
DENISON, IOWA



IOWA CODIFICATION, INC.COPYRIGHT NOTICE



Materials contained in this Code of Ordinances are based on or quoted
directly from the work entitled Comprehensive Model Code of Ordinances for
Iowa Cities which is protected by copyright.



Permission has been granted by the copyright holder, Iowa Codification, Inc.,
to the City of Denison, Iowa, to make copies of this Code of Ordinances for
distribution to officials, employees and citizens of the City of Denison, for
use in carrying out duties and responsibilities of such persons with relation
to the City as may be required or facilitated by such copies.



Reproduction for all other persons is prohibited without the written
permission of Iowa Codification, Inc.



Iowa Codification, Inc.



P. O. Box 141



610 Buddy Holly Place



Clear Lake, Iowa 50428



Adopted August 17, 2009, by Ordinance No. 1362



TABLE OF CONTENTS



GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 1 - CODE OF ORDINANCES



CHAPTER 2 - CHARTER



CHAPTER 3 - ELECTION WARD BOUNDARIES



CHAPTER 4 - MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS



CHAPTER 5 - OPERATING PROCEDURES



CHAPTER 6 - CITY ELECTIONS



CHAPTER 7 - FISCAL MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 8 - INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



CHAPTER 9 - URBAN RENEWAL



CHAPTER 10 - URBAN REVITALIZATION



CHAPTER 11 - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX



ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



CHAPTER 15 - MAYOR



CHAPTER 16 - MAYOR PRO TEM



CHAPTER 17 - COUNCIL



CHAPTER 18 - CITY CLERK



CHAPTER 19 - CITY TREASURER



CHAPTER 20 - CITY ATTORNEY



CHAPTER 21 - CITY MANAGER / DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS



CHAPTER 22 - BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES



CHAPTER 23 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



CHAPTER 24 - UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



CHAPTER 25 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



CHAPTER 26 - NORTHSIDE RECREATION AREA  JOINT ADVISORY BOARD



CHAPTER 27 - BOULDERS CONFERENCE CENTER COMMISSION



CHAPTER 28 - TOURISM BOARD



CHAPTER 29 - COMMUNITY HOUSING AGENCY



CHAPTER 30 - AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION



CHAPTER 31 - AIRPORT COMMISSION



CHAPTER 32 - CITY ENGINEER



POLICE, FIRE AND EMERGENCIES



CHAPTER 35 - POLICE DEPARTMENT



CHAPTER 36 - FIRE DEPARTMENT



PUBLIC OFFENSES



CHAPTER 40 - PUBLIC OFFENSES



CHAPTER 41 - NOISE CONTROL



CHAPTER 45 - MINORS



CHAPTER 46 - PARK REGULATIONS



NUISANCES AND ANIMAL CONTROL



CHAPTER 50 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



CHAPTER 51 - JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES



CHAPTER 55 - ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



CHAPTER 56 - DANGEROUS ANIMALS



CHAPTER 57 - MOWING OF PROPERTIES



TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES



CHAPTER 60 - ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



CHAPTER 61 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



CHAPTER 62 - GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 63 - SPEED REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 64 - STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



CHAPTER 65 - LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



CHAPTER 66 - PEDESTRIANS



CHAPTER 67 - ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



CHAPTER 68 - PARKING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 69 - TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



CHAPTER 75 - SNOWMOBILE, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLES



CHAPTER 76 - BICYCLE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 77 - GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 78 - ABANDONED VEHICLES



WATER



CHAPTER 90 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



CHAPTER 91 - PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED



SANITARY SEWER



CHAPTER 95 - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



CHAPTER 96 - FAT, OIL AND GREASE



GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE



CHAPTER 105 - SOLID WASTE CONTROL AND RECYCLING



CHAPTER 106 - LICENSED COLLECTORS AND COLLECTION SERVICE



CHAPTER 107 - OPEN BURNING



FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES



CHAPTER 110 - NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE



CHAPTER 111 - ELECTRIC UTILITY



CHAPTER 112 - CABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS



REGULATION OF BUSINESS AND VOCATIONS



CHAPTER 120 - LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



CHAPTER 121 - CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS



CHAPTER 122 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



CHAPTER 123 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS



CHAPTER 124 - LICENSING TAXICABS



CHAPTER 125 - PAWNBROKERS



STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



CHAPTER 135 - STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



CHAPTER 136 - SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 137 - VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



CHAPTER 138 - STREET GRADES



CHAPTER 139 - NAMING OF STREETS



CHAPTER 140 - CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



CHAPTER 141 - RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY



BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 145 - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



CHAPTER 146 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES



CHAPTER 147 - RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY  AND INSPECTION PROGRAM



CHAPTER 150 - BUILDING NUMBERING



CHAPTER 151 - TREES



CHAPTER 155 - BUILDING CODE



CHAPTER 156 - FIRE CODE



CHAPTER 157 - MECHANICAL CODE



CHAPTER 158 - PLUMBING CODE



CHAPTER 159 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE



CHAPTER 160 - ELECTRICAL CODE



CHAPTER 161 - HOUSING CODE



CHAPTER 162 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



CHAPTER 163 - CONSTRUCTION SITE SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



ZONING AND SUBDIVISION



CHAPTER 165 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS



CHAPTER 166 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - USE TYPES



CHAPTER 167 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - DISTRICT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 168 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 169 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 170 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 171 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS



CHAPTER 172 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



CHAPTER 173 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - SIGN REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 174 - ZONING AND PROPERTY - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



CHAPTER 175 - AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 176 - CORE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 180 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



INDEX



APPENDIX:



   USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES



   NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE



   SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES AND FEES



GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1.01  Title
 
1.08  Amendments


1.02  Definitions
 
1.09  Catchlines and Notes


1.03  City Powers
 
1.10  Altering Code


1.04  Indemnity
 
1.11  Severability


1.05  Personal Injuries
 
1.12  Warrants


1.06  Rules of Construction
 
1.13  General Standards for Action


1.07  Extension of Authority
 
1.14  Standard Penalty



 



1.01    TITLE.



   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Denison, Iowa.



1.02    DEFINITIONS.



   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in
the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of
Ordinances unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.  Other
words and phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless
specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances
or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:



      1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a
street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 



      2.   “City” means the City of Denison, Iowa.



      3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Denison, Iowa.



      4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of
Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive
title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by
reference).



      5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Denison, Iowa.



      6.   “Council” means the city council of Denison, Iowa.



      7.   “County” means Crawford County, Iowa.



      8.   “May” confers a power.



      9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution,
or motion.



      10.   “Must” states a requirement.



      11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or
land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building
or land, whether alone or with others.



      12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of
Denison, Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not
repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted
hereafter.



      13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership,
domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock
association, trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a
governmental body.



      14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard,
parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.



      15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.



      16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street
between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



      17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.



      18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of
the Code of Iowa, as amended.



      19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width
between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes
of vehicular traffic.



Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.



1.03    CITY POWERS.



   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and
if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)



1.04    INDEMNITY.



   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or
death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to
property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the
issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such
applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City
and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from
any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss,
damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
by reason of the foregoing.  The provisions of this section shall be deemed
to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or
any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.



1.05    PERSONAL INJURIES.



   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged
to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused.  The notice
shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name
and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of
the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the
person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend.  A judgment obtained in the suit
is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to
the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the
liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to
the amount of the damage or injury.  The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all
the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)



1.06    RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized
to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.



1.07    EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.



   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act
by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed
as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.



1.08    AMENDMENTS.



   All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)



1.09    CATCHLINES AND NOTES.



   The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances,
titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the
section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any
part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.



1.10    ALTERING CODE.



   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the
Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
City to be misrepresented thereby.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)



1.11    SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, provision, or part of the Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the
validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or
part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



1.12    WARRANTS.



   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon
or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.



1.13    GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.



   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard:  The discretionary power to
grant, deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts
and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.



1.14    STANDARD PENALTY.



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances
for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person
failing to perform a duty or obtain a license required by this Code of
Ordinances or violating any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule
or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six
hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00).



(Ord. 1472 - Feb. 18 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])



CHAPTER 2
CHARTER



 

2.01  Title
 
2.04  Number and Term of Council


2.02  Form of Government
 
2.05  Term of Mayor


2.03  Powers and Duties
 
2.06  Copies on File



 



2.01    TITLE.



   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Denison, Iowa. 1



2.02    FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of
government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



2.03    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and
shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by
the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.



2.04    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



   The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one
Council Member from each of three wards as established by this Code of
Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.05    TERM OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.06    COPIES ON FILE.



   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep
copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)



 


Notes

1 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 781 adopting a charter for the City was
passed and approved by the Council on July 14, 1975.



CHAPTER 3
ELECTION WARD BOUNDARIES



 

3.01  Division into Wards
 
3.02  Election Precincts



 



3.01    DIVISION INTO WARDS.



   The City is hereby divided into three wards.



      1.   First Ward.  The First Ward includes all that part of
the City lying within the following described boundaries:



   Beginning at the intersection of North 20th Street and Third Avenue
North thence north along the centerline of North 20th Street to the
intersection of North 20th Street and Sixth Avenue North, thence west along
the centerline of Sixth Avenue North to the intersection of Sixth Avenue
North and North 18th Street, thence north along the centerline of North 18th
Street to the intersection of North 18th Street and Eighth Avenue North,
thence easterly along the centerline of Eighth Avenue North to the
intersection of Eighth Avenue North and North 20th Street, thence northerly
along the centerline of North 20th Street to the intersection of North 20th
Street and Ridge Road, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Ridge
Road to the intersection of Ridge Road and the north corporate limits line,
thence west along the north corporate limits line until the corporate limits
line turns southerly at its most westerly point, thence proceed along the
west corporate limits line of the City until its intersection with the
centerline of U.S. Highway 59, south of its intersection with Chamberlin
Drive, thence northerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 59 to the
intersection of U.S. Highway 59 and Fourth Avenue South, thence east along
the centerline of Fourth Avenue South to the intersection of Fourth Avenue
South and South 7th Street, thence northerly along the centerline of South
7th Street to the intersection of 7th Street and Broadway, thence east along
the centerline of Broadway to the intersection of Broadway and Main Street,
thence north along the centerline of North Main Street to the intersection of
Third Avenue North and North Main Street, thence east along the centerline of
Third Avenue North to the intersection with North 20th Street (the point of
beginning).



      2.   Second Ward.  The Second Ward includes all that part of
the City lying within the following described boundaries:



   Beginning at the intersection of North 20th Street and Third Avenue
North, thence west along the centerline of Third Avenue North to the
intersection of Third Avenue North and North Main Street, thence south along
the centerline of North Main Street to the intersection of North Main Street
and Broadway, thence west along the centerline of Broadway to the
intersection of Broadway and South 7th Street, thence southerly along the
centerline of South 7th Street to the intersection of South 7th Street and
Fourth Avenue South, thence west along the centerline of Fourth Avenue South
to the intersection of Fourth Avenue South and U.S. Highway 59, thence
southerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 59 to the point where the
corporate boundary line departs the centerline of U.S. Highway 59 and turns
westerly, thence follow the southwest and south corporate limits line until
its intersection with South Main Street, thence northerly along the
centerline of South Main Street to the intersection of South Main Street and
the East Boyer River, thence easterly along the centerline of the East Boyer
River to the intersection of the centerline of the East Boyer River and the
centerline of Seventh Avenue South extended, thence west along the centerline
of Seventh Avenue South extended to the intersection of Seventh Avenue South
and South 15th Street, thence north along the centerline of South 15th Street
to the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence easterly along the
centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad and the northern edge of census
blocks 190470704004011 and 190470704004118 to their intersection with South
19th Street, thence north along the centerline of South 19th Street to the
intersection of South 19th Street and Fourth Avenue South, thence east along
the centerline of Fourth Avenue South to the intersection of Fourth Avenue
South and South 20th Street, thence north along the centerline of South 20th
Street to its intersection with Third Avenue North (the point of beginning).



      3.   Third Ward.  The Third Ward includes all that part of
the City lying within the following described boundaries:



   Beginning at the intersection of North 20th Street and Third Avenue
North, thence south along the centerline of North 20th Street to the
intersection of South 20th Street and Fourth Avenue South, thence west along
the centerline of Fourth Avenue South to the intersection of Fourth Avenue
South and South 19th Street, thence south along the centerline of South 19th
Street to the northern edge of census blocks 190470704004118 and
190470704004011 to their intersection with the centerline of the Union
Pacific Railroad, thence westerly along the centerline of the Union Pacific
Railroad to the centerline of South 15th Street, thence south along the
centerline of South 15th Street to the intersection of South 15th Street and
Seventh Avenue South, thence east along the centerline of Seventh Avenue
South to the centerline of Seventh Avenue South extended, to the intersection
of Seventh Avenue South extended and the centerline of the East Boyer River,
thence westerly along the centerline of the East Boyer River to the
intersection of the East Boyer River and South Main Street, thence southerly
along the centerline of South Main Street to the intersection of South Main
Street and the corporate limits line, thence east along the south corporate
limits line to the most southeasterly point of the corporate limits line,
thence north along the east corporate limits line to the intersection of the
corporate limits line with the north line of Fourth Avenue South, thence
easterly along the corporate limits line until the corporate limits line
turns north, thence northerly and westerly along the corporate limits line
until the intersection of the corporate limits line with the centerline of
Ridge Road, thence southwesterly along the centerline of Ridge Road to the
intersection of Ridge Road and North 20th Street, thence south along the
centerline of North 20th Street to the intersection of North 20th Street and
Eighth Avenue North, thence westerly along the centerline of Eighth Avenue
North to the intersection of Eighth Avenue North and North 18th Street,
thence south along the centerline of North 18th Street to the intersection of
North 18th Street and Sixth Avenue North, thence east along the centerline of
Sixth Avenue North to the intersection of Sixth Avenue North and North 20th
Street, thence south along the centerline of North 20th Street to the
intersection of North 20th Street and Third Avenue North (the point of
beginning).



3.02    ELECTION PRECINCTS.



   The three wards defined in Section 3.01 of this chapter are hereby
established as the election precincts in the City of Denison, Iowa, pursuant
to Section 49.5 of the Code of Iowa.



(Ch. 3 - Ord. 1412 - Oct. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS



 

4.01  Municipal Infraction
 
4.04  Civil Citations


4.02  Violations, Penalties, and Alternative Relief
 
4.05  Criminal Penalties


4.03  Environmental Violation
 



 



4.01    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the
Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as
provided herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])



4.02    VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.



      1.   Unless provided elsewhere in this Code, a violation of a
City ordinance is punishable by a civil penalty which shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.  The schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees is
listed in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



      2.   Failure to conform to the standards, criteria, or
provisions of the following chapters of this Code of Ordinances may
constitute a municipal infraction, punishable by a civil penalty:



         A.   Chapter 50   – Nuisance Abatement. 



         B.   Chapter 91   – Private Wells Restricted



         C.   Chapter 123   – Moving Buildings



         D.   Chapter 145   – Dangerous Buildings



         E.   Chapter 155   – Building Code



         F.   Chapter 156   – Fire Code



         G.   Chapter 157   – Mechanical Code



         H.   Chapter 158   – Plumbing Code



         I.   Chapter 159   – Existing Building Code



         J.   Chapter 160   – Electrical Code



         K.   Chapter 161   – Housing Code



         L.   Chapter 162   – Property Maintenance Code



         M.   Chapter 171   – Zoning and Property –
Administration and Enforcement



      3.   Violations of those chapters listed in subsection 2 above
are punishable by a civil penalty which shall be set by resolution of the
City Council.  The schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees is listed in the
Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



      4.   Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.



      5.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter
does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the Court in
the same action.  Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited
to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.



      6.   Special Civil Penalties.



         A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than
$1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or continues.



         B.   A municipal infraction classified as an
environmental violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00
for each occurrence.  However, an environmental violation is not subject to
such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:



            (1)   The violation results solely from conducting
an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation
or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.



            (2)   The City is notified of the violation within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.



            (3)   The violation does not continue in existence
for more than eight (8) hours.



4.03    ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.



   A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code
of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation.  However, the provisions of this section shall not
be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal
negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



      1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8.



      2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by
the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.



      3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by
the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such
industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from
September 15 to January 15.



4.04    CIVIL CITATIONS.



   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances
may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. 
A copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule
of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at
defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and
subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311.  A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation
shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.  The citation shall serve
as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the
following information:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])



      1.   The name and address of the defendant.



      2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by
the officer issuing the citation.



      3.   The location and time of the infraction.



      4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the
alternative relief sought, or both.



      5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may
be paid.



      6.   The time and place of court appearance.



      7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.



(Ord. 1364 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



      8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if
applicable.



(Ord. 1386 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



4.05    CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation.  Nor does it preclude or
limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])



CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES



 

5.01  Oaths
 
5.07  Conflict of Interest


5.02  Bonds
 
5.08  Resignations


5.03  Duties:  General
 
5.09  Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees


5.04  Books and Records
 
5.10  Vacancies


5.05  Transfer to Successor
 
5.11  Gifts


5.06  Meetings
 



 



5.01    OATHS.



   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance
with the following:



      1.   Qualify for Office.  Each elected or appointed officer
shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when
required, a bond.  The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such
officer is certified as elected, no later than noon of the first day which is
not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for
which the officer was elected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)



      2.   Prescribed Oath.  The prescribed oath is:  “I,
(name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully
and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the
office of (name of office) in Denison as now or hereafter required by law.”



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)



      3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths.  The following
are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective offices:



         A.   Mayor



         B.   City Clerk



         C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies
created by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)



5.02    BONDS.



   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:



      1.   Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a
surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be
necessary and advisable.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)



      2.   Bonds Approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)



      3.   Bonds Filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper
record, shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])



      4.   Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the
“Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds
of all City officers, elective or appointive.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])



5.03    DUTIES:  GENERAL.



   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.04    BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be
open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions
of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept
confidential.  Access to public records which are combined with data
processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)



5.05    TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



   Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.06    MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any
multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing
bodies shall be held in accordance with the following:



      1.   Notice of Meetings and Tentative Agenda. 



         A.   Timeliness.  Notice of a meeting, its time, date,
place, and tentative agenda shall be finalized, posted and distributed by
12:00 p.m. on a day that is at least two business days before the day of the
council meeting. In case of emergency, less advanced notice may be given, but
in all cases reasonable notice, as defined by state law, shall be given.



         B.   Tentative agenda.  Items shall be placed on the
tentative agenda at the request of the Mayor, City Manager, or two
councilmembers.



(Ord. 1501 - May 19 Supp.)



      2.   Meetings Open.  All meetings shall be held in open
session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



      3.   Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing
the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each
meeting.  The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present.  The
vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.  The
minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



      4.   Closed Session.  A closed session may be held only by
affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members
present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)



      5.   Cameras and Recorders.  The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)



      6.   Electronic Meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by
electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is
impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)



5.07    CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof
or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly
permitted by law.  A contract entered into in violation of this section is
void.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)



      1.   Compensation of Officers.  The payment of lawful
compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office
or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public
office or is not prohibited by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])



      2.   Investment of Funds.  The designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])



      3.   Stock Interests.  Contracts in which a City officer or
employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest
of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the
contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and
opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as
a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve
the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.  The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])



      4.   Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])



      5.   Existing Contracts.  A contract in which a City officer
or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the
officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be
renewed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])



      6.   Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer firefighters or
civil defense volunteers.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])



      7.   Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a
City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when
less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the
spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])



      8.   Contracts.  Contracts made by the City upon competitive
bid in writing, publicly invited, and opened. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])



      9.   Cumulative Purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted
by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City
officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do
not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars
($1500.00) in a fiscal year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[10])



      10.   Franchise Agreements.  Franchise agreements between the
City and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision
of essential City utility services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])



      11.   Third Party Contracts.  A contract that is a bond, note
or other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly
from the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or
may not be the original underwriter, purchaser or obligee of the contract.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[13])



5.08    RESIGNATIONS.



   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered.  A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible
for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been
increased.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])



5.09    REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons
appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body
making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. 
The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request
filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the
copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues
connected with the removal.  The hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests
a later date.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)



5.10    VACANCIES.



   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be
filled, at the Council's option, by one of the two following procedures:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])



      1.   Appointment.  By appointment following public notice by
the remaining members of the Council within sixty (60) days after the vacancy
occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of
the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the
Council shall call a special election as provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])



      2.   Election.  By a special election held to fill the office
for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])


(Ord. 1442 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




5.11    GIFTS.



   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a
public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate
family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift
or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B
and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or
jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a
series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)



CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS



 

6.01  Nominating Method to be Used
 
6.04  Preparation of Petition and Affidavit


6.02  Nominations by Petition
 
6.05  Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections


6.03  Adding Name by Petition
 
6.06  Persons Elected



 



6.01    NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.



   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under
the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)



6.02    NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.



   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors,
residents of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)



6.03    ADDING NAME BY PETITION.



   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than
by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)



6.04    PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.



   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of
candidacy.  The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form
prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information
required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code
of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)



6.05    FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS.



   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency
of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed
by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)



6.06    PERSONS ELECTED.



   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office
on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])



CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT



 

7.01  Purpose
 
7.04  Fund Control


7.02  Finance Officer
 
7.05  Operating Budget Preparation


7.03  Cash Control
 
7.06  Financial Reports



 



7.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for
rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of
the City.



7.02    FINANCE OFFICER.



   The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.



7.03    CASH CONTROL.



   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:



      1.   Deposit of Funds.  All moneys or fees collected for any
purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the
finance officer.  If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid
to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the
Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto
as required by law, ordinance, or Council directive. 



      2.   Deposits and Investments.  All moneys belonging to the
City shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in
amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the
Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy
and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)



7.04    FUND CONTROL.



   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds
in accordance with the following: 



      1.   Revenues.  All moneys received by the City shall be
credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.



      2.   Expenditures.  No disbursement shall be made from a fund
unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was
properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council. 



      3.   Emergency Fund.  No transfer may be made from any fund
to the Emergency Fund.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])



      4.   Debt Service Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt
Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest.  Such transfers
must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])



      5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Except where
specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City
fund to the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Such transfers must be
authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])



      6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds.  A surplus in a Utility or
Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the
Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council.  A
surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any
restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any
revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise
Fund.  A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or
the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in excess of:



         A.   The amount of the expense of disbursements for
operating and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three
(3) months, and



         B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers
to restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])



      7.   Balancing of Funds.  Fund accounts shall be reconciled
at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.



7.05    OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.



   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance
with the following:



      1.   Proposal Prepared.  The City Manager is responsible for
preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council
and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and
Council.



      2.   Boards and Commissions.  All boards, commissions and
other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the City Manager for
inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.



      3.   Submission to Council.  The City Manager shall submit
the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of
each year.



      4.   Council Review.  The Council shall review the proposed
budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate
before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.



      5.   Notice of Hearing.  Upon adopting a proposed budget the
Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March
15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to
be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date established for the hearing.  Proof of such publication must be filed
with the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])



      6.   Copies of Budget on File.  Not less than twenty (20)
days before the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor
and not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall
make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet
the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for
distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])



      7.   Adoption and Certification.  After the hearing, the
Council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal
year and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal
year to the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors.  The tax
levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in
the proposed budget.  Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and
of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])



7.06    FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial
reports:



      1.   Monthly Reports.  There shall be submitted to the
Council each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund,
program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month.



      2.   Annual Report.  Not later than December 1 of each year
there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the
preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the
City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the
legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year.  A copy of the
annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December
1 of each year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)



CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



 

8.01  Purpose
 
8.06  Applications


8.02  Definitions
 
8.07  Approval


8.03  Period of Partial Exemption
 
8.08  Exemption Repealed


8.04  Amounts Eligible for Exemption
 
8.09  Dual Exemptions Prohibited


8.05  Limitations
 



 



8.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers.



8.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



      1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as
of the first year for which the exemption is received.



      2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure
used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent
shipment to retail outlets.  Distribution center does not mean a building or
structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily
by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process,
used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail
sale of goods.



      3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures
and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions
to existing buildings and structures.  New construction does not include
reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute
complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an
existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing
building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for
the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction
is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue
competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination
shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the
recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.



      4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or
group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities,
including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of
prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services
which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the
public.



      5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a
public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7,
of the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure
used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are
sold at retail.



8.03    PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.



   The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial
exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.04    AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.



   The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from
taxation shall be as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



      1.   For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%) 



      2.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%)



      3.   For the third year, forty-five percent (45%) 



      4.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%) 



      5.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)



8.05    LIMITATIONS.



   The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of
the new construction added.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.06    APPLICATIONS.



   An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



      1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner
of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year
in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.



      2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information
pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information
deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.



8.07    APPROVAL.



   A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction.  If the
City Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and
hold a public hearing thereon.  Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after
such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a
tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance
with City zoning.  Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to
exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and
found to be qualified real estate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



8.08    EXEMPTION REPEALED.



   When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption
granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council
may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until
their expiration.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)



8.09    DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.



   A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property
tax exemption authorized by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)



CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL



 




EDITOR’S NOTE



The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 

ADOPTED

 

NAME OF AREA




1016

 

December 11, 1990

 
Denison Urban Renewal Area



1069

 

March 8, 1994

 
1994 Addition to Denison Urban Renewal Area



1184

 

August 28, 2000

 
2000 Addition to Denison Urban Renewal Area



1226

 

March 31, 2003

 
2003 Addition to Denison Urban Renewal Area



1404

 

April 13, 2011

 
2010 Addition to Denison Urban Renewal Area



1407

 

June 30, 2011

 
Addition to the 2010 Addition to Denison Urban Renewal Area




 



       



CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION



   EDITOR’S NOTE



   Ordinance No. 1129, adopted September 16, 1997, designated the Denison
Urban Revitalization Area for the City.  This ordinance, not codified
herein, is specifically saved from repeal.



CHAPTER 11
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX



 

11.01  Tax Imposed
 
11.02  Administration



 



11.01    TAX IMPOSED.



   There is hereby levied and imposed, in accordance with Chapter 423A of
the Code of Iowa, a seven percent (7%) tax upon the gross receipts from the
renting of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel,
inn, public lodging house or rooming house, mobile home which is tangible
personal property or tourist court, or any place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or
without meals, in the City, excepting only those rooms excluded by Section
423A.5 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.4)



11.02    ADMINISTRATION.



   The receipts of this tax shall be used only for those purposes
authorized by Section 423A.7 of the Code of Iowa and shall be administered by
the Tourism Board established by Chapter 28 of this Code of Ordinances.



ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



CHAPTER 15
MAYOR



 

15.01  Term of Office
 
15.04  Compensation


15.02  Powers and Duties
 
15.05  Voting


15.03  Appointments
 



 



15.01    TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



15.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:



      1.   Chief Executive Officer.  Act as the chief executive
officer of the City and presiding officer of the Council. The Mayor shall
not, however, have any supervisory authority over City employees or officers,
unless expressly required by state law, as all such authority has been
delegated to the City Manager. The Mayor's lack of authority includes, but is
not limited to, a lack of authority to direct the work of any of the City's
employees or its appointed officers.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



(Ord. 1507 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      2.   Proclamation of Emergency.  Have authority to take
command of the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a
determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists.  Within the
City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to
suppress disorders.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])



      3.   Special Meetings.  Call special meetings of the Council
when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City. 
 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



      4.   Mayor’s Veto.  Sign, veto or take no action on an
ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the Council.  The Mayor may
veto an ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after
passage.  The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written
message to the Council at the time of the veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])



      5.   Reports to Council.  Make such oral or written reports
to the Council as required.  These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.



      6.   Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations
properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The Mayor shall
not represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.



      7.   Contracts.  Whenever authorized by the Council, sign
contracts on behalf of the City, provided, however, that the Mayor shall not
have the authority to direct work of any of the City's retained vendors or
other retained professionals absent specific Council approval.



(Ord. 1507 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      8.   Licenses and Permits.  Sign all licenses and permits
which have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or
ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer.



      9.   Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public
expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.



      10.   Absentee Officer.  Make appropriate provision that
duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.



15.03    APPOINTMENTS.



   The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and the Mayor also appoints,
with Council approval, the following officials:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



      1.   Fire Chief



      2.   Police Chief



      3.   Aquatic Recreation Center Commission



      4.   Boulders Conference Center Commission



      5.   Board of Library Trustees



      6.   Northside Recreation Area Advisory Board



      7.   Tourism Board



      8.   Utility Board of Trustees



      9.   City Engineer



      10.   2020 Executive Advisory Board



      11.   Representative to the Crawford County Joint E911 Service
Board




(Ord. 1503 - Sep. 19 Supp.)




   In addition, the Mayor recommends individuals for appointment by the
Council for membership on the Planning and Zoning Commission.



15.04    COMPENSATION.



   The salary of the Mayor is six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year,
payable in monthly installments.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



15.05    VOTING.



   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member
of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 



CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM



 

16.01  Vice President of Council
 
16.03  Voting Rights


16.02  Powers and Duties
 
16.04  Compensation



 



16.01    VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who
shall serve as vice president of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties.  In the exercise of the duties of the office
the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ or discharge from
employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ or discharge without the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.03    VOTING RIGHTS.



   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.04    COMPENSATION.



   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days
or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as
determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of
the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL



 

17.01  Number and Term of Council
 
17.04  Council Meetings


17.02  Powers and Duties
 
17.05  Appointments


17.03  Exercise of Power
 
17.06  Compensation



 



17.01    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



   The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one
Council Member from each of three wards as established by the Code of
Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.



17.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to
the following:



      1.   General.  All powers of the City are vested in the
Council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



      2.   Wards.  By ordinance, the Council may divide the City
into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate
wards, or create new wards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])



      3.   Fiscal Authority.  The Council shall apportion and
appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and
claims, and order payment thereof.  It shall make all assessments for the
cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or
repairs which may be specially assessed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])



      4.   Public Improvements.  The Council shall make all orders
for the construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



      5.   Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the
making of all contracts.  No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the
City unless approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)



      6.   Employees.  The Council shall authorize, by resolution,
the number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers
not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers.  By
ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council
members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of
the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is
adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the
compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and
December in the year of a regular City election.  A change in the
compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at
the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next
following the change in compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



17.03    EXERCISE OF POWER.



   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])



      1.   Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the
Council.  Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the
Council.  A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to
accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion.  Each
Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded.  A measure which
fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



      2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within thirty (30) days
after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of
not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



      3.   Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the
Council become effective in one of the following ways:



         A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor
becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])



         B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])



         C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage
of the motion by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])



         D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or
resolution and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a
resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or
amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



         E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days
after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14
days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is
provided within the ordinance or amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])



   “All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of
the Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent,
but does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by
reason of a conflict of interest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



17.04    COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other
provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances.  Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:



      1.   Regular Meetings.  The regular meetings of the Council
are on the first Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. and on the third Tuesday
of each month at 5:00 p.m., at the Council Chambers at City Hall.  If such
day falls on a legal holiday, the meeting is held the following day at the
same time unless a different day or time is determined by the Council.
      (Ord. 1419 - May 12 Supp.)



      2.   Special Meetings.  Special meetings shall be held upon
call of the Mayor or upon the request of a majority of the members of the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



      3.   Quorum.  A majority of all Council members is a quorum. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])



      4.   Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall determine its own
rules and maintain records of its proceedings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



      5.   Compelling Attendance.  Any three members of the Council
can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or
duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to
attend at once.



       6.   Cancellation of Council Meetings.  City Council shall
have the sole authority to cancel council meetings.



(Ord. 1498 - May 19 Supp.)



17.05    APPOINTMENTS.



   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:



      1.   City Clerk / Treasurer



      2.   City Attorney



      3.   City Manager / Director of Public Works



      4.   Planning and Zoning Commission



      5.   Airport Commission



      6.   Airport Zoning Commission – two members

      7.   Board of Adjustment - five members



      8.   Denison Community Housing Authority




(Ord. 1503 - Sep. 19 Supp.)




17.06    COMPENSATION.



   Each Council member is paid three hundred dollars ($300.00) at the
beginning of the year for all special and committee meetings.  Each Council
member is also paid twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each regular meeting of
the Council attended, payable at the end of the year, not to exceed a total
of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per year, including all compensation for
regular and special meetings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK



 

18.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
18.08  Records


18.02  Powers and Duties: General
 
18.09  Attendance at Meetings


18.03  Publication of Minutes
 
18.10  Issue Licenses and Permits


18.04  Recording Measures
 
18.11  Notify Appointees


18.05  Publication
 
18.12  Elections


18.06  Authentication
 
18.13  City Seal


18.07  Certify Measures
 



 



18.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for an
indefinite term.  The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established
by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])



18.02    POWERS AND DUTIES:  GENERAL.



   The City Clerk has the following powers and duties:



      1.   Financial Administration. Be responsible for financial
administration and:



         A.   Budget. Prepare the budget annually and submit it
to the Council together with a message describing the important features.



         B.   Accounting and Reporting.  Prepare or supervise
the development and administration of such accounting and reporting systems
as may be necessary or desirable to accurately reflect the financial
condition of the City.



         C.   Purchasing. Supervise the development and
administration of a modern and efficient purchasing system covering the
acquisition by the City of services, supplies, and materials.



      2.   Contracts. Supervise the performance of all contracts of
the City, make all purchases of materials and supplies, and see that such
materials and supplies are received and are of the quality and character
called for by the contract.



      3.   Investigative Authority. Summarily and without notice,
investigate the affairs and conduct of any department, agency, officer, or
employee under the supervision of the City Manager/Director of Public Works,
and/or City Clerk, and compel the production and evidence and attendance of
witnesses.



      4.   Personnel.  Evaluation of Employees.  Evaluate or
oversee evaluation of the performance of the Deputy Clerk, Administrative
Assistant and Part-time Office Assistant.



      5.   Recommendations.  Recommend to the Council such measures
as deemed necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the
City.



      6.   Boards and Commissions. Carry on the management of any
present board or commission if such board or commission is abolished or
ceases to exist.



      7.   The Clerk, or in the Clerk's absence or inability to act,
the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances and the law.



(Ord. 1469 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



18.03    PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.



   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and
within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause
the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.  Such publication
shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and
shall show the gross amount of the claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])



18.04    RECORDING MEASURES.



   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council
and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether
the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the
measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])



18.05    PUBLICATION.



   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as follows:



      1.   Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other
official action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice
must be published at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty
(20) days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless
otherwise provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])



      2.   Manner of Publication.  A publication required by this
Code of Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once
weekly and having general circulation in the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])



18.06    AUTHENTICATION.



   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the
Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when
required.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])



18.07    CERTIFY MEASURES.



   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)



18.08    RECORDS.



   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:



      1.   Ordinances and Codes.  Maintain copies of all effective
City ordinances and codes for public use.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])



      2.   Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the
safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in
interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      3.   Maintenance.  Maintain all City records and documents,
or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that
ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer,
redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at
least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or
obligations.  Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and
documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions
shall be maintained permanently.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])



      4.   Provide Copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal
officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s
control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such
officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment
of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or
other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public
documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are
required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])



      5.   Filing of Communications.  Keep and file all
communications and petitions directed to the Council or to the City
generally.  The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken
upon matters considered in such communications and petitions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.09    ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards, and commissions.  The Clerk shall record and preserve a
correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.10    ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by
this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued
which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose
for which issued.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.11    NOTIFY APPOINTEES.



   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.12    ELECTIONS.



   The Clerk shall perform the following duty relating to elections and
nominations:



      1.   Certify to the County Commissioner of Elections the type
of nomination process to be used by the City no later than ninety (90) days
before the date of the regular City election.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)




(Ord. 1444 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




18.13    CITY SEAL.



   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by
the Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates which it may be
necessary or proper to authenticate.  The City seal is circular in form, in
the center of which are the words “DENISON, IOWA,” and around the margin
of which are the words “CITY SEAL.”



CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER



 

19.01  Appointment
 
19.03  Duties of Treasurer


19.02  Compensation
 



 



19.01    APPOINTMENT.



   The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of
the position of Treasurer.



19.02    COMPENSATION.



   The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties
of the Treasurer.



19.03    DUTIES OF TREASURER.



   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      1.   Custody of Funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody
of all funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council
direction. 



      2.   Record of Fund.  Keep the record of each fund separate. 



      3.   Record Receipts.  Keep an accurate record of all money
or securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the
date, from whom, and for what purpose received. 



      4.   Record Disbursements.  Keep an accurate account of all
disbursements, money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what
fund paid. 



      5.   Special Assessments.  Keep a separate account of all
money received by the Treasurer from special assessments. 



      6.   Deposit Funds.  Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the
Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in
depositories selected by the Council.



      7.   Reconciliation.  Reconcile depository statements with
the Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of
cash and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.



      8.   Financial Report.  Make to the Council not later than
the first Monday of each month an itemized financial report in writing,
showing the receipts and disbursements for the preceding month.  Copies of
financial reports must be available at the Clerk’s office for public
distribution.



      9.   Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as specified by
the Council by resolution or ordinance. 



CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY



 

20.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
20.06  Provide Legal Opinion


20.02  Attorney for City
 
20.07  Attendance at Council Meetings


20.03  Power of Attorney
 
20.08  Prepare Documents


20.04  Ordinance Preparation
 
20.09  Other Duties


20.05  Review and Comment
 



 



20.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney.  The City
Attorney shall hold office until the end of the term of the City Council
which made the appointment or until a successor has been appointed and
qualified.  The City Council may employ another attorney at law to represent
the City in place of or in addition to the City Attorney.  The City Attorney
shall receive such compensation as may be allowed by motion of the City
Council upon presentation of a statement thereof.



20.02    ATTORNEY FOR CITY.



   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board.  The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.03    POWER OF ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds
and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound
upon the same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.04    ORDINANCE PREPARATION.



   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may
desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.05    REVIEW AND COMMENT.



   The City Attorney shall, upon request of the City Manager or the City
Council, make a report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts,
documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the City
Attorney's notice.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



(Ord. 1505 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



20.06    PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.



   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
City Manager or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



(Ord. 1505 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



20.07    ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request
of the City Manager or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



(Ord. 1505 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



20.08    PREPARE DOCUMENTS.



   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.09    OTHER DUTIES.



   The City Attorney shall have such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be provided by the City Council, the ordinances of the City, or
the laws of the State and shall transmit to his or her successor in office
all books, papers, records, documents, or other property belonging to the
City, together with an inventory of the same, in the City Attorney’s
custody or control pertaining to such office.



CHAPTER 21
CITY MANAGER / DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS



 

21.01  Appointment and Term
 
21.07  Other Duties


21.02  Compensation and Benefits
 
21.08  Council’s Retained Powers


21.03  Mayor and Police Department
 
21.09  Mayor’s Retained Powers


21.04  Administrative Responsibility
 
21.10  Exceptions


21.05  Appointment of Officers
 
21.11  Council Relations


21.06  Powers and Duties
 



 



21.01    APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works is appointed by a majority
vote of the Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council, and
is subject to removal by majority vote of the Council.



21.02    COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall receive such salary
as the Council shall from time to time determine and shall also receive all
personnel benefits available to other employees of the City and any other
benefits the Council deems appropriate.



21.03    MAYOR AND POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall assist the Mayor in
any mayoral duties as requested by the Mayor and approved by the Council. 
Said officer shall have such charge and control of the Police Department as
the Mayor may at any time delegate in writing.



21.04    ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall be directly
responsible to the Council for the administration of municipal affairs as
directed by that body.  All departmental activity requiring the attention of
the Council shall be brought before the body by the City Manager / Director
of Public Works and Council involvement in administration initiated by the
Council must be coordinated through such officer.



21.05    APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall have power to
recruit, select, and employ persons to fill all offices for which no other
mode of appointment is provided, subject to the approval of the Council.



21.06    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Manager/Director of Public Works has the following powers and
duties:



      1.   Financial Administration.  Be responsible for financial
administration and:



         A.   Budget.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it
to the Council together with a message describing the important features.



         B.   Accounting and Reporting.  Prepare or supervise
the development and administration of such accounting and reporting systems
as may be necessary or desirable to accurately reflect the financial
condition of the City.



         C.   Purchasing.  Supervise the development and
administration of a modern and efficient purchasing system covering the
acquisition by the City of services, supplies, and materials.



      2.   Contracts. Supervise the performance of all contracts of
the City, make all purchases of materials and supplies, and see that such
materials and supplies are received and are of the quality and character
called for by the contract.



      3.   Property and Improvements. With appropriate professional
assistance, supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance,
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the
City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements, except
property, improvements and undertakings managed by a utility board of
trustees.



      4.   Intergovernmental Agreements.  Act for the City in the
exercise and execution of all policies and programs when the City is involved
on a joint basis with any other governmental subdivision, including any
subdivision of the government of the State of Iowa or of the United States of
America.



      5.   Council Meetings.  Attend all meetings of the Council
unless excused by the Mayor.



      6.   Investigative Authority.  Summarily and without notice,
investigate the affairs and conduct of any department, agency, officer, or
employee under the supervision of the City Manager/Director of Public Works,
and compel the production and evidence and attendance of witnesses.



      7.   Planning.  Assist the Council, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and all other boards and commissions in the carrying out and
revision of the Comprehensive Plan and all other forms of planning for the
future growth and development of the City.



      8.   Economic Development.  Execute, oversee, and coordinate
the economic development efforts of the City with Crawford County, Crawford
County Development Corporation and other local economic development entities.



      9.   Personnel. 



         A.   Supervision and Evaluation of employees. 
Supervise, evaluate or oversee evaluation of the performance of the City
Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Assistant Public Works Director and
Street Commissioner. The authority to supervise and evaluate includes but is
not limited to the authority to suspend, investigate and/or discipline the
supervised employees.



         B.   Supervision of Appointed Officials. Supervise and
direct the workload, subject to Council approval, of appointed officers,
including but not limited to, the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1505 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      10.   Recommendations.  Recommend to the Council such
measures as deemed necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare
of the City. 



      11.   City Laws.  Supervise the enforcement and execution of
the City laws. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the City, and see that all
franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the City are faithfully
observed.



      12.   Inform and Coordinate.  Keep the Council informed on
the progress of all its programs and status of its policies; coordinate and
direct all municipal services provided through the various departments.



      13.   Boards and Commissions.  Carry on the management of any
present board or commission if such board or commission is abolished or
ceases to exist.



(Ord. 1500 - May 19 Supp.)



(Ord. 1492 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      9.   Recommendations.  Recommend to the Council such measures
as deemed necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the
City. 



      10.   City Laws.  Supervise the enforcement and execution of
the City laws. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the City, and see that all
franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the City are faithfully
observed.



      11.   Inform and Coordinate.  Keep the Council informed on
the progress of all its programs and status of its policies; coordinate and
direct all municipal services provided through the various departments.



      12.   Boards and Commissions.  Carry on the management of any
present board or commission if such board or commission is abolished or
ceases to exist.



(Ord. 1469 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



21.07    OTHER DUTIES.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall perform other duties
at the Council’s direction.



21.08    COUNCIL’S RETAINED POWERS.



   Without limitation, the Council specifically retains the powers and
duties as listed in Chapter 17, subsections 17.02 and 17.05 of this Code of
Ordinances.  In addition the Council:



      1.   Controls and directs the activities of the City Manager /
Director of Public Works.



      2.   Makes, establishes, and approves the policies of the City.



21.09    MAYOR’S RETAINED POWERS.



   Without limitation, the Mayor specifically retains the powers and
duties as listed in Chapter 15, subsections 15.02 and 15.03 of this Code of
Ordinances; provided, however, that the Mayor shall have no retained power
with respect to the employees or officers identified in City Code section
21.06(9) as all supervisory authority has been delegated to the City Manager
pursuant to this Chapter.  In addition the Mayor:



      1.   Works with the City Manager / Director of Public Works in
the furtherance of the policies of the Council;



      2.   Fulfills all legal obligations and responsibilities
provided by ordinance or State law.



(Ord. 1505 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



21.10    EXCEPTIONS.



   The governance and operation of the Denison Municipal Utilities are
hereby excepted from all provisions of this chapter.  The City Manager /
Director of Public Works shall have no authority over or responsibility in
regard to the Denison Municipal Utilities.  The City Manager / Director of
Public Works shall act as the Council’s liaison and representative to the
Denison Municipal Utilities and will cooperate with the Board of Trustees of
the Denison Municipal Utilities and its manager.  The City Manager /
Director of Public Works shall, from time to time as deemed appropriate, make
recommendations to the Council concerning its relations with the Denison
Municipal Utilities.



21.11    COUNCIL RELATIONS.



   The City Manager / Director of Public Works shall not take part in any
City election except by casting his or her vote, and shall not appoint a City
elected official to any City office or employment. 



CHAPTER 22
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES



 

22.01  Establishment of Board
 
22.07  Use Pursuant to Contract


22.02  Term of Office
 
22.08  Library Account


22.03  Qualifications of Members
 
22.09  Annual Report


22.04  Vacancies
 
22.10  Records


22.05  Powers
 
22.11  Compensation


22.06  Power to Contract
 



 



22.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.



   The public library for the City is known as the Norelius Community
Library.  It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.  There is
hereby established a Board of Library Trustees consisting of seven (7)
members.  The members of the Board are appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.



22.02    TERM OF OFFICE.



   All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years, except to
fill vacancies.  Each term shall commence on July 1.  Appointments shall be
made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as possible, to
stagger the terms.



22.03    QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   Only bona fide citizens and residents of the City, male or female, 18
years of age or over, are eligible to membership of the Board of Library
Trustees.



22.04    VACANCIES.



   Vacancies in the Board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with
the approval of the Council.  Such appointees shall fill out the unexpired
term for which the appointment is made.  The removal of any member of the
Board permanently from the City or by absence from six consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in case of sickness or temporary absence from
the City, without due explanation of absence, shall render such member’s
office vacant.



22.05    POWERS.



   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers:



      1.   To meet and organize by the election of one of their
members as President of the Board, and by the election of a Secretary and
such other officers as the Board may deem necessary. 



      2.   To have charge, control and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same, directing and
controlling all the affairs of the Library.



      3.   To recruit, select, and appoint such employees as it
determines to be necessary to perform its duties, subject to the budgetary
limitations established by the City Council.  The Board shall determine the
duties and compensation of such employees.  Any employees appointed by the
Board may be removed by it.



      4.   To remove the librarian, assistants or employees by a
two-thirds vote of the Board, for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention
to duties.



      5.   To select and make purchases of books, pamphlets,
magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, furniture, fixtures,
stationery and supplies for the Library.



      6.   To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents of
the City and to fix charges therefor.



      7.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal bylaws, rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law,
for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the business
of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.



      8.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under
the rules of the Board.



      9.   To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or
mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the
title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills
of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received
by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.



22.06    POWER TO CONTRACT.



   Contracts may be made by the Board of Library trustees with any other
boards of trustees of any other free public libraries, or with any other
city, school corporation, township, or county, or with the trustees of any
County library district for the use of the Library by their respective
residents.  Such contracts shall provide for the rate of tax to be levied
during the period thereof.  They may, by mutual consent of the contracting
parties, be terminated at any time.  They may also be terminated by a
majority of the electors, represented by either of the contracting parties,
voting on a proposition to terminate which shall be submitted by the
governing body upon a written petition of electors in a number not less than
five percent (5%) of those who voted in the area for Governor at the last
general election.  The proposition may be submitted at any election provided
by law which covers the area of that seeking to terminate the contract.  The
petition shall be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40)
days before the election at which the question is to be submitted.



22.07    USE PURSUANT TO CONTRACT.



   Use of the Library pursuant to a contract authorized by Section 22.06
of this chapter shall be accomplished by one or more of the following methods
in whole or in part:



      1.   By lending the books of the Library to such residents on
the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City. 



      2.   By establishing depositories of Library books to be
loaned to such residents at stated times and places. 



      3.   By establishing bookmobiles or other conveyances for
lending the same to such residents at stated times and places.



      4.   By establishing branch libraries for lending books to
such residents. 



22.08    LIBRARY ACCOUNT.



   The Board of Library Trustees shall have control of the expenditure of
all funds provided for Library purposes under the annual budget adopted by
the Council.  Statements of all expenditures to be paid out of said funds
shall be submitted to the Clerk for payment after approval by the Board of
Library Trustees.



22.09    ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the
close of each municipal fiscal year.  This report shall contain statements
as to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number
circulated, the number not returned or lost, the amount of fines collected,
and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the
year, together with such further information as may be required by the
Council.



22.10    RECORDS.



   The Board of Library Trustees shall keep a record of its proceedings.



22.11    COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services.



CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



 

23.01  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
23.04  Compensation


23.02  Term of Office
 
23.05  Powers and Duties


23.03  Vacancies
 



 



23.01    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council.  The
Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any
elective office in the City government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)



23.02    TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five
years.  The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in
any one year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.03    VACANCIES.



   If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the
same manner as the original appointee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.04    COMPENSATION.



   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.05    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



      1.   Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose
annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as
Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties
of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



      2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt
such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedures as it
may deem necessary.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



      3.   Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the
powers and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations
and other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)



      4.   Recommendations of Improvements.  No statuary, memorial
or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct,
street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any
department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless
the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been
submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except
such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for
any such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written
notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



      5.   Review and Comment on Plats.  All plans, plats, or
re-plats of subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or
adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or
other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the
City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations
obtained before approval by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



      6.   Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements.  No
plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or
other public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by
the City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such
proposal shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission
shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations
thereon. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



      7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts.  The Commission shall
have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



CHAPTER 24
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



 

24.01  Purpose
 
24.07  Vacancies


24.02  Board Established
 
24.08  Powers and Duties of the Board


24.03  Appointment of Trustees
 
24.09  Control of Funds


24.04  Removal
 
24.10  Accounting


24.05  Qualifications
 
24.11  Discriminatory Rates Illegal


24.06  Compensation
 
24.12  Discontinuance of Board



 



24.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned Denison Municipal Utilities by a board of trustees.



24.02    BOARD ESTABLISHED.



Pursuant to an election held January 27, 1949, the management and control of
the municipally owned waterworks, and electric utilities, were placed in the
hands of a Utility Board of Trustees.  Pursuant to an election held March
18, 1969, the municipally owned sanitary sewer system was placed under the
Utility Board of Trustees.  Pursuant to an election held November 6, 1979,
the number of Board members was increased to five (5).  Pursuant to an
election held November 4, 1997, the cable/telecommunications utilities were
placed under the Utility Board of Trustees.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)



24.03    APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES.



   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, five
persons to serve as trustees for staggered six-year terms.  No public
officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the utility board.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



24.04    REMOVAL.



   The City Council may remove a trustee in accordance with the
requirements of the Code of Iowa.



24.05    QUALIFICATIONS.



   Only persons who are citizens of the United States and residents of the
City of Denison, Iowa, and who are eighteen years of age or over are eligible
to be members of the joint Board of Trustees.



24.06    COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



24.07    VACANCIES.



   An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made
in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment
shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



24.08    POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation
to the sanitary sewer system, waterworks, electric utility, and cable
communications system, with the following exceptions:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)



      1.   Taxes, Ordinances, and Bonds.  The Board may not certify
taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general
obligation or special assessment bonds. 



   Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])



      2.   Property.  Title to all property must be in the name of
the City but the Board has full control of such property subject to
limitations imposed by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])



      3.   Reports to Council.  The Board shall make a detailed
annual report to the Council including a complete financial statement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])



      4.   Proceedings Published.  Immediately following a regular
or special meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed
statement of proceedings including a list of all claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])



24.09    CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all
moneys derived from operations.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)



24.10    ACCOUNTING.



   Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund, with a separate
account for each utility.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)



24.11    DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL.



   The utilities may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate,
except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of
Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)



24.12    DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.



   A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid
petition, to discontinue the Denison Municipal Utilities Board is subject to
the approval of the voters of the City, except that the Board may be
discontinued by resolution of the Council when the utilities it administers
are disposed of or leased for a period of over five years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)



CHAPTER 25
PARKS AND RECREATION  COMMISSION



 



25.01  Establishment of Commission
 
25.10  Records


25.02  Number of Members
 
25.11  Maintenance and Control of Facilities


25.03  Appointment
 
25.12  Employees


25.04  Term of Office
 
25.13  Rules


25.05  Qualifications of Members
 
25.14  Fees


25.06  Vacancies
 
25.15  Improvements


25.07  Compensation
 
25.16  Contracts


25.08  Meetings
 
25.17  Sale or Lease of Real Estate


25.09  Officers of the Commission
 
25.18  Control of Funds




 



25.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   There is hereby established an administrative agency which shall be
known as the Parks and Recreation Commission of the City of Denison, Iowa,
referred to in this chapter as the "Commission".



25.02    NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The Commission shall consist of five members.



25.03    APPOINTMENT.



   The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.



25.04    TERM OF OFFICE.



   Members of the Commission are appointed for staggered terms of five
years.



25.05    QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   Any resident of the City who is 18 years of age or over is eligible for
membership on the Commission.



25.06    VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.  A member appointed to fill a
vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the unexpired term in which
the vacancy occurs.



25.07    COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services.  However, they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in serving
on the Commission.



25.08    MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall have a regular meeting each month at a time and
place established by resolution of the Commission.  It shall also have such
special meetings as may be called by the Chairperson of the Commission or
ordered by vote of the Commission.



25.09    OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   At the first regular meeting of the Commission after April 15, the
Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary of the Commission and
such other officers as it may deem necessary.



25.10    RECORDS.



   The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and expenditures.



25.11    MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF FACILITIES.



   The Commission shall maintain, control, and supervise the use of the
Aquatic Recreation Center located on North 16th Street in the City of
Denison, Iowa and the use of all parks, athletic fields, tennis courts and
other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the City of Denison,
Iowa.



25.12    EMPLOYEES.



   The Commission shall recruit, select, and appoint such employees as it
determines to be necessary to perform its duties subject to the budgetary
limitations established by the City Council.  The Commission shall determine
the duties and compensation of such employees.  Any employees appointed by
the Commission may be removed by the Commission.



25.13    RULES.



   The Commission may make rules governing the use by the public of the
Aquatic Recreation Center, and the use of all parks, athletic fields, tennis
courts and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the City. 
In the event of violation of its rules by any person, it may suspend for a
reasonable period of time the right of such person to use the Aquatic
Recreation Center, any and all parks, athletic fields, tennis courts and
other recreational facilities.  Said power of suspension may be delegated to
supervisory employees of the Commission, subject to the right of appeal to
the Commission pursuant to rules to be established by the Commission.  All
rules governing the use by the public of any facility shall be made readily
available to the public.  No rule made by the Commission shall be
inconsistent with any State statute or regulation or with any provisions of
this Code of Ordinances.



25.14    FEES.



   The Commission may establish and collect fees for use by the public of
the Aquatic Recreation Center, any and all parks, and other recreational
facilities owned or controlled by the City other than athletic fields and
tennis courts.  Fees collected shall be deposited to the account of the City
and shall be under the control of the Commission.



25.15    IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Commission may make such improvements to any facility as it may
determine to be desirable.



25.16    CONTRACTS.



   The Commission may enter into contracts in the performance of its
duties.  Such contracts shall not be subject to approval by the Council if
all amounts required to be paid by the City under such contracts are payable
from funds provided for the Aquatic Recreation Center, any and all parks,
athletic fields, tennis courts and other recreational facilities owned or
controlled by the City.



25.17    SALE OR LEASE OF REAL ESTATE.



   The Commission shall not have the power to sell, lease, or otherwise
dispose of any interest in any real property owned by the City.  The power
to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of real property under the control of the
Commission shall be exercised solely by the Council.



25.18    CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Commission shall have control of the expenditure of all funds
provided for the Aquatic Recreation Center, any and all parks, athletic
fields, tennis courts and other recreational facilities owned or controlled
by the City under the annual budget adopted by the Council.  Statements of
all expenditures to be paid out of said funds shall be submitted to the Clerk
for payment after approval by the Commission.




(Ch. 25 - Ord. 1451 - Mar. 15 Supp.)




CHAPTER 26
NORTHSIDE RECREATION AREA
JOINT ADVISORY BOARD



 

26.01  Establishment and Name
 
26.05  Meetings


26.02  Number of Members
 
26.06  Officers of the Board


26.03  Appointment and Term of Office
 
26.07  Records


26.04  Vacancies
 
26.08  Powers and Duties of the Joint Board



 



26.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.



   There is hereby established an advisory board which shall be known as
the Northside Recreation Area Joint Advisory Board of the City of Denison,
Iowa, and which is referred to herein as the “Joint Board.”



26.02    NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The Joint Board shall consist of five members.



26.03    APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor shall appoint two members with the approval of the Council. 
The Denison Community School District Board shall appoint two members.  The
four members thus appointed shall select the fifth member of the Board.  All
appointments are for staggered three-year terms.



26.04    VACANCIES.



   Vacancies on the Joint Board shall be filled in the same manner as was
used to initially fill the position and shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term.



26.05    MEETINGS.



   The Joint Board shall meet as necessary at a time and place designated
by the Board.  Meetings may be called by the Chairperson of the Board or as
ordered by a vote of the Board.



26.06    OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.



   At the regular meeting of the Joint Board in August of each year, the
Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary of the Board and such other
officers as it may deem necessary.



26.07    RECORDS.



   The Joint Board shall keep a record of its proceedings.



26.08    POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE JOINT BOARD.



   The Joint Board shall not be deemed to be a separate agency but is an
advisory body only.  Except for resolving scheduling disputes, all actions
recommended by the Joint Board require subsequent action by the City of
Denison and the Denison Community School District.  The primary purpose of
the Joint Board is to plan and coordinate joint use of the Northside
Recreation Area.  In addition, this body shall have the power to finally
decide all scheduling disputes that arise when both the City and the School
District want to use a facility at the same time and an agreement cannot be
reached in any other manner.



CHAPTER 27
BOULDERS CONFERENCE CENTER COMMISSION



 



27.01  Establishment and Name
 
27.10  Records


27.02  Number of Members
 
27.11  Maintenance and Control of Facilities


27.03  Appointment
 
27.12  Employees


27.04  Term of Office
 
27.13  Rules


27.05  Qualifications of Members
 
27.14  Fees


27.06  Vacancies
 
27.15  Improvements


27.07  Compensation
 
27.16  Contracts


27.08  Meetings
 
27.17  Sale or Lease of Real Estate


27.09  Officers of the Commission
 
27.18  Control of Funds




 



27.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.



   There is hereby established an administrative agency which shall be
known as the Boulders Conference Center Commission of the City of Denison,
Iowa, referred to in this chapter as the “Commission.”



27.02    NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The Commission shall consist of seven members.



27.03    APPOINTMENT.



   The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.



27.04    TERM OF OFFICE.



   Members of the Commission are appointed for staggered terms of four
years.



27.05    QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   At least five members of the Commission shall be residents of the City
of Denison.  The remaining members of the Commission shall be residents of
Crawford County.  All Commission members must be at least 18 years of age.



27.06    VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.  A member appointed to fill a
vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the unexpired term in which
the vacancy occurs.



27.07    COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services.  However, they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in serving
on the Commission.



27.08    MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall have a regular meeting each month at a time and
place established by resolution of the Commission.  It shall also have such
special meetings as may be called by the Chairperson of the Commission or
ordered by vote of the Commission.



27.09    OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   At the first regular meeting of the Commission in January of each year,
the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary of the Commission
and such other officers as it may deem necessary.



27.10    RECORDS.



   The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and expenditures.



27.11    MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF FACILITIES.



   The Commission shall maintain, control, and supervise the use of the
Boulders Conference Center located in the City of Denison, Iowa.



27.12    EMPLOYEES.



   The Commission shall recruit, select, and appoint such employees as it
determines to be necessary to perform its duties subject to the budgetary
limitations established by the City Council.  The Commission shall determine
the duties and compensation of such employees.  Any employees appointed by
the Commission may be removed by it.



27.13    RULES.



   The Commission may make rules governing the use by the public of the
Boulders Conference Center.  In the event of violation of its rules by any
person, it may suspend for a reasonable period of time the right of such
person to use the Boulders Conference Center.  Said power of suspension may
be delegated to supervisory employees of the Commission, subject to the right
of appeal to the Commission pursuant to rules to be established by the
Commission.  All rules governing the use by the public of any facility shall
be made readily available to the public.  No rule made by the Commission
shall be inconsistent with any State statute or regulation or with any
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.



27.14    FEES.



   The Commission may establish and collect fees for use by the public of
the Boulders Conference Center.  Fees collected shall be deposited to the
account of the City and shall be under the control of the Commission.



27.15    IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Commission may make such improvements to the facility as it may
determine to be desirable.



27.16    CONTRACTS.



   The Commission may enter into contracts in the performance of its
duties.  Such contracts shall not be subject to approval by the Council if
all amounts required to be paid by the City under such contracts are payable
from funds provided for the Boulders Conference Center under the current
annual budget.  Any other contracts entered into by the Commission shall be
subject to review and approval by the Council prior to becoming effective.



27.17    SALE OR LEASE OF REAL ESTATE.



   The Commission shall not have the power to sell, lease or otherwise
dispose of any interest in any real property owned by the City other than to
lease the facility for a period not to exceed two weeks.  The power to sell,
lease for a longer period than two weeks, or otherwise dispose of real
property under the control of the Commission shall be exercised solely by the
Council.



27.18    CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Commission shall have control of the expenditure of all funds
provided for the Boulders Conference Center under the annual budget adopted
by the Council.  Statements of all expenditures to be paid out of said funds
shall be submitted to the Clerk for payment after approval by the Commission.



CHAPTER 28
TOURISM BOARD



 

28.01  Establishment and Name
 
28.08  Meetings


28.02  Number of Members
 
28.09  Officers of the Board


28.03  Appointment
 
28.10  Records


28.04  Term of Office
 
28.11  Contracts


28.05  Qualifications of Members
 
28.12  Real Estate


28.06  Vacancies
 
28.13  Source and Control of Funds


28.07  Compensation
 
28.14  Discontinuance of Board



 



28.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.



   There is hereby established an administrative agency which shall be
known as the Tourism Board of the City of Denison, Iowa, referred to herein
as the “Board.”



28.02    NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The Board shall consist of five members.



(Ord. 1470 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



28.03    APPOINTMENT.



   The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.  Up to three members shall represent the
Hotel/Motel Industry in the City, and the remaining members shall represent
the business owners in the City.



28.04    TERM OF OFFICE.



   Members of the Board are appointed for staggered terms of four years.



28.05    QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   Any resident of the City who is 18 years of age or over is eligible to
membership on the Tourism Board.



28.06    VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor
with the approval of the Council.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy
shall be appointed for the remainder of the unexpired term in which the
vacancy occurs.



28.07    COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their
services. 



28.08    MEETINGS.



   The Board shall have regular quarterly meetings each year at times and
places established by resolution of the Board.  It shall also have such
special meetings as may be called by the Chairperson of the Board or ordered
by vote of the Board.



(Ord. 1470 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



28.09    OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.



   At the first regular meeting of the Board in January of each year, the
Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary of the Board and such other
officers as it may deem necessary.



28.10    RECORDS.



   The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings and expenditures.



28.11    CONTRACTS.



   The Board may enter into contracts in the performance of its duties,
and such contracts shall not be subject to approval by the Council if all
amounts required to be paid by the City under such contracts are payable from
funds provided for tourism purposes under the current annual budget, and
provided that funds for such contracts are currently available for
expenditure from the Tourism Board account.



28.12    REAL ESTATE.



   The Board shall not have the power to purchase, sell, lease, or
otherwise dispose of any interest in real property owned by the City.  The
power to purchase, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of real property shall be
exercised by the Council.



28.13    SOURCE AND CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Board shall use such funds as may be generated by local option
hotel/motel guest tax, less any funds needed to replace the local option
sales tax revenues lost due to the existence of the hotel/motel guest tax. 
The Board shall have control of the expenditure of all funds provided for
tourism under the annual budget adopted by the Council.  Statements of all
expenditures to be paid out of said funds shall be submitted to the Clerk for
payment after approval by the Board and by the Council.



28.14    DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.



   The Tourism Board shall continue in existence only for so long as there
are revenues derived from the hotel/motel tax in excess of the current one
percent.  If the tax revenues are no longer payable to the City for any
reason, the Board shall be abolished by action of the Council in accordance
with Chapter 392, Code of Iowa.



CHAPTER 29
COMMUNITY HOUSING AGENCY



 



29.01  Establishment and Name
 
29.09  Officers of the Housing Agency


29.02  Number of Members
 
29.10  Records


29.03  Appointment
 
29.11  Housing Construction and Renovation


29.04  Term of Office
 
29.12  Employees


29.05  Qualifications of Members
 
29.13  Rules


29.06  Vacancies
 
29.14  Sale or Lease of Real Estate


29.07  Compensation
 
29.15  Control of Funds


29.08  Meetings
 




 



29.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.



   There is hereby established an administrative agency which shall be
known as the Denison Community Housing Agency of the City of Denison, Iowa,
referred to in this chapter as the “Housing Agency.”



29.02    NUMBER OF MEMBERS.



   The Housing Agency shall consist of seven members.



29.03    APPOINTMENT.



   The members of the Housing Agency shall be appointed by the City
Council.



(Ord. 1503 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



29.04    TERM OF OFFICE.



   Members of the Housing Agency are appointed for staggered terms of
three years.



29.05    QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   At least four members of the Housing Agency shall be residents of the
City of Denison.  One member may reside outside of City limits but within a
two mile radius of the City limits.



(Ord. 1503 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



29.06    VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy in the Housing Agency shall be filled by appointment of the
Council.  A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the
remainder of the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs.



(Ord. 1503 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



29.07    COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Housing Agency shall receive no compensation for
their services.  However, they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in
serving on the Housing Agency.



29.08    MEETINGS.



   The Housing Agency shall have a regular meeting each month at a time
and place established by resolution of the Housing Agency.  It shall also
have such special meetings as may be called by the Chairperson of the Housing
Agency or ordered by vote of the Housing Agency.



29.09    OFFICERS OF THE HOUSING AGENCY.



   At the first regular meeting of the Housing Agency in January of each
year, the Housing Agency shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary of the
Housing Agency and such other officers as it may deem necessary.



29.10    RECORDS.



   The Housing Agency shall keep a record of its proceedings and
expenditures.



29.11    HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND RENOVATION.



   The Housing Agency shall coordinate efforts between Federal, State, and
local agencies to stimulate the construction of new single- and multi-family
housing and the renovation of existing housing in the City to meet the needs
of the citizens of Denison.  Subject to Council approval, the Housing Agency
shall apply for grants, conduct necessary studies, assist first-time home
buyers and assist in the removal of unsalvageable substandard housing in
order to increase the number of code-compliant housing units available in the
City.  In addition, the Housing Agency shall oversee the implementation of
the City landlord/tenant ordinance and recommend any necessary changes in
enforcement of this Code of Ordinances.



29.12    EMPLOYEES.



   The Housing Agency shall recruit, select, and appoint such employees as
it determines to be necessary to perform its duties subject to the budgetary
limitations established by the City Council.  The Housing Agency shall
determine the duties and compensation of such employees.  Any employees
appointed by the Housing Agency may be removed by it.



29.13    RULES.



   The Housing Agency may make rules governing its area of
responsibility.  No rule made by the Housing Agency shall be inconsistent
with any State statute or regulation or with any provisions of this Code of
Ordinances.



29.14    SALE OR LEASE OF REAL ESTATE.



   The Housing Agency shall not have the power to sell, lease or otherwise
dispose of any interest in any real property owned by the City.  The power
to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of real property under the control of the
Housing Agency shall be exercised solely by the Council.



29.15    CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Housing Agency shall have control of the expenditure of all funds
provided for the Housing Agency under the annual budget adopted by the
Council.  Statements of all expenditures to be paid out of said funds shall
be submitted to the Clerk for payment after approval by the Housing Agency.



CHAPTER 30
AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION



 

30.01  Airport Zoning Commission
 
30.03  Removal; Vacancies


30.02  Terms of Office
 
30.04  Powers and Duties



 



30.01    AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION.



   There shall be an Airport Zoning Commission consisting of five members,
two of whom shall be selected by the Board of Supervisors of the County, and
two of whom shall be selected by the Council; one additional member to act as
Chairperson shall be selected by a majority vote of the members selected by
the County and City as herein provided.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



30.02    TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The terms of the members of the Commission shall be six years. 
Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number, or
as near as possible, to provide for staggered terms.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



30.03    REMOVAL; VACANCIES.



   Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority upon written charges after public hearing.  Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in
the same manner in which said member was selected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



30.04    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have all the powers, duties and authority vested
in it by the laws of the State, now in effect or which may be hereafter
enacted, and by resolution and ordinances of the County and City.



CHAPTER 31
AIRPORT COMMISSION



 

31.01  Airport Commission
 
31.06  Officers


31.02  Appointment and Term
 
31.07  Powers and Duties


31.03  Vacancies
 
31.08  Rules and Penalties


31.04  Compensation
 
31.09  Reports


31.05  Bond
 
 



 



31.01    AIRPORT COMMISSION.



   There shall be an Airport Commission consisting of five resident voters
of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.02    APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



   Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council for staggered terms of
six years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.03    VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council to fill out the
unexpired term for which the appointment was made. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.04    COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.05    BOND.



   Each Commissioner shall execute and furnish a bond in the amount fixed
by the City Council, which bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.06    OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect from its own members a Chairperson and
Secretary who shall serve for such term as the Commission shall determine.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



31.07    POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission may recruit, select, and appoint such employees as it
determines to be necessary to perform its duties subject to the budget
limitations established by the City Council.  The Commission also has the
power to enter into a contract for the Management/FBO of the facility.  The
Commission shall determine the duties and compensation of such employees. 
Any employee appointed by the Commission may be removed by it.



31.08    RULES AND PENALTIES.



   Every person using the airport or entering upon airport property shall
comply with the rules established by the Commission.  Such rules shall be
effective only after adoption following notice and hearing in compliance with
Section 362.3 of the Code of Iowa and their publication following the hearing
in the newspaper in which Council minutes are published together with the
posting of the rules in two or more prominent locations on airport
property.  In the case of any of said rules which are submitted to and
adopted by the City Council as part of the City Code of Ordinances, a
violation thereof shall be a violation of this Code of Ordinances. 
Following notice to a person who violates an operating rule of the Commission
or State or Federal Air Law, and hearing on a charge of such violation, the
Commission may deny a person or persons charged the use of the airport or its
facilities if it is shown that the violation caused serious danger to other
users or to property, showed negligence, or that there had been a pattern of
repeated violations such as to eliminate the probability of inadvertence in
committing the violation.  The denial order shall state a term not exceeding
one (1) year.  Such rule shall extend to the air space above the airport,
the land within the airport boundaries and the area within two miles of the
boundary of the airport regardless of the territorial limits of the airport
or the City as the Commission shall provide.



31.09    REPORTS.



      1.   Written Reports.  The Commission shall make written
reports to the Council of its activities from time to time as it deems
advisable or upon Council request.  Its revenues and expenditures shall be
reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other departmental revenues
and expenditures and a copy shall be provided to each member of the
Commission and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.



      2.   Annual Reports.  The Airport Commission shall
immediately after the close of each municipal fiscal year, file with the City
Clerk a detailed and audited written report of all money received and
disbursed by the Commission during said fiscal year, and shall publish a
summary thereof in an official newspaper.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.22)



CHAPTER 32
CITY ENGINEER



 

32.01  Appointment
 
32.03  Compensation


32.02  Duties of Engineer
 
32.04  Other Duties



 



32.01    APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council may, at the first meeting following a regular
municipal election, appoint some competent person as City Engineer, and this
person shall be under the supervision of the Council in the discharge and
performance of his or her duties.  The City Council may also employ another
engineer in place of or in addition to the City Engineer, as circumstances
may warrant.



32.02    DUTIES OF ENGINEER. 



The City Engineer shall have the following duties and responsibilities,
subject to the approval of the Council:



      1.   When ordered to do so by the Council, have general
supervision of the construction of all bridges, culverts, drains, water mains
and sewers, the grading, curbing, guttering, paving and improvement of
streets, the construction of sidewalks, and any and all public improvements
that are ordered by the Council.



      2.   Keep corrected maps and profiles of all water mains and
sewers now or hereafter laid, with their dimensions, locations, connections,
hydrants, and cutoffs, on file in the office of the Clerk.



      3.   When directed so to do by the Council, make all surveys,
plats, schedules, maps, profiles, drawings, specifications, and estimates of
all public works and improvements to be assessed to abutting and adjacent
property and file the same with the Clerk.



      4.   Make all surveys for the establishment of street and
sidewalk grades, make profiles therefor, and file such record with the Clerk.



32.03    COMPENSATION. 



The City Engineer shall receive such compensation as may be allowed by motion
of the City Council upon presentation of a statement thereof.



32.04    OTHER DUTIES. 



The City Engineer shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as may be provided by the City Council, the ordinances of the City, or the
laws of the State and shall transmit to his or her successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents, or other property belonging to the City,
together with an invoice of the same, in the City Engineer’s custody or
control pertaining to such office.



POLICE, FIRE AND EMERGENCIES



CHAPTER 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT



 

35.01  Department Established
 
35.06  Peace Officers Appointed


35.02  Organization
 
35.07  Police Chief: Duties


35.03  Peace Officer Qualifications
 
35.08  Duties of Police Officers


35.04  Required Training
 
35.09  Departmental Rules


35.05  Compensation
 



 



35.01    DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   The police department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.



35.02    ORGANIZATION.



   The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be
authorized by the Council.



35.03    PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.



   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law
enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)



35.04    REQUIRED TRAINING.



   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by
law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment.  Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training
as required by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])



(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)



35.05    COMPENSATION.



   Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



35.06    PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.



   The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the
consent of a majority of the Council.  The Police Chief shall select,
subject to the approval of the Council, the other members of the
department.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



35.07    POLICE CHIEF:  DUTIES.



   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the
approval of the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      1.   General.  Perform all duties required of the Police
Chief by law or ordinance.



      2.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce all laws, ordinances, and
regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper
court.



      3.   Writs.  Execute and return all writs and other processes
directed to the Police Chief.



      4.   Accident Reports.  Report all motor vehicle accidents
investigated to the State Department of Transportation. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)



      5.   Prisoners.  Be responsible for the custody of prisoners,
including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.



      6.   Assist Officials.  When requested, provide aid to other
City officers, boards, and commissions in the execution of their official
duties.



      7.   Investigations.  Provide for such investigation as may
be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any
law or ordinance.



      8.   Record of Arrests.  Keep a record of all arrests made in
the City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State
law or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the
disposition of the charge.



      9.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor
or Council.



      10.   Command.  Be in command of all officers appointed for
police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all
vehicles, equipment, and materials of the department.



      11.   Evaluation.  Evaluate or oversee evaluation of the
Building Inspector.



(Ord. 1492 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



35.08    DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   



      1.   Serve and Execute Warrants.  Every police officer shall
have power and authority in the City to serve and execute warrants and other
processes for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with any
crime, held for examination or trial, or taken in the execution or commission
of any crime. 



      2.   Civil Process.  No member of the Police Department shall
serve any civil process except where the City is a party or do any business
or service that will interfere with his or her duties as a police officer. 



      3.   Other Duties.  Police officers shall have such powers
and perform such other duties as the Police Chief, Mayor, Council, or
ordinances of the City shall provide.



      4.   Surrender of City Property.  All police officers shall
surrender to the City all property in their possession belonging to the City
when their appointment is terminated.



35.09    DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



   The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the
Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.



CHAPTER 36
FIRE DEPARTMENT



 



36.01  Organization
 
36.11  Parking Near Fire Scene Prohibited


36.02  Appointment of Fire Chief
 
36.12  Interference with Firefighters


36.03  Appointment of Officers
 
36.13  Use of Fire Equipment


36.04  Duties of Fire Department
 
36.14  Damage to Fire Equipment


36.05  Supervision of Fire Department
 
36.15  PlaceNameplaceCalls PlaceNameOutside PlaceTypeCity Limits


36.06  Obedience to Commanding Officers
 
36.16  Annual Reports


36.07  Supervision of Equipment
 
36.17  Inspections


36.08  Record Keeping
 
36.18  Code Enforcement and Building Inspection Employees


36.09  Authority at Fires and Emergency Scenes
 
36.19  Other Duties


36.10  Yielding Right-of-Way
 




 



36.01    ORGANIZATION.



   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Company to be made up of
not more than fifty members.  The members of the Fire Department shall be
residents of the City or live in a close proximity and be at least eighteen
years of age.



36.02    APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF.



   At the first meeting of the Council following the regular municipal
election, the City Manager, having provided opportunity for input by the
membership of the Fire Company, shall recommend to the Mayor, and subject to
the approval of the Council, the Mayor shall appoint the Chief of the Fire
Department.  The Chief shall hold the office for two years, or until a
successor shall have been appointed and qualified.



36.03    APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The Fire Chief shall appoint additional officers from the membership,
subject to approval by the Council.



36.04    DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department, under the Chief of the
Fire Department, to take charge of all fire apparatus committed to its care,
and in the case of an emergency call, to report to the place of the call with
the apparatus and there work and manage the same under the direction of the
Chief in the most effective manner, until the fire is extinguished or
emergency is mitigated.



36.05    SUPERVISION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Fire Chief shall have general supervision of the Fire Department
subject to the control of the City Manager and shall have command, control,
and direction of all members of the Fire Department and all other persons,
officers or police who may be present at emergency scenes.



36.06    OBEDIENCE TO COMMANDING OFFICERS.



   If any firefighter refuses to obey the orders of the Chief or other
proper commanding officer, or shall leave his or her post of duty while at an
emergency scene, without the permission of the Chief, he or she shall be
subject to expulsion from the Fire Department.



36.07    SUPERVISION OF EQUIPMENT.



      1.   All fire equipment, tools, hose, engines, trucks, and
other machinery or fire apparatus belonging to the City shall be entrusted to
the care of the Fire Department and the Chief shall have supervision and
control over the same.



      2.   The Fire Chief shall make regular monthly inspections of
all fire apparatus or equipment and see that the same is in good repair and
report to the City Manager and Council any repairs or additions of new
equipment required by the Fire Department.



      3.   The Fire Chief shall have charge of the fire alarm system
and the signal boxes, keys, and apparatus connected therewith.



36.08    RECORD KEEPING.



   The Fire Chief shall cause to be kept a correct roll of all members of
the Fire Department, the date of their admission and date of discharge, and
such list shall be corrected monthly or more often if the City Manager or
Council requires the same.  The Chief shall certify in writing all bills
incurred for the Fire Department, to the Council, together with a list of
fires during the month, the cause thereof, if known, and the number and
description of buildings destroyed or injured.



36.09    AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND EMERGENCY SCENES.



      1.   The Chief or other officers of the Fire Department shall
have power to call upon and require the assistance of any person with said
person’s automobile, truck, or other piece of equipment.



      2.   The Fire Chief may prescribe the limits in the vicinity
of a fire or emergency scene within which no person is permitted to come,
except those residing therein, members of the Council, members of the Fire
Department and Police force, and those admitted by the Fire Chief or any
authorized subordinate.



      3.   The Fire Chief shall have the power, when in his or her
judgment it becomes necessary to check or control any fire, to order any
fence, building or erection of any kind to be cut down and removed, and with
the consent of two members of the Council or of the Mayor if no Council
members are present, shall have the power to cause any building or erection
to be blown up with explosives for the purpose of checking or extinguishing a
fire.



      4.   The Fire Chief shall have the power to cause the removal
of all wires or turning off all utilities whenever the same interferes with
the work of the Fire Department.



36.10    YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The fire apparatus, when going on an emergency call and sounding its
sirens or bells and displaying emergency lights, shall have the right-of-way
on all streets, avenues, or alleys over any automobiles, or other vehicles or
conveyances.  All pedestrians along the streets on which the trucks are
passing shall remain on the sidewalks and away from the street
intersection.  Drivers of all vehicles shall immediately yield right-of-way,
when the siren is heard, and remain in the position until the right-of-way of
the fire trucks has been assured.



36.11    PARKING NEAR FIRE SCENE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, wagon or
other vehicle in any street or avenue within 500 feet of any building on fire
and while the fire equipment of the City is engaged in extinguishing such
fire.



36.12    INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS.



   It is unlawful to hinder any officer or firefighter in the performance
of duties at an emergency scene, going to or returning from the same, or
while attending to any duties as a member of the Fire Department.



36.13    USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful to take or use any fire apparatus, tools, or equipment
for private use.



36.14    DAMAGE TO FIRE EQUIPMENT.



      1.   It is unlawful to cut, injure, deface, or destroy any
wires, poles, signal boxes, fixtures, or other apparatus connected with the
Fire Department, and belonging to the City. 



      2.   It is unlawful to drive or run any automobile, truck,
locomotive, train or cars, or other vehicle, across, along, or upon any fire
hose.



36.15    CALLS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department, the Assistant Chief, the Mayor (or
the Mayor Pro Tem when performing the duties of Mayor) or anyone designated
by them in their absence may authorize or dispatch the fire equipment, or a
portion thereof, outside the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of
fighting fires or for the rendering of other emergency assistance, whenever
in the opinion of the said persons such action will probably save life or
property and will not be prejudicial to the safety and general welfare of the
City.



36.16    ANNUAL REPORTS.



   The Fire Chief shall make an annual report to the Council each calendar
year in regard to the Fire Department, showing the number of firefighters,
the emergency calls answered, the loss by fire, the condition of all property
and apparatus, with suggestions and recommendation for the improvement of the
department.



36.17    INSPECTIONS.



   The Fire Chief shall work as the Fire Code Enforcement Officer and Fire
Marshal enforcing the applicable municipal, building, and fire codes as
adopted by the State or City.  The Fire Chief or representative of the Fire
Chief shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to any house, building or
premises for the purpose of such inspection, and if any violation of any law
or ordinance or other dangerous condition exists, such officer shall at once
order, in writing, the owner, occupant or agent where such violation or
dangerous condition exists to remove or repair the same within a specified
amount of time.  If a condition is deemed immediately dangerous to life or
health, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to direct the situation to
cease.



(Ord. 1383 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



36.18    CODE ENFORCEMENT AND BUILDING INSPECTION EMPLOYEES.



(Repealed by Ord. 1378 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



36.19    OTHER DUTIES.



   The Fire Chief shall have such other powers to perform such other
duties as may be provided by the Council, this Code of Ordinances, or the
laws of the State, and shall transmit to his or her successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property belonging to the City in his
or her custody pertaining to his or her office.



PUBLIC OFFENSES



CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC OFFENSES



 



40.01  Indecent Exposure
 
40.12  Discharging Weapons


40.02  Urinating and Defecating
 
40.13  Throwing and Shooting


40.03  Window Peeking
 
40.14  Carrying Concealed Weapons


40.04  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages, Intoxicating
 
40.15  Fireworks


Liquor, Wine or Beer at Recreational Facilities
 
40.16  Stench Bombs


40.05  Removal of Safeguards or Danger Signals
 
40.17  Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators


40.06  Uncovered Hazards
 
40.18  Trapping on City Property


40.07  Removal of Hydrant Caps or Manhole Covers
 
40.19  Glass, Tacks, and Nails on Public Property


40.08  Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
 
40.20  Protection of Levee


40.09  Antenna and Radio Wires
 
40.21  Slaughtering Restricted


40.10  Sale of Food
 
40.22  Other Public Offenses


40.11  Distributing Medicines
 
 




 



40.01    INDECENT EXPOSURE.



   No person shall designedly expose oneself or the person of another, in
a grossly open and indecent or obscene manner, to public view in a state of
nudity, or lewdness, or in indecent or lewd dress.



40.02    URINATING AND DEFECATING.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.



40.03    WINDOW PEEKING.



   It is unlawful for any person to peek into the windows or doors of a
private home either in the daytime or the nighttime.



40.04    CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INTOXICATING LIQUOR, WINE, OR
BEER AT RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use or consume alcoholic beverages,
intoxicating liquor, wine or beer on or in the following recreational
facilities in the City:  the tennis courts located north of 6th Avenue North
on the west side of 16th Street, the Aquatic Fun Center located north of 7th
Avenue North on the east side of 16th Street, the athletic fields located
north of 7th Avenue North between 16th Street and 20th Street, customarily
known as the Northside Recreation Area, and the Soccer Field complex located
west of the Water Treatment Plant.  Notwithstanding the preceding, wine or
beer may be consumed within the confines of the sand volleyball courts
located at the Aquatic Fun Center to the extent permitted by the Parks and
Recreation Commission of the City of Denison, Iowa.



(Ord. 1494 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



40.05    REMOVAL OF SAFEGUARDS OR DANGER SIGNALS.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy,
extinguish or carry away any light, obstruction, guard or other similar
article or thing erected or placed on any highway, street, alley, avenue or
bridge for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
without the consent of the person in control of that safeguard or danger
signal.



40.06    UNCOVERED HAZARDS.



   It is unlawful to create or allow to exist without adequate safeguards
any uncovered hazards such as open cellar doors, open cesspools, open wells,
holes in sidewalks, or open excavations of any kind.



40.07    REMOVAL OF HYDRANT CAPS OR MANHOLE COVERS.



   It is unlawful to remove or carry away hydrant caps, sewer caps or
manhole covers without the consent of the person in control thereof.



40.08    BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to
enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the
Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as
agricultural land.



40.09    ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.



   It is unlawful to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires,
or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalks, or
public property.



40.10    SALE OF FOOD.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any tainted, unsound or rotten
meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, eggs, butter, canned goods, packaged
goods or other articles of food; or sell or offer for sale the flesh of any
animal that was diseased.



40.11    DISTRIBUTING MEDICINES.



   No person shall distribute any packages of medicine, pills, or other
free sample packages of any preparation for medical purposes by leaving the
same on porches or doorsteps or about the premises or any building or
business house or any lot, street, sidewalk, or place.



40.12    DISCHARGING WEAPONS.



      1.   Except at an indoor firing range for which an occupancy
permit has been issued by the City of Denison or as authorized by the City
Council,  it is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns,
revolvers, pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City
limits.



      2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a
reckless manner.



(Ord. 1448 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



40.13    THROWING AND SHOOTING.



   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any
kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB
guns or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building.  The
provisions of this section do not apply to the hunting of antlerless deer in
accordance with Section 55.23 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1370 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



40.14    CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   No person shall carry a dirk, dagger, sword, pistol, revolver,
stiletto, metallic knuckles, pocket billy, sandbag, skull cracker, slug shot
or other offensive or dangerous weapon (except a hunting knife adapted and
carried as such) concealed either on or about the person, except in such
person’s own dwelling, place of business or on the other land possessed by
such person or when permitted by the County Sheriff or the State Commissioner
of Public Safety.



40.15    FIREWORKS.



   The sale, use, possession, and exploding of fireworks within the City
are subject to the following:



      1.   Definitions. 



         A.   Consumer Fireworks. (American Pyrotechnics
Association (APA) standard 87-1, chapter 3) Any device, other than a novelty
or theatrical pyrotechnic article, intended to produce visible and/or audible
effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks are further
described as Fireworks UN0336 (formerly Common Fireworks and now referred to
in this Standard as Consumer Fireworks,) or Fireworks UN0335 (formerly
Special Fireworks and now referred to in this Standard as Display Fireworks.)
Fireworks may also be described as Fireworks UN0337 if examination and
testing in accordance with Title 49 CFR, § 173.56 is performed that warrants
that classification.



         For purposes of this Section, the term “fireworks”
includes any explosive composition, or combination of explosive substances,
or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, or other
fireworks of like construction and fireworks containing any explosive or
flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. The
term “fireworks” does not include gold-star producing sparklers on wires
which contain no magnesium or chlorate or perchlorate, flitter sparklers in
paper tubes that do not exceed one-eighth of an inch in diameter, toy snakes
which contain no mercury, or caps used in cap pistols.



         B.   Novelty Fireworks. (American Pyrotechnics
Association (APA) standard 87-1) A device containing small amounts of
pyrotechnic and/or explosive composition. Such devices produce limited
visible or audible effects. These items must be approved by DOT, and are
normally classed as 1.4G. A different classification may be assigned based on
testing and examination as specified in Title 49 CFR §CFR, § 173.56.
Certain novelties which meet the criteria specified in Section 3.2 are not
regulated as explosives, and approval by DOT is not required for those
specific items.



            (1)   Novelty fireworks typically produce a much
weaker explosion and sound. A few examples include:



            (2)   Party Poppers — once a string is pulled to
activate the charge, confetti is thrust into the air and produces a report.



            (3)   Snaps — a small paper bag typically filled
with gravel and a few milligrams of silver fulminate will produce a report
when thrown at a hard surface or stepped on.



            (4)   Flying Lanterns (Sky lantern) — these
paper lanterns float into the sky when lit. They emit a slight glow and are
very commonly used at weddings and celebrations.



            (5)   Paper Tanks & Vehicles — when lit, these
small paper vehicles emit sparks that cause them to move around on the ground
and commonly produce a loud bang at the end.



            (6)   Ground Bloom Flowers — a small cylinder
that spins on the ground and changes color, spinning in such a way that it
resembles a flower. Could be described as a large Jumping Jack.



            (7)   Snakes (Black snake) — a small compressed
pellet that, when lit, expands into a long snake-like object.



         C.   Display or Theatrical Fireworks/Pyrotechnics.
(American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) standard 87-1) Pyrotechnic devices
for professional use in the entertainment industry similar to consumer
fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for
consumer use. Such articles, meeting the lift and effect powder weight limits
for similar consumer fireworks but not labeled as such, and containing only
chemicals listed in table 4.3-1 may be approved under the provisions of this
Standard and classified as Articles, Pyrotechnic, 1.4G, UN0431.



            Note: Theatrical pyrotechnic devices may be classed
by DOT as Articles, Pyrotechnic, 1.4S, UN0432 or as Articles, Pyrotechnic,
1.3G, UN0430 on the basis of examination and testing as specified in Title 49
CFR, § 173.56.



            Examples include: Aerial Shell, Salute, all other
fireworks that are not considered Novelty or Consumer.



      2.   Fireworks Sales General Requirements.



         A.   Prior to any person engaging in fireworks sales the
following shall be provided to the fire chief:



            (1)   Proof of valid permit issued from the state
fire marshal.



            (2)   Proof of liability insurance separate from
the building property insurance specifically showing coverage of fireworks
sales for the amounts required by Iowa Code § 100.19(4)(b).



         B.   Any property, building, or premise whether it be
permanent or temporary, intended for fireworks sales shall have an initial
fire inspection completed by the Fire Chief prior to engaging in fireworks
sales. The Fire Chief or their designee shall cause an annual inspection to
occur meeting the requirements of the National Fire Protection Code 1124
(2006 edition), the current fire code adopted by the City of Denison (City
Ordinance Chapter 157), and any rules, regulations, requirements or the like
promulgated by the state fire marshal pursuant to Iowa Code § 100.19.



            (1)   An annual inspection fee of $250 shall be
charged by the City of Denison for any permanent structure or building where
fireworks are sold. This is in addition to any City Business License fee.



            (2)   An annual inspection fee of $500 shall be
charged for any temporary or non-brick and mortar building used to sell
fireworks. This is in addition to any City Business License fee.



            (3)   The Fire Chief or his designee may cause for
additional inspections with no additional fee, to ensure the seller remains
in compliance with this ordinance for the safety and well-being of any
potential customers.



            (4)   All annual inspections must be arranged a
minimum of 2 (two) days before intended sales dates. Failure to schedule an
inspection in that time frame is grounds for non-issuance of occupancy and
business permits. The Fire Chief shall notify the State Fire Marshall of any
non-compliance for revocation or suspension of sales permits if this occurs.



            (5)   Persons shall not construct any display or
offer for sale any fireworks type on roadways including shoulders thereof,
alleys, sidewalks, public property or in Assembly or Educational occupancies.
(IFC 5601.2.2)



            (6)   Permits shall not be issued for the storage
or sale of any fireworks at any place of habitation or within 100 feet
thereof. (IFC 5601.2.1)



            (7)   The Fire Chief is authorized to limit the
quantity permitted at any given location. Permit holders shall not keep or
store amounts greater than that they are permitted for and only the type they
are permitted for. (IFC 5601.2.3)



         C.   Fireworks sales shall only be conducted in
accordance with dates and times designated by Iowa Code § 100.19(4)(c).



            (1)   Approved fireworks sales meeting the
requirements of this chapter shall be allowed from an approved permanent
structure or building between June 1 and July 8 and from December 10 until
January 3.



            (2)   Approved fireworks sales meeting the
requirements of this chapter shall be allowed from an approved temporary
structure between June 13 and July 8.



            (3)   It shall be unlawful to sell fireworks
without meeting the requirements specified in this ordinance, or to sell
fireworks outside of the dates specified.



      3.   Firework Sales Safety Requirements.



         A.   The City hereby adopts National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standard 1124 (2006 edition) as incorporated by reference
in Iowa Code § 100.19(4)(a). By so adopting NFPA standard 1124, the
following safety requirements shall be adopted for all locations where
fireworks are sold:



            (1)   Not more than 100 pounds of total aggregate
weight of DOT 1.4 class fireworks shall be located inside a commercial
business with other mercantile products for sale.



            (2)   Not more than 500 pounds of total aggregate
weight of DOT 1.4 class fireworks shall be located inside a building where
fireworks are the primary business.



            (3)   Not more than 1000 pounds of total aggregate
weight of DOT 1.4 class fireworks shall be located in a temporary structure
used primarily for fireworks sales.



            (4)   Any permanent structure used primarily for
the purpose of fireworks sales shall be located 35 feet from a property line,
public roadway, alley, or highway; and 70 feet from an inhabited building.



               Exception: Where a person owns the adjacent
property or written permission is granted, the property line distance
requirement can be reduced to 15 feet.



            (5)   Any temporary structure shall be located 55
feet from a property line, public roadway, alley, or highway; and 110 feet
from an inhabited building.



            (6)   Smoking, open flame source, or matches shall
not be located within 50 feet where fireworks are sold.



               Exception: Lighters and matches may be sold as
part of a retail business in commercial structures who engage in other
merchandise sales where fireworks are not the primary business.



               Exception: Locations who engage in fireworks
sales as a primary source of revenue may sell extended lighters so long as
lighters are located in a sealed package and not removed within the store
premises.



            (7)   All electrical wiring shall meet NFPA 70
National Electrical Code. Permanent structures or buildings used primarily
for fireworks sales shall meet wiring requirements for a hazardous location,
including covered light fixtures to avoid sparks upon failure or damage to
lights.



            (8)   All fireworks sales locations of any type
shall maintain 48 inch clear aisles between fireworks display shelves.



            (9)   Any location where fireworks are sold shall
maintain two approved exits for egress during an emergency. All approved
exits shall be clearly marked with signage; exit signs in permanent
structures shall be illuminated.



            (10)   Fireworks sales shall only be permitted in
a single story at grade building or structure to facilitate easy exiting
during an emergency.



            (11)   All locations shall have a minimum of two
10-pound ABC rated fire extinguishers mounted in accordance with NFPA 10.
Additional fire extinguishers shall be placed in locations to prevent travel
distance exceeding 75 feet in order to reach a fire extinguisher.  The Fire
Chief or his designee may order additional fire extinguishers and determine
their location/placement.



            (12)   All doors used as service doors outside the
view of a clerk shall be locked to prevent unauthorized persons from entering
the building unnoticed. If doors are approved exit doors as part of the two
approved exits needed, they shall be operable without special tools, keys, or
knowledge. Delayed or alarmed egress doors are permitted so long as release
is activated within 8 seconds.



            (13)   No persons under the influence of alcohol,
drugs, or narcotics, shall be allowed to remain in the business where
fireworks are sold as a primary business.



            (14)   No more than one approved explosive
magazine shall be located on site for short term storage of extra product.
All containers shall be properly placarded and equipped with tamper proof
locking devices. It is permitted to place containers in a security fenced
area, if approved. Conex containers are not permitted.



            (15)   Individual fireworks devices or opened
fireworks packages shall not be permitted to be displayed. No open fuses
shall be exposed during storage inside a sales location.



            (16)   Vehicles shall not be allowed to park
within 30 feet of any structure, providing for clear and open access for any
Fire Department response.



         B.   No person shall sell a DOT 1.4 class firework to a
person under the age of 18.



         C.   Fireworks shall not be sold to an intoxicated
person or to any person whom a reasonable person would believe may be
impaired by other substances.



         D.   Fireworks shall not be sold out of a residence or
any part or combination of a residence, including: sidewalk adjacent to the
property, yard – including the Right-of-Way, garage, temporary structures
on residential property or vehicles. The term residence shall include single,
double and multi-family dwellings.



      4.   Fireworks Discharging General Requirements.  The use of
or explosion of consumer fireworks within the City is hereby prohibited. It
is the intention that citizens be allowed to enjoy novelty fireworks, subject
to the following safety restrictions:



         A.   No person under the age of 18 shall discharge
novelty fireworks without direct supervision by a parent or legal guardian.



         B.   A person shall only discharge novelty fireworks on
real property they own or on property where consent has been expressly given.
Novelty fireworks shall not be discharged on City-owned or public property
without authorization of the Fire Chief.



         C.   Novelty fireworks shall not be discharged by
persons showing visible signs of, or who are determined to be, intoxicated or
under the influence of a drug or narcotic.



         D.   Any person discharging novelty fireworks assumes
all responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. No person
shall discharge a fireworks device in a reckless manner or in a manner likely
to cause death, injury, fire, or property damage.



         E.   Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to
be released within the city limits, except if tethered by a retrievable rope
so long as the person discharging has control over the sky lantern.



         F.   No person shall discharge novelty fireworks within
areas set aside for special events, i.e., City Fourth of July event from the
hours of 10:00 pm the night before the event and ending at 6:00 am the
morning following the event date(s).



         G.   Notwithstanding the above subsections, no person
shall discharge novelty fireworks at any time upon declaration from the fire
chief or police chief that discharging a fireworks device is temporarily
banned due to severe dry weather conditions that create heightened fire
dangers.  Any such declaration by the fire chief or police chief shall be
published at least once in a newspaper calculated to bring such declaration
to the notice of the residents of the City.  Any declaration issued by the
fire chief or police chief under this subsection shall take effect
immediately upon its being published and shall be effective until rescinded
by a declaration from the issuing chief indicating a termination of the ban.



(Ord. 1509 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      5.   Display Fireworks.



         A.   No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, store, or use or explode any
display fireworks.



         B.   Notwithstanding the above subsection, the City
Council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of
display fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and
other organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities
when such display fireworks will be handled by a competent operator. No
permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring
organization has filed with the City a Special Event Permit Application as
required by section 126.05 of this Code of Ordinances and has complied with
the Insurance Requirements as required by section 126.08 of this Code of
Ordinances.



      6.   Applicability.  Section 40.15 of the Denison Code of
Ordinances does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer, manufacturer or
jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited by city or state law; or the
sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the
sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes
in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a
recognized military organization. This section does not apply to any
substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation
purposes.



(Ord. 1467 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



40.16    STENCH BOMBS.



   No person shall throw, drop, pour, explode, deposit, release or expose
any stench bomb or tear bomb, or any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or
matter of any kind that is injurious to persons or property, or that is
nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses, in or
about any theater, restaurant, car, structure, place of business or amusement
or any place of public assemblage, or to attempt to do any of these acts, or
to prepare or possess such devices or materials with intent to do any of
these acts.  This provision does not apply to duly constituted police,
military authorities, prison officials or peace officers in the discharge of
their duties, or to licensed physicians, nurses, pharmacists and other
similar persons licensed under the laws of the State, or to any established
place of business or home having tear gas installed as a protection against
burglary, robbery or holdup, or to any bank messenger or other messenger
carrying funds or other valuables.



40.17    ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. 



   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator,
ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended
and so accessible to children.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)



40.18    TRAPPING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall place any trap on any real property owned or leased by
the City without the express authorization of the Council, Board, Commission,
or officer having lawful authority to supervise the use of property.



40.19    GLASS, TACKS, AND NAILS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit on any street, highway, alley,
sidewalk or public or private property any glass bottle, glass, tacks, nails,
wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal or any other debris or any
other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle, or likely to
engender offensive odors and sights.



40.20    PROTECTION OF LEVEE.



   The following regulations are adopted to protect the levee:



      1.   Parking.  No vehicle shall be parked on the levee or
with 15 feet of the levee footprint without permission.



      2.   Altering or Defacing Property.  No digging, planting,
altering, or defacing the levee or levee footprint shall be done without
permission.



40.21    SLAUGHTERING RESTRICTED.



   No person shall slaughter, butcher, dress, or process any animal in
open view within a residential area.  All slaughtering, butchering,
dressing, and processing shall be done in an enclosed shelter outside of the
view of the general public and the remains of such animals, to include but
not limited to, the carcass, skin, pelt, fluids, internal organs, bones, etc.
shall be disposed of in an acceptable manner.



40.22    OTHER PUBLIC OFFENSES.



   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions which are also
deemed to be public offenses:



      1.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling.



         A.   Section 105.05 – Littering Prohibited



         B.   Section 105.06 – Open Dumping Prohibited



         C.   Section 105.07 – Dumping Unauthorized Materials
in Yard Waste Disposal Site Prohibited



      2.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance.



         A.   Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices



         B.   Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing



         C.   Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On



         D.   Section 135.04 – Playing In



         E.   Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street
or Alley



         F.   Section 135.07 – Burning Prohibited



         G.   Section 135.13 – Dumping of Snow



      3.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations.



         A.   Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk
Improvements



         B.   Section 136.14 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks



         C.   Section 136.15 – Defacing



         D.   Section 136.16 – Debris on Sidewalks



         E.   Section 136.17 – Obstructing Sidewalks



         F.   Section 136.18 – Merchandise Display



         G.   Section 136.19 – Sales Stands.



CHAPTER 41
NOISE CONTROL



 

41.01  Purpose
 
41.05  Sounding of Horn


41.02  Disturbing the Peace
 
41.06  Operation of Noise Producing Equipment


41.03  Disturbing the Peace with Motor Vehicles
 
41.07  Permission to Exceed Noise Limits


41.04  Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
 
41.08  Exemptions



 



41.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish noise standards for the
protection of the public health and welfare.  Any person causing noise in
excess of the established level or standard is in violation of this chapter.



41.02    DISTURBING THE PEACE.



      1.   It is unlawful for a person to disturb the peace by
excessive, loud, or unusual noise, by blowing horns or ringing bells or by
use of sirens, radios, or any type of speaking devices or noisemakers. 



      2.   It is unlawful for any person to create, cause, produce,
play or permit the operation of any sound amplification system, including
(but not limited to) any radio, tape player, compact disc player, stereo,
loud speaker, television or any other electrical device that creates or
causes a noise disturbance.  For the purpose of this subsection, “creates
or causes a noise disturbance” means any sound which clearly can be heard,
by unimpaired auditory senses, based on a direct line of sight of fifty (50)
feet or more from the source; however, words or phrases need not be
discernible and said sound shall include bass reverberation.



41.03    DISTURBING THE PEACE WITH MOTOR VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disturb the peace and
quiet of any street, alley, avenue, public place, religious or public
assembly, or neighborhood, by loud or unusual noise caused by the operation
of a motor vehicle, which includes (but is not limited to) the unnecessary
racing or gunning of the motor, the squealing of tires caused by the friction
of rubber on pavement, or the noise caused by an exhaust system which is
defective or which has been modified bythe installation ofa muffler cutout or
bypass.



41.04    ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES. 



   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause
to be used or operated within the City any engine brake, compression brake,
or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration
of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise
from such vehicle.  The use of an engine brake, compression brake, or
mechanical device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner
so as to be audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall
constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.



41.05    SOUNDING OF HORN.



   No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor
vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal device
be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, nor shall it be
sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.



41.06    OPERATION OF NOISE PRODUCING EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any of the
following described activities in a residential area between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. which creates or causes a noise disturbance.  For
the purpose of this section, “creates or causes a noise disturbance”
means creating any sound which clearly can be heard, by unimpaired auditory
senses, across a real property boundary from a source specifically limited by
this section.  “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along
the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person.



      1.   Use or operate a power lawn mower, power trimmer or other
gasoline or electric-powered device intended for mowing or trimming a lawn.



      2.   Use or operate a gasoline or electric-powered device
intended for the removal of snow or ice.



      3.   Use or operate a gasoline or electric-powered chain saw.



      4.   Use or operate any mechanical apparatus or tools for the
purposes of erection, demolition, excavation, drilling, remodeling or other
such construction work.



      5.   Intentionally sound or activate any privately owned fire
alarm, burglar alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency
signaling device for the purposes of testing.



      6.   Load, unload, open, close, or handle boxes, crates,
containers, building materials, trash cans, containers, receptacles,
dumpsters, or similar objects.



      7.   Use, play, or permit the use or playing of any musical
instrument or device.



      8.   Use, run, or operate a semi-tractor power unit, cooler
unit, or refrigeration trailer.



41.07    PERMISSION TO EXCEED NOISE LIMITS. 



   The Chief of Police may, for good cause shown, grant permission to
exceed the noise and/or time limits outlined in this chapter, for specific
activities, events, celebrations, and public gatherings.  In deciding
whether to extend the noise or time limits, the Chief of Police shall take
into consideration the date, location, and type of special event being
proposed.



41.08    EXEMPTIONS. 



   The noise prohibitions contained within this chapter are not applicable
to the following:



      1.   Emergency or public safety vehicles, street maintenance
equipment, government-owned or hired snow removal equipment, vehicles owned
and operated by the City, and vehicles owned or operated by any utility
company.



      2.   Noise caused by the performance of emergency work for the
immediate safety, health, or welfare of the community or individuals of the
community or to restore property to a safe condition following a public
calamity.



      3.   The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors of
any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar
stationary emergency signaling device for emergency purposes.



      4.   The sound emitted in conjunction with a religious
celebration, to include the sound emitted by church carillons, bells, or
chimes.



      5.   The sound emitted by a motor vehicle radio, tape player,
compact disc player, or similar device intended for the use and enjoyment of
such vehicle’s occupants while such vehicle is on the public right-of-way,
provided that the sound emitted from the device is not audible for more than
fifty (50) feet.



CHAPTER 45
MINORS



 

45.01  Curfew
 
45.03  Minors Prohibited in Adult Entertainment Venues


45.02  Minors Prohibited in Alcohol Establishments
 



 



45.01    CURFEW.



   The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and
specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults
responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper
influences and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the
curfew hour.



      1.   Definitions.  For use in this section, the following
terms are defined:



         A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited
to, an errand relating to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident
or any other situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness,
bodily injury or loss of life.



         B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible
adult should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
minor in that responsible adult’s custody.  It is intended to continue to
hold the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable
standard of adult responsibility through an objective test.  It is therefore
no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent
to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.



         C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under
the age of eighteen (18) years.



         D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an
unlocked multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room
which is not designed, set aside or used as a secure detention area, and the
person arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the
area; the person is physically accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a
person employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and
the use of the area is limited to providing nonsecured custody only while
awaiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for
contacting of and release to the person’s parents or other responsible
adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6)
hours without the oral or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing
the detention.  A judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six
hours beyond the initial six-hour period.



         E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots,
parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use;
and also includes such parts of buildings and other premises whether publicly
or privately owned which are used by the general public or to which the
general public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on
which the general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to
which the general public has access.  For purposes of this section, a
vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a public place when in the
areas defined above.



         F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian,
or other adult who is 21 years of age or older and who is specifically
authorized by law or the minor’s parent or lawful guardian to have custody
or control of a minor.



      2.   Curfew Established.  No minor shall be or remain upon
any of the alleys, streets, or public places or be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



      3.   Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to the curfew:



         A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.



         B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the
minor resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the
adult responsible for the minor has given permission for the minor to be
there.



         C.   The minor is present at or is traveling over the
most direct and accessible route between the minor’s residence and one of
the following:



            (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business,
trade, or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged;



            (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity;



            (3)   Governmental or political activity;



            (4)   School activity;



            (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest,
demonstration, sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of
economic, political, religious, or cultural matters, or for any other
activity protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees
of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of assembly;



         D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a
responsible adult;



         E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through
the City beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by
direct route.



      4.   Responsibility of Adults.  It is unlawful for any
responsible adult knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public
place in the City within the time periods prohibited by this section unless
the minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.



      5.   Enforcement Procedures.



         A.   Determination of Age.  In determining the age of
the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth
certificate or driver’s license, a law enforcement officer shall use his or
her best judgment in determining age.



         B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. 
Grounds for arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without
qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper
identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate
threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public.  A law
enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the
minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any non-secured
setting.  The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs,
on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical
violence when being taken into custody.  A minor shall not be placed in
detention following a curfew violation.



         C.   Notification of Responsible Adult.  After a minor
is taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible.  The minor shall be released
to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to
produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct.



         D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision.  If a law
enforcement officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision
because the law enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent,
guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor,
within a reasonable time, the law enforcement officer shall attempt to place
the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for
the child or another adult person who is known to the child.



      6.   Penalties.



         A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation.  In the
case of a first violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by
personal service or regular mail, send or deliver to the adult responsible
for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance
against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable penalties.



         B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation.  Any
responsible adult as defined in this section who, following receipt of a
warning, knowingly allows the minor to violate any of the provisions of this
section is guilty of a municipal infraction.



         C.   Minor’s First Violation.  In the case of a first
violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a
written warning, which states that any subsequent violation will result in
full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and
the minor, with applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s
discretion, may issue the minor a citation for a first violation.



         D.   Minor’s Second Violation.  For the minor’s
second and subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section,
the minor is guilty of a municipal infraction. 



45.02    MINORS PROHIBITED IN ALCOHOL ESTABLISHMENTS.



      1.   It is unlawful to permit or allow any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age to enter into or remain upon a premises in which
a license or permit has been issued pursuant to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act wherein more than fifty percent (50%) of the business conducted
is the sale, dispensing and consumption of  alcoholic beverages. 



      2.   It is unlawful for every person employed with respect to
such premises to knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable measures to
prevent the entry onto such premises of any and all persons who have not yet
attained the lawful age for the purchase, possession, and consumption of
alcoholic beverages. 



      3.   However, the provisions of subsections 1 and 2 do not
apply when:



         A.   The underage person is a lawful employee of the
license holder, or performing a lawfully contracted service with respect to
the premises.



         B.   The underage person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian, or spouse who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older.



      4.   It is unlawful for any person who has not yet attained
the age for lawful purchase, possession, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages to enter, attempt to enter, or to remain upon such premises except
as provided in subsection 3.



45.03    MINORS PROHIBITED IN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT VENUES.



      1.   It is unlawful to permit or allow any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to enter into or remain upon an adult
entertainment premises where exotic, erotic, nude, or partially nude dancing
or performances are conducted.  “Nude or partially nude” means less than
completely opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female
breast below the areola, and human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid
state, even if opaquely covered. 



      2.   It is unlawful for every person employed with respect to
such premises to knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable measures to
prevent the entry onto such premises of any and all persons who have not yet
attained the age of eighteen (18) years.



      3.   However, the provisions of subsection 1 and 2 do not
apply when:



         A.   The underage person is a lawful employee of the
entertainment venue, or is performing a lawfully contracted service with
respect to the premises.



         B.   The underage person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian, or spouse who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older.



      4.   It is unlawful for any person who has not yet attained
the age of eighteen (18) years from entering, attempting to enter, or
remaining upon such premises except as provided in subsection 3.



CHAPTER 46
PARK REGULATIONS



 



46.01  Purpose
 
46.09  Commercial Sales


46.02  Use of Drives Required
 
46.10  Tuckers Pond


46.03  Fires
 
46.11  Noise


46.04  Littering
 
46.12  Shelters


46.05  Parks Closed
 
46.13  Animals in Parks


46.06  Camping
 
46.14  Sewell Trail


46.07  Alcoholic Beverages
 
46.15  Kids’ Kastle


46.08  Trapping and Hunting
 




 



46.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)



46.02    USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead
any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or
roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the
City.



46.03    FIRES.



   No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such
fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.



46.04    LITTERING.



   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.



46.05    PARKS CLOSED.



   All City parks are closed between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



46.06    CAMPING.



   Overnight camping is prohibited in all City parks.



46.07    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   The consumption of alcoholic liquor is prohibited in all public parks
within the City.  Bottled or canned beer or wine may be consumed in a public
park by persons age 21 or older.  Use and consumption of keg beer is
prohibited in public parks.  The sale of any alcoholic liquor, beer or wine
within public parks is prohibited.



46.08    TRAPPING AND HUNTING.



   Trapping and hunting are prohibited in public parks.



46.09    COMMERCIAL SALES.



   The commercial sale of merchandise for profit is prohibited in public
parks.



46.10    TUCKERS POND.



      1.   Swimming is prohibited at Tuckers Pond.



      2.   Ice fishing at Tuckers Pond is permitted in designated
areas only.  Fishing holes are limited to 8-inch diameter or smaller.



      3.   The use of motorized boats on Tuckers Pond is prohibited.



46.11    NOISE.



   The use of amplified sound or loud music is prohibited in all City
parks between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.



46.12    SHELTERS.



   Reservations for the enclosed shelters at Union and Morningside parks
may be made at City Hall following payment of the appropriate rental fee per
day and deposit fee, as set forth in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees
under the subheading "Miscellaneous Fees" in the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Denison, Iowa.




(Ord. 1462 - Oct. 16 Supp.)




46.13    ANIMALS IN PARKS.



   No domesticated animal shall be allowed to run at large in any City
park.  All such animals shall be on a leash or carried.  Animal owners are
responsible for the prompt removal and disposal of all animal solid waste
created by their pets.



46.14  SEWELL TRAIL.



   The operation of motorcycles, mopeds, and skateboards is prohibited on
any portion of the Sewell Trail.



46.15    KIDS’ KASTLE.



   Bare feet, food, drinks, tobacco products, littering, bikes,
skateboards, in-line skates, and all pets are prohibited on that portion of
Washington Park designated as the Kids’ Kastle.



NUISANCES AND ANIMAL CONTROL



CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



 

50.01  Definition of Nuisance
 
50.08  Request for Hearing


50.02  Nuisances Enumerated
 
50.09  Abatement in Emergency


50.03  Other Conditions
 
50.10  Abatement by City


50.04  Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.11  Collection of Costs


50.05  Nuisance Abatement
 
50.12  Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement


50.06  Notice to Abate: Contents
 
50.13  Failure to Abate


50.07  Method of Service
 
50.14  Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure



 



50.01    DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.



   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to
the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially
to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property
is a nuisance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)



50.02    NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions
which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)



      1.   Offensive Smells.  Erecting, continuing or using any
building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably
offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.



      2.   Filth or Noisome Substance.  Causing or suffering any
offal, filth, or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place
to the prejudice of others.



      3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River.  Obstructing or
impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor
or collection of water.



      4.   Water Pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or
impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.



      5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways.  Obstructing or
encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private
ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.



      6.   Billboards.  Billboards, signboards and advertising
signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which
so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street,
avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track
as to render dangerous the use thereof.  (See also Section 62.05)



      7.   Storing of Flammable Junk.  Depositing or storing of
flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by
dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a
building of fireproof construction.  (See also Chapter 51)



      8.   Air Pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes
or fly ash.



      9.   Weeds, Brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush,
or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire
hazard.



      10.   Dutch Elm Disease.  Trees infected with Dutch elm
disease.  (See also Chapter 151)



      11.   Airport Air Space.  Any object or structure hereafter
erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or
regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or
obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object
or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the
same is located.



      12.   Houses of Ill Fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the
purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by
persons participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of
the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled
substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation
of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the
peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.



50.03    OTHER CONDITIONS.



   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:



      1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51.)



      2.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105.)



      3.   Trees (See Chapter 151.)



50.04    NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a
nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)



50.05    NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists,
such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether
to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure, the municipal infraction
procedure, or to issue a citation to the person for violation of this Code of
Ordinances. 2



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.06    NOTICE TO ABATE:  CONTENTS.



   The notice to abate shall contain:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



      1.   Description of Nuisance.  A description of what
constitutes the nuisance.



      2.   Location of Nuisance.  The location of the nuisance.



      3.   Acts Necessary to Abate.  A statement of the act or acts
necessary to abate the nuisance.



      4.   Reasonable Time.  A reasonable time within which to
complete the abatement.



      5.   Assessment of City Costs.  A statement that if the
nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is
made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs
against such person.



50.07    METHOD OF SERVICE.



   The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail
to the property owner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.08    REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the
Council as to whether a nuisance exists.  A request for a hearing must be
made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the
notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it
must be abated as ordered.  The hearing will be before the Council at a time
and place fixed by the Council.  The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.



50.09    ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.



   If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the
continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any
action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice.  The
City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and
50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.10    ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or
fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to
abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.  The itemized
expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on
behalf of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.11    COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by
certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such
costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general
property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.12    INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.



   If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in
up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with
the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property
under State law.



(Ord. 1425 - Oct. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)



50.13    FAILURE TO ABATE.



   Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse
to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified
in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.



50.14    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   A failure to abate a nuisance as defined in this chapter or a failure
to perform an action required herein, following notice as provided in this
chapter, shall constitute a municipal infraction and the requirements of this
chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal
infractions in lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in this chapter.



 


Notes

2 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  A suggested form of notice for the abatement of
nuisances is included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. 



CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES



 

51.01  Definitions
 
51.04  Exceptions


51.02  Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited
 
51.05  Notice to Abate


51.03  Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 



 



51.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



      1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or
any other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled
vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or
appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or
discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or
hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is
not considered junk.



      2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle, whether licensed or
not, on any property other than a junk yard if the vehicle constitutes a
danger to human health or safety by reason of any defective condition,
including but not limited to:



         A.   Broken Glass.  Any vehicle with a broken or
cracked windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or
broken glass which could cause injury to any child who is attracted to the
vehicle.



         B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part.  Any vehicle with
a broken, loose, missing, or damaged part which could cause injury to any
child who is attracted to the vehicle.



         C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects.  Any
vehicle which has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other
vermin or insects.



         D.   Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle which lacks an
engine or two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor
vehicle totally inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or
has not been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or
more.



         E.   Defective or Obsolete Condition.  Any other
vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other
way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.



      3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or
street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any
combination thereof.



51.02    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain
on any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or
junk vehicle.



51.03    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.



   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to
the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of
Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa.  If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon
private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the
property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said
violation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



51.04    EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within:



      1.   Structure.  A garage or other enclosed structure; or



      2.   Salvage Yard.  An auto salvage yard or junk yard
lawfully operated within the City.



51.05    NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



 



55.01  Definitions
 
55.13  Owner’s Duty


55.02  License Required
 
55.14  Confinement


55.03  License Fee
 
55.15  At Large:  Impoundment


55.04  Rabies Vaccination
 
55.16  Impounding


55.05  Animal Neglect
 
55.17  Costs of Impounding


55.06  Livestock Neglect
 
55.18  Disposal of Cats and Dogs


55.07  Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
 
55.19  Sterilization


55.08  Livestock
 
55.20  Kennel Dogs or Cats


55.09  At Large Prohibited
 
55.21  Zoning Ordinance


55.10  Damage or Interference
 
55.22  Pet Awards Prohibited


55.11  Annoyance or Disturbance
 
55.23  Antlerless Deer Hunting


55.12  Vicious Animals
 
55.24  Feeding of Wild or Stray Animals




 



55.01    DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.



      1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in
any medium including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign,
display, label, tag or articulation.



      2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)



      3.   “At large”.  An animal is considered “at large”
unless the animal is:



         A.   On private property with the consent of the person
in possession or control of the property; or



         B.   Restrained within a motor vehicle; or



         C.   Under the direct presence and control of its owner
or other competent person.



      4.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of
the following:



         A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.



         B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an
organization.



         C.   A solicitation to make an investment.



         D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.



      5.   “Fair” means any of the following:



         A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa
State Fair Board pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair
event conducted by a fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of
Iowa.



         B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured
products.



         C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or
devices or concession booths.



      6.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of
skill” as defined in Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.



      7.   “Kennel dog or cat” means a dog or cat which is kept
or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which is kept under
constant restraint.



      8.   “Licensed dog or cat” means a dog or cat for which an
unexpired City license has been issued and which has an unexpired City
license tag attached to its collar or harness.



      9.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine,
caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm
deer as defined in Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)



      10.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering
or harboring an animal.



      11.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat or an animal normally
maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not
limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch,
tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko or iguana.



      12.   “Unlicensed dog or cat” means a dog or cat for which
no unexpired City license has been issued or which does not have an unexpired
City license tag attached to its collar or harness.



55.02    LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, shelter or keep an
unlicensed dog or cat which is four months of age or older.



      1.   The owner of a dog or cat shall obtain a City dog or cat
license from the City Clerk on or before the date said person acquires
ownership of the dog or cat or the date when the dog or cat becomes four
months of age, whichever occurs first.  Thereafter the owner of a dog or cat
shall obtain a City dog or cat license from the Clerk on or before January 1
of each year. 



      2.   Upon payment of the license fee and presentation of
evidence of rabies vaccination, the City Clerk shall enter a record of the
name of the owner, said owner’s place of residence and a description of the
dog or cat and shall issue to the owner a metal City license tag stamped with
the number of the license and the year for which it is issued.  The owner of
the dog or cat shall securely fasten the City license tag to a collar or
harness which shall be worn by the dog or cat for which the license is
issued. 



      3.   All City dog or cat licenses shall expire on January 1 of
the year following the date of issuance. 



55.03    LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for an annual dog or cat license issued hereunder shall be set
by resolution of the City Council.  Such fee is listed in the Schedule of
Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.  A
penalty shall be added to the license fee for each month or part thereof when
the license fee is delinquent.  The delinquent penalty shall be set by
resolution of the Council and is also listed in the Schedule of Civil
Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



55.04    RABIES VACCINATION.



   Before a City dog or cat license is issued, the owner must present
evidence that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies.  Such
evidence shall be a certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed
veterinarian, and the certificate shall show the vaccination does not expire
within six months from the effective date of the license. 



55.05    ANIMAL NEGLECT.



   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an
animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement
with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined
dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary
sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes
unjustified pain, distress or suffering.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)



55.06    LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.



   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any
place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary
animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary
sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain
or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry
practices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)



55.07    ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.



   A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon
the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another
person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the
cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)



55.08    LIVESTOCK.



   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except in
compliance with the City's zoning regulations.




(Ord. 1432 - Aug. 13 Supp.)




55.09    AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within
the corporate limits of the City.



55.10    DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such
animal to pass upon the premises of another, thereby causing damage to or
interference with the premises.



55.11    ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to allow or permit such
dog or cat to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by
frequent and habitual howling, yelping, whining, caterwauling, wailing,
screeching, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing persons,
bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.



55.12    VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal of any
kind within the City. 



55.13    OWNER’S DUTY.



   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person within the City limits or any person having
knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health or law
enforcement official.  It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to
report to the local board of health and the Police Department the existence
of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)



55.14    CONFINEMENT.



   If the Police Department receives information that an animal has bitten
a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the Police
Department shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it
directs.  If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed,
the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by the Police Department, and
after ten (10) days may humanely destroy the animal.  If such animal is
returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This
section does not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law
enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a
person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)



55.15    AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.



   Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded, and, at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be
served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made
thereunder.



55.16    IMPOUNDING.



   When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall
be provided to the owner within two (2) days after impoundment, if the
owner’s name and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing
a tag or other device that is on or part of the animal.  Impounded animals
may be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an
unvaccinated and/or unlicensed dog or cat, by having it immediately
vaccinated and/or licensed.  If the owner fails to redeem the animal within
seven (7) days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner
cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall be disposed of in
accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.



55.17    COSTS OF IMPOUNDING.



   The cost of impounding an animal under this chapter shall be set by
resolution of the Council.  Such costs are listed in the Schedule of Civil
Penalties and Fees found in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



55.18    DISPOSAL OF CATS AND DOGS.



   Disposal of a dog or cat by the City pursuant to this chapter shall be
by humane destruction of the dog or cat or by giving the dog or cat to a
person who agrees to assume ownership of the dog or cat.  Before receiving a
dog or cat from the City, person who agrees to assume ownership shall pay to
the City the adoption fee plus any required license fee and the costs of any
required vaccination.  The adoption fee is $10.00.



55.19    STERILIZATION.



   No person shall be permitted to adopt a dog or cat from the City pound
unless the person adopting the dog or cat first agrees to have the animal
sterilized in accordance with the requirements of Section 162.20, Code of
Iowa.  Any person who fails to have the adopted dog or cat sterilized shall
be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction.  Any person who fails to
comply with a sterilized agreement or to return the adopted dog or cat within
24 hours after receiving a demand letter requiring proof of sterilization
shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction.



55.20    KENNEL DOGS OR CATS.



   Dogs or cats kept in State or federally licensed kennels are not
subject to the provisions of Sections 55.02, 55.03 and 55.04 of this chapter.



55.21    ZONING ORDINANCE.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to permit the use
of land or structure for an animal hospital or kennel in any district where
such use is not permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of the City.



55.22    PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717.E)



      1.   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any person to award a
pet or advertise that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:



         A.   A prize for participating in a game.



         B.   A prize for participating in a fair.



         C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of
business or attending an event sponsored by a business.



         D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract
which includes provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of
the pet.



      2.   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any of the
following:



         A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of
the Code of Iowa if the award of a pet is provided in connection with the
sale of a pet on the premises of the pet shop.



         B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future
Farmers of America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations
associated with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not
limited to the Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.



55.23    ANTLERLESS DEER HUNTING.



   Licensed bow hunters meeting the requirements established by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources and who pass a proficiency examination
administered on behalf of the City may hunt antlerless deer within the areas
designated as the Denison Special Deer Management Zones on public or private
property, under all the following conditions:



      1.   Hunting may occur only on dates designated by the
Department of Natural Resources as bow hunting season in the Denison Special
Deer Management Zones, but not earlier than November 1, by persons who are at
least 18 years of age and possess and carry a valid deer hunting license. 
In addition, each person must possess and carry written evidence of having
passed the City of Denison proficiency examination.



      2.   Hunters must have written permission from the property
owner and must carry such written permission, along with the portion of the
special deer management zone map which verifies that the property is within
the zone, at all times while hunting.



      3.   Hunters shall not carry an uncased bow within 200 feet of
any residence or within 75 feet of any trail, road, parking lot or building.



      4.   Hunters must take all shots from an elevated stand and
shoot no further than 25 yards.



      5.   Hunters must comply with all rules of the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources for hunting in such zone.



      6.   Hunters must take all deer meat to be processed or given
to charity.




(Ord. 1370 – Oct. 09 Supp.)




55.24    FEEDING OF WILD OR STRAY ANIMALS.



   No person may place any salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable
material on any public or private property within the City limits for the
purpose of feeding wild or stray animals excluding domesticated cats
(otherwise known as Felis catus or Felis silverstris catus).  Prohibited
items include, but are not limited to, salt, corn, apples, cabbage, potatoes,
acorns, oats, carrots, beets, straw, hay, fodder, or any combination
thereof.  No person shall intentionally feed, or cause to be fed, food or
other substances for the consumption of wild or stray animals excluding
domesticated cats.



      1.   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that either of
the following acts are for the purpose of feeding wild or stray animals
excluding domesticated cats:



         A.   The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or
vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon
at the height of less than six (6) feet.



         B.   The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or
vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon
in a drop feeder, automatic feeder, or similar device regardless of the
height of the material.



      2.   This section shall not apply to the following situations:



         A.   Naturally growing grain, fruit or vegetable
material, including gardens, ornamental plants, and residue for lawns,
gardens, and other vegetable material maintained as a mulch pile.



         B.   Grain or other feed scattered or distributed solely
as a result of normal agricultural, gardening, or soil stabilization
practices.



         C.   Stored crops, provided that the stored crop is not
intentionally made available to wild or stray animals.



         D.   Incidental spills of seed materials intended for
planting or to crop materials that have been harvested if the spills are
incidental to normal agricultural operations and such materials are not
intentionally made available to wild or stray animals.



         E.   Elevated bird/squirrel feeders providing seed,
grain, fruit, worms or suet for birds or squirrels.



         F.   Veterinarians, animal shelters, and county, state
or federal game officials who in the course of their duties have wild or
stray animals in their custody and control.



         G.   When authorized by the City Council on a temporary
basis for a specific public purpose.




(Ord. 1449 - Mar. 15 Supp.)




CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS ANIMALS



 

56.01  Definition
 
56.04  Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition


56.02  Keeping of Dangerous Animals Prohibited
 
56.05  Escape


56.03  Regulations for Keeping Dangerous Animals
 



 



56.01    DEFINITION.



   “Dangerous animal” means those animals listed in Section 717F.1,
paragraph 5a of the Code of Iowa.  In addition, the following animals are
also considered dangerous animals:



      1.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels and skunks;



      2.   Raccoons;



      3.   Scorpions;



      4.   Piranhas and sharks;



      5.   Any domesticated animal that has proven itself to be a
dangerous or vicious animal by a history of attacking or biting human beings
or other animals; 



      6.   Any crossbreed of such animals which have similar
characteristics to the animals specified above.



56.02    KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal within the
City for any purpose except as permitted by Section 717F.7 of the Code of
Iowa.



56.03    REGULATIONS FOR KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



      1.   Every person keeping, sheltering, or harboring a
dangerous animal as permitted under Section 56.02 of this chapter shall at
all times keep such animal securely confined within a cage or other approved
enclosure.



      2.   No person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring a
dangerous animal as permitted under Section 56.02 of this chapter shall
permit or allow such animal to enter upon, be placed in or to traverse any
public property, park property, public right-of-way, public waterway or
lagoon, or public sewer system, or any business establishment licensed by the
City or the property of another except when such animal is being transported
while caged, confined or properly restrained.



      3.   It shall be the duty of the persons permitted to keep
dangerous animals under Section 56.02 of this chapter to report to the Police
Department when any dangerous animal is found missing.



      4.   No person shall keep or harbor a dangerous animal which
has demonstrated a propensity without provocation to attack or bite.



56.04    SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.



      1.   In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large
and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way,
public waterway, lagoon or public sewer system, or on the property of someone
other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such
animal may, in the discretion of a peace officer, be destroyed if it cannot
be confined or captured.  The City shall be under no duty to attempt the
confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it
have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.



      2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises in the City
in violation of this chapter or is keeping a dangerous animal which has
demonstrated a propensity to attack or bite without provocation, the Police
Chief shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation,
the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the City, the Police Chief
shall order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal
from the City or destroy the animal within three (3) days of the receipt of
such an order.  Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove the
dangerous animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the person
keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail.  Such order and notice to remove the
dangerous animal shall not be required where such dangerous animal has
previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case
the Police Chief shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and
impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk
of serious physical harm or death to any person.



      3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the
Police Chief may be appealed to the Council.  In order to appeal such order,
written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous
animal.  Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a
waiver of the right to appeal the order.



      4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such
appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. 
The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within fourteen (14) days after
the receipt of the notice of appeal.  The hearing may be continued for good
cause.  After such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of
the Police Chief.  Such determination shall be contained in a written
decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after the
hearing or any continued session thereof.



      5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Police Chief,
the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning,
sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous animal remove such animal
from the City or destroy it.  The decision and order shall immediately be
served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice
of removal.  If the original order of the Police Chief is not appealed and
is not complied with within three (3) days or the order of the Council after
appeal has been served, the Police Chief is authorized to seize, impound, or
destroy such dangerous animal.  An animal so seized shall be impounded for a
period of seven (7) days.  If at the end of the impoundment period, the
person against whom the decision and order of the Police Chief or Council was
issued has not petitioned the Crawford County District Court for a review of
said order, the Police Chief shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale
or shall destroy such animal in a humane manner.  Failure to comply with an
order of the Council issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
simple misdemeanor.  All impoundment fees shall be at the expense of the
owner of the dangerous animal, which fee shall be the actual cost of the
feeding and care of the animal.



56.05    ESCAPE.



   No person shall aid or cause any dangerous animal, whether owned by
such person or not, to escape confinement or impoundment whether such
confinement or impoundment be upon such person’s property or that of
another by opening any gate, door or window or making any opening in any
fence, enclosure or structure or by unleashing or releasing such animal.



CHAPTER 57
MOWING OF PROPERTIES



 

57.01  Purpose
 
57.05  Uniform Height Specifications


57.02  Exemptions
 
57.06  Publication of Notice


57.03  Definitions
 
57.07  Failure to Comply


57.04  Cutting Specifications and Standards of Practice
 
 



 



57.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance
of the City by requiring property owners and occupants to maintain lawns at a
uniform height within the boundaries of their property and on abutting street
right-of-way in order to prevent unsightly, offensive or nuisance conditions.



57.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   The Council reserves the right to declare any particular area exempt
from this chapter if it involves conservation or other natural grass, flower,
or wildlife area, such exemption to be approved by the Council by motion and
filed in writing with the Clerk.



57.03    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



      1.   "Curb", "curb line" or "curbing" means the outer
boundaries of a street at the edge of that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.



      2.   "Cut" or "mow" means to mechanically maintain the growth
of grass, weeds, or brush at a uniform height.



      3.   "Owner" means a person owning private property in the
City and any person occupying private property in the City.



      4.   "Parking" means that part of a street in the City not
covered by a sidewalk and lying between the lot line or property line and the
curb line; or on unpaved streets, that part of the street lying between the
lot line or property line and that portion of the street usually traveled by
vehicular traffic.



57.04    CUTTING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.



      1.   Every owner shall cut, mow and maintain all grass, weeds
and brush upon the owner's property and adjacent to the curb line or outer
boundary of any street, which includes the parking area abutting the owner's
property, to a uniform height as defined in Section 57.05.



      2.   Every owner shall cut, mow and maintain all grass, weeds
and brush adjacent to the curb line, including the parking area abutting the
owner's property, in such a manner so as to be in conformity with and at an
even height with all other grass, weeds, or brush growing on the remainder of
the owner's property.



57.05    UNIFORM HEIGHT SPECIFICATIONS.



   Any property within the City of Denison, whether vacated or
non-vacated, is required to be mowed any time the grass, weeds and brush
reaches a height where it can become a habitat for vermin, or a health,
safety or fire hazard.  Ornamental grasses are excluded.  Unless a variance
is allowed by resolution of the Council, grass, weeds, brush or other plants,
except trees, shall be cut, mowed and maintained to conform to the following
height specification:



      1.   Developed Residential Areas:  not to exceed six inches
(6").



      2.   Undeveloped Residential Areas:  not to exceed eight
inches (8").



      3.   Business and Industrial Areas:  not to exceed six inches
(6").



      4.   Agricultural Areas:  not to exceed twelve inches (12").



57.06    PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.



   Annual spring publication of this ordinance in an official newspaper
shall serve as notice to property owners.  The City will be authorized to
respond to violations without additional written notice being given.  The
Code Enforcement Department will only provide notification of the same
violation once per calendar year.



57.07    FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If the property owner fails to comply with this chapter, the Council or
its appointee will order the property to be mowed.  The City of Denison will
then apply a charge as listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in
the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.  This fee, if not paid within
thirty (30) days, will be assessed by the City for such costs and will be
collected in the same manner as general property taxes.




(Ch. 57 - Ord. 1458 - May 16 Supp.)




TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES



CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



 

60.01  Title
 
60.05  Traffic Accidents:  Reports


60.02  Definitions
 
60.06  Peace Officer’s Authority


60.03  Administration and Enforcement
 
60.07  Obedience to Peace Officers


60.04  Power to Direct Traffic
 
60.08  Parades Regulated



 



60.01    TITLE.



   Chapters 60 through 69 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and
cited as the “Denison Traffic Code.”



60.02    DEFINITIONS.



   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State
law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted
by reference.  Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or
are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



      1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to
and including the following designated streets or portions of streets:



         A.   2nd Avenue North between Avenue C and North Main
Street;



         B.   1st Avenue North between Avenue C and North 14th
Street;



         C.   All of Center Street;



         D.   Broadway between 11th Street and 15th Street;



         E.   1st Avenue South between South 12th and South 14th
Street;



         F.   Avenue B between 1st Avenue North and Broadway;



         G.   All of Exchange Street;



         H.   South 12th Street between Broadway and 1st Avenue
South;



         I.   Avenue C between 2nd Avenue North and Broadway;



         J.   Main Street between 2nd Avenue North and 2nd Avenue
South;



         K.   14th Street between 2nd Avenue North and 1st Avenue
South;



      2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers.



      3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to
direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic
regulations.



      4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous
to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school
district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway
for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings
or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.



      5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to
and including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either
direction from a schoolhouse.



      6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.



      7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of
movement.



      8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any
halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.



      9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City
not included in the business, school, or residence districts.



      10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals,
markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or
erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



      11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which
any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, street, or alley.



60.03    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor
vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



60.04    POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of
the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws.  In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])



60.05    TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS.



   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of
the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)



60.06    PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.



   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition
of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of
traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the
vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or
other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the
registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or
permit of such vehicle.  A peace officer having probable cause to stop a
vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage
card issued for the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)



60.07    OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control, or regulate traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)



60.08    PARADES REGULATED.



   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as
provided herein:



      1.   “Parade” Defined.  “Parade” means any march or
procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the
streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of
persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.



      2.   Approval Required.  No parade shall be conducted without
first obtaining approval from the Council.  The person organizing or
sponsoring the parade shall provide information concerning the time and date
for the parade and the streets or general route therefor, and any approval
given to such person includes all participants in the parade, provided they
have been invited to participate.



      3.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction.  Any parade for which
approval has been given and the persons lawfully participating therein shall
not be deemed an obstruction of the streets, notwithstanding the provisions
of any other ordinance to the contrary.



      4.   Control By Peace Officers and Firefighters.  Persons
participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful
orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement
personnel and members of the Fire Department.



CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



 

61.01  Installation
 
61.04  Standards


61.02  Crosswalks
 
61.05  Compliance


61.03  Traffic Lanes
 



 



61.01    INSTALLATION.



   The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State
law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an
emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to
regulate, guide or warn traffic.  The Police Chief shall keep a record of
all such traffic control devices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.02    CROSSWALKS.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the
Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate
traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway and
at such other places as traffic conditions require.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.03    TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent
with this Traffic Code.  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.04    STANDARDS.



   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.05    COMPLIANCE.



   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



 

62.01  Violation of Regulations
 
62.174  Clinging to Vehicle


62.02 – 62.170  State Code Sections Adopted by Reference
 
62.175  Use of Electronic Device While Driving


62.171  U-Turns Prohibited
 
62.176  Driving Unreasonably Close to a Bicyclist


62.172  Operating Vehicles on Sidewalks
 
62.177  Texting or Using a Mobile Telephone


62.173  Driving on City Property
 
62.190  Obstructing View at Intersections



 



62.01    VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful
order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a
fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the Iowa
statutory laws listed in the following Sections 62.02 through 62.170 relating
to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this
chapter.  Said Code of Iowa sections listed herein are adopted by reference.



62.02    SECTION 321.17   Operating non-registered vehicle.



62.03    SECTION 321.20B   Driving without liability coverage.



62.04    SECTION 321.25   Improper Use of Registration Card.




(Ord. 1382 - Nov. 10 Supp.)




62.05    SECTION 321.32   Failure to carry registration card.



62.06    SECTION 321.34   Registration violation.



62.07    SECTION 321.37   Failure to display registration plates.



62.08    SECTION 321.38   Failure to maintain registration plates.



62.09    SECTION 321.41   Failure to give notice of address or name
change.



62.10    SECTION 321.45   Failure to Transfer Title.




(Ord. 1382 - Nov. 10 Supp.)




62.11    SECTION 321.46   Violation of new title and registration upon
transfer to new owner.



62.12    SECTION 321.47   Transfers by operation of law.



62.13    SECTION 321.48   Violation of title – vehicles acquired for
resale.



62.14    SECTION 321.52   Violation of title – out of State sale,
junked, dismantled, wrecked, or salvaged vehicles.



62.15    SECTION 321.54   Registration required – certain nonresident
carriers.



62.16    SECTION 321.55   Registration required – other nonresident
carriers.



62.17    SECTION 321.57   Violation of Special Plates Requirement.




(Ord. 1382 - Nov. 10 Supp.)




62.18    SECTION 321.62   Special Plates, Records Violation.




(Ord. 1382 - Nov. 10 Supp.)




62.19    SECTION 321.67   Failure to deliver or acquire certificate of
title upon sale of vehicle.



62.20    SECTION 321.91   Abandonment of vehicle.



62.21    SECTION 321.98   Operation without registration.



62.22    SECTION 321.99   Improper use of registration.



62.23    SECTION 321.104   Penal offenses against title law.



62.24    SECTION 321.115   Improper use of antique plates.



62.25    SECTION 321.174   Failure to have a valid license or permit for
operating a motor vehicle.



62.26    SECTION 321.174A   Operation of motor vehicle with expired
license.



62.27    SECTION 321.180   Violation of instruction permit limitation.



62.28    SECTION 321.180B   Violation of graduated driver’s license
condition.



62.29    SECTION 321.193   Violation of conditions of restricted license.



62.30    SECTION 321.194   Violation of conditions of minor’s school
license.



62.31    SECTION 321.208A   Violation of out-of-service order.



62.32    SECTION 321.216   Unlawful use of license or non-operator’s
identification card.



62.33    SECTION 321.216B   Misuse of license or identification card to
acquire alcohol.



62.34    SECTION 321.216C   Misuse of license or identification card to
acquire tobacco.



62.35    SECTION 321.219   Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.



62.36    SECTION 321.220   Permitting unauthorized person to drive.



62.37    SECTION 321.229   Failure to comply with order of peace officer.



62.38    SECTION 321.231   Failure to caution by driver of emergency
vehicle.



62.39    SECTION 321.232   Radar jamming devices.



62.40    SECTION 321.234   Failure to observe seating requirements.



62.41    SECTION 321.234A   All-terrain vehicles.



62.42    SECTION 321.235A   Electric personal assistive mobility devices.



62.43    SECTION 321.236   Local parking ordinance by uniform citation.



62.44    SECTION 321.247   Unlawful golf cart operation.



62.45    SECTION 321.256   Failure to obey traffic control device.



62.46    SECTION 321.257   Failure to yield to pedestrian within
intersection or to respond to traffic control signal.



62.47    SECTION 321.275   Motorcycle and motorized bicycle violation.



62.48    SECTION 321.277A   Careless driving.



62.49    SECTION 321.284   Open container – drivers.



62.50    SECTION 321.284A   Open container – passengers.



62.51    SECTION 321.285   Speed restrictions.



62.52    SECTION 321.288   Failure to maintain control of vehicle.



62.53    SECTION 321.294   Failure to maintain minimum speed.



62.54    SECTION 321.295   Excessive speed on bridge.



62.55    SECTION 321.297   Driving on wrong side of two-way highway.



62.56    SECTION 321.298   Failure to yield half of roadway when meeting
vehicle.



62.57    SECTION 321.299   Passing on wrong side.



62.58    SECTION 321.302   Improper overtaking on the right.



62.59    SECTION 321.303   Unsafe passing.



62.60    SECTION 321.304   Passing restrictions.



62.61    SECTION 321.305   Violating one-way traffic designation.



62.62    SECTION 321.306   Improper use of lanes.



62.63    SECTION 321.307   Following too closely.



62.64    SECTION 321.308   Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.



62.65    SECTION 321.309   Failure to use approved drawbar.



62.66    SECTION 321.310   Unlawful towing four-wheeled trailers.



62.67    SECTION 321.311   Turning from improper lane.



62.68    SECTION 321.312   Making U-turn on curve or hill.



62.69    SECTION 321.313   Unsafe starting of a stopped vehicle.



62.70    SECTION 321.314   Unsafe turn or failure to give signal.



62.71    SECTION 321.315   Failure to give continuous turn signal.



62.72    SECTION 321.316   Failure to signal stop or rapid deceleration.



62.73    SECTION 321.317   Signal light requirements.



62.74    SECTION 321.318   Incorrect hand signal.



62.75    SECTION 321.319   Failure to yield to vehicle on right.



62.76    SECTION 321.320   Failure to yield upon left turn.



62.77    SECTION 321.321   Failure to yield upon entering through
highway.



62.78    SECTION 321.322   Failure to obey stop or yield signs.



62.79    SECTION 321.323   Unsafe backing on highway.



62.80    SECTION 321.323A   Unsafe approach to certain stationary
vehicles.



62.81    SECTION 321.324   Failure to yield to emergency vehicle.



62.82    SECTION 321.325   Pedestrian disobeying traffic control signal.



62.83    SECTION 321.326   Pedestrian walking on wrong side of highway.



62.84    SECTION 321.327   Failure to yield to pedestrians’
right-of-way.



62.85    SECTION 321.328   Pedestrian failing to use crosswalk.



62.86    SECTION 321.329   Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or
working on highways.



62.87    SECTION 321.331   Soliciting ride from within roadway.



62.88    SECTION 321.332   Unlawful use of white canes.



62.89    SECTION 321.333   Failure to yield to blind person.



62.90    SECTION 321.340   Driving in or through safety zone.



62.91    SECTION 321.341   Failure to stop properly at railroad crossing.



62.92    SECTION 321.342   Failure to obey stop sign at railroad
crossings.



62.93    SECTION 321.343   Failure to stop certain cargo or passenger
vehicles at railroad crossing.



62.94    SECTION 321.344   Unlawful movement of construction equipment
across railroad track.



62.95    SECTION 321.344B   Creating an immediate safety threat at
railroad crossing.



62.96    SECTION 321.353   Unsafe entry onto sidewalk or roadway.



62.97    SECTION 321.354   Stopping on paved or traveled part of highway.



62.98    SECTION 321.358   Stopping, standing, or parking where
prohibited.



62.99    SECTION 321.360   Prohibited parking in front of theaters and
hotels.



62.100  SECTION 321.361   Parking too far from curb - angular parking.



62.101  SECTION 321.362   Parking without stopping engine and setting
brake.



62.102  SECTION 321.363   Driving with obstructed view or control.



62.103  SECTION 321.364   Contaminated food – hazardous materials.



62.104  SECTION 321.365   Coasting on downgrade.



62.105  SECTION 321.366   Improper use of median, curb, or access
facility.



62.106  SECTION 321.367   Failure to maintain distance from fire vehicle.



62.107  SECTION 321.368   Crossing unprotected fire hose.



62.108  SECTION 321.369   Depositing or throwing litter.



62.109  SECTION 321.370   Failure to remove injurious material.



62.110  SECTION 321.372   School bus infractions.



62.111  SECTION 321.381   Driving or towing unsafe vehicle.



62.112  SECTION 321.381A   Improper operation of low-speed vehicle.



62.113  SECTION 321.382   Operating under-powered vehicle.



62.114  SECTION 321.383   Failure to display reflective device on
slow-moving vehicle.



62.115  SECTION 321.384   Failure to use headlamps when required.



62.116  SECTION 321.385   Insufficient number of headlamps on motor
vehicle.



62.117  SECTION 321.386   Insufficient number of headlamps on motorcycle.



62.118  SECTION 321.387   Improper rear lamps.



62.119  SECTION 321.388   Improper registration plate lamp.



62.120  SECTION 321.389   Improper rear reflector.



62.121  SECTION 321.390     Reflector requirements.



62.122  SECTION 321.392   Improper clearance lighting on truck or trailer.



62.123  SECTION 321.393   Lighting device color and mounting.



62.124  SECTION 321.394   No lamp or flag on rear-projecting load.



62.125  SECTION 321.395   Parking on certain roadways without parking
lights.



62.126  SECTION 321.397   Improper light on bicycle.



62.127  SECTION 321.398   Improper light on other vehicle.



62.128  SECTION 321.402   Improper use of spotlight.



62.129  SECTION 321.403   Improper use of auxiliary driving lights.



62.130  SECTION 321.404   Improper brake light.



62.131  SECTION 321.404A   Prohibited use of light-restricting devices.



62.132  SECTION 321.409   Improperly adjusted headlamp.



62.133  SECTION 321.415   Failure to dim.



62.134  SECTION 321.419   Improper headlights when night driving.



62.135  SECTION 321.420   Excessive number of driving lights.



62.136  SECTION 321.421   Special restrictions on lamps.



62.137  SECTION 321.422   Lights of improper color – front or rear.



62.138  SECTION 321.423   Unauthorized use of or failure to use emergency
vehicle lighting equipment.



62.139  SECTION 321.430   Defective braking equipment.



62.140  SECTION 321.432   Defective audible warning device.



62.141  SECTION 321.433   Unauthorized use of emergency vehicle or
emergency audible warning devices on motor vehicle.



62.142  SECTION 321.434   Use of siren or whistle on bicycle.



62.143  SECTION 321.436   Defective or unauthorized muffler system.



62.144  SECTION 321.437   Mirrors.



62.145  SECTION 321.438   Windshields and windows.



62.146  SECTION 321.439   Windshield wipers.



62.147  SECTION 321.440   Defective tires.



62.148  SECTION 321.441   Unauthorized use of metal tire or track.



62.149  SECTION 321.442   Unauthorized use of metal projections on wheels.



62.150  SECTION 321.444   Failure to use safety glass.



62.151  SECTION 321.445   Failure to maintain or use safety belts.



62.152  SECTION 321.446   Failure to secure child.



62.153  SECTION 321.449   Failure to comply with safety regulations.



62.154  SECTION 321.450   Hazardous materials transportation.



62.155  SECTION 321.454   Length and width of vehicles.



62.156  SECTION 321.455   Excessive side projection of load – passenger
vehicle.



62.157  SECTION 321.456   Excessive height of vehicles.



62.158  SECTION 321.457   Excessive length of vehicles.



62.159  SECTION 321.458   Excessive projection from front of vehicle.



62.160  SECTION 321.460   Spilling loads on highways.



62.161  SECTION 321.461   Excessive tow-bar length.



62.162  SECTION 321.462   Failure to use required towing equipment.



62.163  SECTION 321.463   Fines for overloads on axles.



62.164  SECTION 321.466   Gross weight in excess of registered gross
weight.



62.165  SECTION321L.2A(2)   Misuse of wheelchair parking cone.



62.166  SECTION 321L.2A(3)   Interference with wheelchair parking cone.



62.167  SECTION 321L.3   Failure to return persons with disabilities
device.



62.168  SECTION 321L.4(2)   Improper use of persons with disabilities
device.



62.169  SECTION 321L.4(2)   Improper use of persons with disabilities
parking space.



62.170  SECTION 321L.7   Failure to provide persons with disabilities
parking space signs.



62.171    U-TURNS PROHIBITED.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn at any place on a
street other than at an intersection; however, U-turns are prohibited within
the Business District and at the following designated intersections:



      1.   At the intersection of Main Street and 1st Avenue North;



      2.   At the intersection of Main Street and Broadway;



      3.   At the intersection of Main Street and 1st Avenue South;



      4.   At the intersection of Main Street and 4th Avenue South;



      5.   At the intersection of Broadway and 11th Street;



      6.   At the intersection of Broadway and Avenue B and Exchange
Street;



      7.   At the intersection of Broadway and 12th Street;



      8.   At the intersection of Broadway and Avenue C;



      9.   At the intersection of Broadway and 14th Street;



      10.   At the intersection of Broadway and 15th Street.



62.172    OPERATING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk
area except when:



      1.   Entering or leaving an alley, driveway or private road or
otherwise legally entering or leaving private or public property;



      2.   Removing snow and ice from the sidewalk;



      3.   Repairing or reconstructing the sidewalk.



62.173    DRIVING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall drive any vehicle on any property owned by the City,
other than a street or alley, without the express authorization of the
Council, Board, Commission, or officer having lawful authority to supervise
the use of the property, unless the motor vehicle is driven on a roadway
designated for use by the public for driving of motor vehicles.



62.174    CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless
all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended
for their accommodation.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



62.175    SECTION 321.276.  Use of electronic device while driving.



62.176  SECTION 321.281(1).  Steer unreasonably close or project any object
or substance at or against a person riding a bicycle.



62.177  SECTION 321.449B. Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.



(Ord. 1493 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



62.190  OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.



   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets.  Any
such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty
may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1408 - Oct. 11 Supp.)



   EDITOR’S NOTES



   See also the following sections of Chapter 41 (Noise Control) for
additional traffic offenses:  Section 41.03 (Disturbing the Peace with Motor
Vehicles) and Section 41.04 (Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes).



   The fines imposed for violation of Sections 41.03, 41.04, 62.171,
62.172, 62.173, and 62.174 shall be set by resolution of the City Council and
are listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees contained in the
Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS



 

63.01  General
 
63.04  Special Speed Zones


63.02  State Code Speed Limits
 
63.05  Minimum Speed


63.03  Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
 



 



63.01    GENERAL.



   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)



63.02    STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.



   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the
Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.



      1.   Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.



      2.   Residence or School District– twenty-five (25) miles
per hour.



      3.   Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.



63.03    PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.



   A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park,
cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])



63.04    SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.



   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions
found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the
City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such
higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such
location.  The following special speed zones have been established:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)



      1.   Special 10 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of ten
(10) miles per hour is unlawful in any of the following areas:



         A.   Union Park.



         B.   Any alley in the City.



      2.   Special 20 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



         A.   North 18th Street from 7th Avenue North to its
intersection with 8th Avenue North.



         B.   8th Avenue North from 16th Street to 20th Street.



      3.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of
twenty-five (25) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof.



         A.   Opportunity Drive from U.S. Highway 30 to the
entrance of the Job Corps Center.



         B.   13th Avenue South from its intersection with South
Main Street west to its intersection with South 8th Street.



         C.   12th Avenue South from its intersection with South
Main Street east to its point of intersection with Donna Reed Road.



         D.   North 10th Street from Avenue C to the north
corporate limits.



(Ord. 1456 - May 16 Supp.)



      4.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



         A.   Donna Reed Drive from U.S. Highway 30 south 600
feet.



         B.   Avenue C between its intersection with Highway 39
and its intersection with 7th Street.



      5.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of
thirty-five (35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following
designated streets or parts thereof.



         A.   Highway 30 between its intersection with Highway
59/141 east to its intersection with Morningside Drive.



         B.   Ridge Road from its intersection with 26th Street
to the corporate limits of the City.



         C.   7th Street between its intersection with Avenue C
and its intersection with 4th Avenue South.



         D.   13th Avenue South between its intersection with
South Main Street and its intersection with South 8th Street.



(Ord. 1456 - May 16 Supp.)



      6.   Special 40 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of forty
(40) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



         A.   Donna Reed Drive from 600 feet south of U.S.
Highway 30 to 1700 feet south of U.S. Highway 30.



      7.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 45
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



         A.   Highway 39 between its intersection with Highway
59/141 to the north corporate limits.



         B.   Highway 30 from its intersection with Morningside
Drive to its intersection with Donna Reed Drive.



      8.   Special 50 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of fifty
(50) miles per hour in unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



         A.   Highway 59/141 from the north corporate limits to
the south corporate limits.



      9.   Special 55 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of
fifty-five (55) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof.



         A.   Highway 30 from the west corporate limits to its
junction with Highway 59/141.



         B.   Highway 30 from its intersection with Donna Reed
Drive to the east corporate limits.



63.05    MINIMUM SPEED.



   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)



CHAPTER 64
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



 

64.01  Stop Signs
 
64.06  School Stops


64.02  Through Streets – Stop
 
64.07  Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk


64.03  Stop Required
 
64.08  Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed


64.04  Yield Signs
 
64.09  Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks


64.05  Yield Required
 
64.10  Official Traffic Controls



 



64.01    STOP SIGNS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign erected
pursuant to this chapter and shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely
as to constitute a hazard, but said driver, having so stopped and yielded,
may proceed cautiously and with due care enter the intersection.



64.02    THROUGH STREETS – STOP.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless otherwise directed by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated
through streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



      1.   All primary highways located within the City;



      2.   Main Street from the south line of Oakwood Drive, south
to the City limits;



      3.   Broadway from the east line of 7th Street, east to the
west line of 26th Street;



      4.   7th Street from the south line of Avenue C, south to the
north line of 4th Avenue South;



      5.   16th Street from the south line of Northwood Drive, south
to the north line of 4th Avenue South;



      6.   20th Street from the north line of 9th Avenue North,
south to the north line of 4th Avenue South;



      7.   24th Street from the north line of 10th Avenue North,
south to the north line of 4th Avenue South;



      8.   Avenue C from the west line of Arrowhead Road, southeast
to the north line of Broadway.



64.03    STOP REQUIRED.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



      1.   5th Street



         A.   Highway 59/141 and North 5th Street.  Northbound
traffic on North 5th Street shall stop.



      2.   7th Street.



         A.   Highway 30 and South 7th Street.  Southbound
traffic on South 7th Street shall stop.



      3.   8th Street.



         A.   Broadway and South 8th Street.  Northbound traffic
on South 8th Street shall stop.



         B.   13th Avenue South and South 8th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 8th Street shall stop.



      4.   9th Street.



         A.   Avenue A and North 9th Street.  Northbound traffic
on North 9th Street shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and North 9th Street.  Both north and
southbound traffic on 9th Street shall stop.



         C.   Highway 30 and South 9th Street.  Both north and
southbound traffic on South 9th Street shall stop.



      5.   10th Street.



         A.   Avenue C and North 10th Street.  Southbound
traffic on North 10th Street shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and South 10th Street.  Northbound
traffic on South 10th Street shall stop.



         C.   Highway 30 and South 10th Street.  Northbound
traffic on South 10th Street shall stop.



      6.   11th Street.



         A.   Avenue C and North 11th Street.  Southbound
traffic on North 11th Street shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and South 11th Street.  Northbound
traffic on South 11th Street shall stop.



      7.   12th Street.



         A.   3rd Avenue North and North 12th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 12th Street shall stop.



         B.   2nd Avenue North and North 12th Street. 
Southbound traffic on North 12th Street shall stop.



         C.   Broadway and South 12th Street.  Northbound
traffic on South 12th Street shall stop.



      8.   14th Street.



         A.   4th Avenue North and North 14th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 14th Street shall stop.



         B.   1st Avenue North and North 14th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 14th Street shall stop.



         C.   Broadway and 14th Street.  Northbound traffic on
South 14th Street shall stop.



         D.   1st Avenue South and South 14th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 14th Street shall stop.



         E.   Highway 30 and South 14th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic on South 14th Street shall stop.



      9.   15th Street.



         A.   4th Avenue North and North 15th Street. 
Southbound traffic on North 15th Street shall stop.



         B.   1st Avenue North and North 15th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 15th Street shall stop.



         C.   1st Avenue South and South 15th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 15th Street shall stop.



         D.   Highway 30 and South 15th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic shall stop.



         E.   12th Avenue South and South 15th Street. 
Northbound traffic on South 15th Street shall stop.



      10.   16th Street.



         A.   Northwood Drive and North 16th Street.  Northbound
traffic on North 16th Street shall stop.



         B.   8th Avenue North and North 16th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 16th Street shall stop.



         C.   6th Avenue North and North 16th Street. 
Southbound traffic on North 16th Street shall stop.



         D.   4th Avenue North and North 16th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 16th Street shall stop.



         E.   Broadway and 16th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on 16th Street shall stop.



         F.   1st Avenue South and South 16th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 16th Street shall stop.



      11.   17th Street.



         A.   6th Avenue North and 17th Street.  Northbound
traffic on 17th Street shall stop.



         B.   4th Avenue North and North 17th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 17th Street shall stop.



         C.   Broadway and North 17th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic on 17th Street shall stop.



         D.   2nd Avenue South and 17th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic on 17th Street shall stop.



         E.   3rd Avenue South and 17th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic on 17th Street shall stop.



         F.   Highway 30 & 17th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on South 17th Street shall stop.



      12.   18th Street.



         A.   8th Avenue North and North 18th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 18th Street shall stop.



         B.   6th Avenue North and North 18th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on 18th Street shall stop.



         C.   5th Avenue North and North 18th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 18th Street shall stop.



         D.   4th Avenue North and North 18th Street. 
Southbound traffic on North 18th Street shall stop.



         E.   2nd Avenue North and North 18th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 18th Street shall stop.



         F.   Broadway and 18th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on 18th Street shall stop.



         G.   1st Avenue South and North 18th Street. 
Southbound traffic on South 18th Street shall stop.



         H.   2nd Avenue South and South 18th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 18th Street shall stop.



         I.   3rd Avenue South and South 18th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 18th Street shall stop.



         J.   Highway 30 and 18th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on South 18th Street shall stop.



      13.   19th Street.



         A.   6th Avenue North and North 19th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 19th Street shall stop.



         B.   4th Avenue North and North 19th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 19th Street shall stop.



         C.   2nd Avenue North and North 19th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on North 19th Street shall stop.



         D.   1st Avenue North and North 19th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 19th Street shall stop.



         E.   Broadway and 19th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on 19th Street shall stop.



         F.   1st Avenue South and South 19th Street. 
Southbound traffic on South 19th Street shall stop.



         G.   2nd Avenue South and South 19th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 19th Street shall stop.



         H.   3rd Avenue South and South 19th Street.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on South 19th Street shall stop.



         I.   Highway 30 and South 19th Street.  Both northbound
and southbound traffic on South 19th Street shall stop.



      14.   20th Street.



         A.   Ridge Road and North 20th Street.  Southbound
traffic on North 20th Street shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and 20th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on 20th Street shall stop.



      15.   22nd Street.



         A.   Broadway and 22nd Street.  Southbound traffic on
22nd Street shall stop.



      16.   24th Street.



         A.   Broadway and 24th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic shall stop.



         B.   Highway 30 and South 24th Street.  Southbound
traffic on South 24th Street shall stop.



      17.   25th Street.



         A.   Broadway and 25th Street.  Both northbound and
southbound traffic on 25th Street shall stop.



         B.   Highway 30 and South 25th Street.  Southbound
traffic on South 25th Street shall stop.



      18.   26th Street.



         A.   Ridge Road and North 26th Street.  Northbound
traffic on North 26th Street shall stop.



         B.   Highway 30 and South 26th Street.  Southbound
traffic on South 26th Street shall stop.



      19.   35th Street.



         A.   Highway 30 and South 35th Street.  Southbound
traffic on 35th Street shall stop.



      20.   36th Street.



         A.   Highway 30 and South 36th Street.  Southbound
traffic from the north on 36th Street shall stop.



      21.   10th Avenue North.



         A.   Ridge Road and 10th Avenue North.  Northwest-bound
traffic on 10th Avenue North shall stop.



      22.   9th Avenue North.



         A.   North 20th Street and 9th Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on North 9th Street shall stop.



      23.   8th Avenue North.



         A.   North 16th Street and 8th Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 8th Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 20th Street and 8th Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 8th Avenue North shall stop.



      24.   7th Avenue North.



         A.   North 16th Street and 7th Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 7th Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 20th Street and 7th Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 7th Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   North 18th Street and 7th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 7th Avenue North shall stop.



(Ord. 1479 - May 18 Supp.)



      25.   6th Avenue North



         A.   North 16th Street and 6th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 6th Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 20th Street and 6th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 6th Avenue North shall stop.



      26.   5th Avenue North.



         A.   North 9th Street and 5th Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 5th Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 10th Street and 5th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   North Main Street and 5th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue North shall stop



         D.   North 14th Street and 5th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue North shall stop.



         E.   North 16h Street and 5th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue North shall stop.



      27.   4th Avenue North.



         A.   North Main Street and 4th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 4th Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 16th Street and 4th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 4th Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   North 20th Street and 4th Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 4th Avenue North shall stop.



      28.   3rd Avenue North.



         A.   North 10th Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North Main Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   North 16th Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



         D.   North 17th Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



         E.   North 20th Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



         F.   North 24th Street and 3rd Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 3rd Avenue North shall stop.



      29.   2nd Avenue North.



         A.   North 7th Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   North 9th Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   Avenue A and 2nd Avenue North.  Westbound traffic
on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         D.   Avenue C and 2nd Avenue North.  Both eastbound and
westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         E.   North Main Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         F.   North 16th Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         G.   North 17th Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



         H.   North 20th Street and 2nd Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue North shall stop.



      30.   1st Avenue North.



         A.   North 7th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         B.   Avenue B and 1st Avenue North.  Westbound traffic
1st Avenue North shall stop.



         C.   Avenue C and 1st Avenue North.  Both eastbound and
westbound traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         D.   North 15th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         E.   North 16th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         F.   North 17th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         G.   North 19th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         H.   North 20th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



         I.   North 24th Street and 1st Avenue North.  Westbound
traffic on 1st Avenue North shall stop.



(Ord. 1488 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      31.   Broadway.



         A.   16th Street and Broadway.  Both eastbound and
westbound traffic on Broadway shall stop.



         B.   20th Street and Broadway.  Both eastbound and
westbound traffic on Broadway shall stop.



         C.   26th Street and Broadway.  Eastbound traffic on
Broadway shall stop.



      32.   1st Avenue South.



         A.   South 11th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         B.   South 12th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         C.   South 14th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         D.   South 15th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         E.   South 16th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
and westbound traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         F.   South 17th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         G.   South 20th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



         H.   South 24th Street and 1st Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 1st Avenue South shall stop.



(Ord. 1488 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      33.   2nd Avenue South.



         A.   South 7th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall stop.



         B.   South 9th Street and 2nd Avenue South: Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall stop.



         C.   South 11th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         D.   South 12th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         E.   South Main Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall stop.



         F.   South 14th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         G.   South 16th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         H.   South 17th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         I.   South 18th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue shall stop.



         J.   South 20th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall stop.




(Ord. 1460 - Aug. 16 Supp.)




         K.   South 24th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall stop.



(Ord. 1488 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      34.   3rd Avenue South.



         A.   South 9th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         B.   South 11th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         C.   South 12th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         D.   South Main Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         E.   South 16th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         F.   South 17th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         G.   South 18th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         H.   South 19th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



         I.   South 20th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 3rd Avenue shall stop.



      35.   5th Avenue South.



         A.   South Main Street and 5th Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue South shall stop.



         B.   South 15th Street and 5th Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue shall stop.



      36.   7th Avenue South.



         A.   South Main Street and 7th Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 7th Avenue shall stop.



      37.   12th Avenue South.



         A.   Main Street and 12th Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 12th Avenue South shall stop.



         B.   Donna Reed Road and 12th Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 12th Avenue South shall stop.



      38.   13th Avenue South.



         A.   South 8th Street and 13th Avenue South.  Westbound
traffic on 13th Avenue South shall sop.



         B.   Main Street and 13th Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 13th Avenue South shall stop.



      39.   14th Avenue South.



         A.   Highways 59-141-30 and 14th Avenue South. 
Westbound traffic on 14th Avenue South shall stop.



         B.   South 8th Street and 14th Avenue South.  Eastbound
traffic on 14th Avenue South shall stop.



      40.   25th Avenue South.



         A.   Highways 59-141-30 and 25th Avenue South. 
Westbound traffic on 25th Avenue South shall stop.



      41.   Adams Drive.



         A.   Arrowhead Road and Adams Drive.  Northwest-bound
traffic on Adams Drive shall stop.



      42.   Arrowhead Road



         A.   Highway 59-141 and Arrowhead Road.  Both
northeast- and southwest-bound traffic on Arrowhead Road shall stop.



         B.   Avenue C and Arrowhead Road.  Northeast-bound
traffic on Arrowhead Road shall stop.



(Ord. 1424 - Oct. 12 Supp.)



      43.   Avenue A.



         A.   7th Street and Avenue A.



   Northwest-bound traffic on Avenue A shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and Avenue A.



   Southeast-bound traffic on Avenue A shall stop.



      44.   Avenue B.



         A.   7th Street and Avenue B.



   Northwest-bound traffic on Avenue B shall stop.



         B.   Broadway and Avenue B.



   Southeast-bound traffic on Avenue B shall stop.



      45.   Avenue C.



         A.   Broadway and Avenue C.



   Southwest-bound traffic on Avenue C shall stop.



      46.   Bel Aire Drive.



         A.   North 20th Street and Bel Aire Drive.  Eastbound
traffic on Bel Aire Drive shall stop.



         B.   North 24th Street and Bel Aire Drive.  Westbound
traffic on Bel Aire Drive shall stop.



      47.   Boyer Valley Road.



         A.   Highway 59-141-30 and Boyer Valley Road. 
Eastbound traffic on Boyer Valley Road stop.



      48.   Brummer Drive.



         A.   12th Avenue South and Brummer Drive.  Northbound
traffic on Brummer Drive shall stop.



      49.   Buena Vista Drive.



         A.   North 10th Street and Buena Vista Drive. 
Westbound traffic on Buena Vista Drive shall stop.



      50.   Bohnker Hill Road and City View Drive.



         A.   City View Drive and Bohnker Hill Road.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on Bohnker Hill Road shall stop.



      51.   Bohnker Hill Road and South Main Street (north
intersection).



         A.   South Main Street and Bohnker Hill Road. 
Westbound traffic on Bohnker Hill Road shall stop.



      52.   Bohnker Hill Road and South Main Street (south
intersection).



         A.   South Main Street and Bohnker Hill Road. 
Westbound traffic on Bohnker Hill Road shall stop.



      53.   Center Street.



         A.   Ave C. and Center Street.  Westbound traffic on
Center Street shall stop.



         B.   North Main Street and Center Street.  Eastbound
traffic on Center Street shall stop.



      54.   City View Drive.



         A.   12th Avenue South and City View Drive.  Northbound
traffic on City View Drive shall stop.



      55.   Chamberlin Drive.



         A.   Highway 30 and Chamberlin Drive (east
intersection).  Northeast-bound traffic on Chamberlin Drive shall stop.



      56.   Crestview Drive.



         A.   Highways 59-141-30 and Crestview Drive.  Westbound
traffic on Crestview Drive shall stop.



      57.   Donna Reed Road



         A.   Highway 30 and Donna Reed Road.  Northbound
traffic on Donna Reed Road shall stop.



      58.   Fair Lane



         A.   Donna Reed Road and Fair Lane.  Eastbound traffic
on Fair Lane shall stop.



      59.   Friendly Lane.



         A.   North 20th Street and Friendly Lane.  Southbound
traffic on Friendly Lane shall stop.



      60.   Frontier Road.



         A.   Ridge Road and Frontier Road.  Eastbound traffic
on Frontier Road shall stop.



         B.   Settlers Lane and Frontier Road.  Both eastbound
and westbound traffic on Frontier Road shall stop.



         C.   North 20th Street and Frontier Road.  Westbound
traffic on Frontier Road shall stop.



      61.   Industrial Drive Extension.



         A.   Industrial Drive Extension and Avenue C.



   Southwest-bound traffic on Industrial Drive Extension shall stop.



         B.   Industrial Drive Extension and Industrial Drive. 
Southeast-bound traffic on Industrial Drive Extension shall stop.



      62.   Lyons Avenue.



         A.   6th Avenue North and Lyons Avenue.  Northbound
traffic on Lyons Avenue shall stop.



      63.   Morningside Drive



         A.   Broadway and Morningside Drive.  Northbound
traffic on Morningside Drive shall stop.



         B.   Highway30 and Morningside Drive.  Southbound
traffic on Morningside Drive shall stop.



      64.   N Avenue.



         A.   Arrowhead Road and N Avenue.  Westbound traffic on
N Avenue shall stop.



      65.   Northwood Drive.



         A.   North 10th Street and Northwood Drive.  Westbound
traffic on Northwood Drive shall stop.



      66.   Oakridge Drive (north intersection).



         A.   Medical Parkway and Oakridge Drive.  Eastbound
traffic on Oakridge Drive shall stop.



      67.   Oakridge Drive (south intersection).



         A.   Medical Parkway and Oakridge Drive.  Eastbound
traffic on Oakridge Drive shall stop.



      68.   Oakwood Drive.



         A.   North 10th Street and Oakwood Drive.  Westbound
traffic on Oakwood Drive shall stop.



      69.   Opportunity Drive.



         A.   Highway 30 and Opportunity Drive.  Southbound
traffic on Opportunity Drive shall stop.



      70.   Park View Drive.



         A.   North 24th Street and Park View Drive.  Both
southeast- and northwest-bound traffic on Park View Drive shall stop.



      71.   Ridgeway Drive.



         A.   North 20th Street and Ridgeway Drive.  Westbound
traffic on Ridgeway Drive shall stop.



      72.   Settlers Lane.



         A.   Frontier Road and Settlers Lane.  Northbound
traffic on Settlers Lane shall stop.



      73.   Timberline Drive.



         A.   Yellow Smoke Road and Timberline Drive.  Eastbound
traffic on Timberline Drive shall stop.



      74.   Valley Drive.



         A.   North 24th Street and Valley Drive.  Northwest
bound traffic on Valley Drive shall stop.



      75.   Yellow Smoke Road.



         A.   Highway 30 and Yellow Smoke Road.  Southbound
traffic on Yellow Smoke Road shall stop.



      76.   Alleys.



         A.   The north/south alley located in the 1300 block of
Broadway from 1st Avenue North to Broadway, traffic from the north shall stop
prior to entering Broadway, and traffic from the south shall stop prior to
entering 1st Avenue North.



         B.   The north/south alley in the 1300 block of 1st
Avenue South running from the east/west alley to 1st Avenue South, traffic
from the north shall stop prior to entering 1st Avenue South.




(Subsections 74-76 - Ord. 1488 - Sep. 18 Supp.)




64.04    YIELD SIGNS.



   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign erected pursuant to
this chapter shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable
for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the street on which he is
driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
street so closely as to constitute a hazard.  Said driver having so yielded
may proceed with caution. 



64.05    YIELD REQUIRED.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



      1.   9th Street.



         A.   1st Avenue South and South 9th Street.  Southbound
traffic on South 9th Street shall yield.



      2.   14th Street.



         A.   2nd Avenue North and North 14th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 14th Street shall yield.



      3.   15th Street.



         A.   2nd Avenue North and North 15th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 15th Street shall yield.



         B.   4th Avenue North and North 15th Street. 
Northbound traffic on North 15th Street shall yield.



      4.   9th Avenue North.



         A.   North 24th Street and 9th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 9th Avenue North shall yield.



      5.   6th Avenue North.



         A.   North 24th Street and 6th Avenue North.  Eastbound
traffic on 6th Avenue North shall yield.



      6.   5th Avenue North.



         A.   North 15th Street and 5th Avenue North.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 5th Avenue North shall yield.



      7.   1st Avenue North.



         A.   Avenue B and 1st Avenue North.  Westbound traffic
on 1st Avenue North shall yield.



      8.   2nd Avenue South.



         A.   South 15th Street and 2nd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 2nd Avenue South shall yield.



      9.   3rd Avenue South.



         A.   14th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both eastbound
and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue South shall yield.



         B.   South 15th Street and 3rd Avenue South.  Both
eastbound and westbound traffic on 3rd Avenue South shall yield.



      10.   Chamberlin Drive.



         A.   South Chamberlin Drive and West Chamberlin Drive. 
Northwest-bound traffic on South Chamberlin Drive shall yield.



      11.   Exchange Street.



         A.   1st Avenue North and Exchange Street.  Northbound
traffic on Exchange Street shall yield.



      12.   Oakwood Drive.



         A.   Oakwood Drive at its intersection with East Circle
Drive and North Main.  Eastbound traffic on Oakwood Drive shall yield.



      13.   Park View Drive.



         A.   6th Avenue North and Park View Drive.  Southbound
traffic on Park View Drive shall yield.



      14.   Morningview Street.



         A.   Morningside Drive and Morningview Street. 
Eastbound traffic on Morningview Street shall yield.



      15.   Settlers Lane.



         A.   Frontier Road and Settlers Lane (east
intersection).  Northbound traffic on Settlers Lane shall yield.



      16.   Sunset Drive.



         A.   6th Avenue North and Sunset Drive.  Both
northbound and southbound traffic on Sunset Drive shall yield.



(Ord. 1479 - May 18 Supp.)



64.06    SCHOOL STOPS.



   At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle
approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten
(10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized
school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until
the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)



      1.   Pedestrian Crossing on North 20th Street between 2nd
Avenue North and 1st Avenue North.



64.07    STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley,
driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving
onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area
only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the
vehicle is entering.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)



64.08    STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.



   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no
driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle.



64.09    YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.



   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)



64.10    OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.



   Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by
official traffic control signals at the following intersections:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



      1.   Intersection of Avenue C and Highway 39;



      2.   Intersection of Avenue C and North 7th Street;



      3.   Intersection of 1st Avenue North and North Main Street;



      4.   Intersection of Broadway and North Main Street;



      5.   Intersection of Broadway and 15th Street;



      6.   Intersection of 1st Avenue South and South Main Street;



      7.   Intersection of 4th Avenue South and South 11th Street;



      8.   Intersection of 4th Avenue South and South 12th Street;



      9.   Intersection of 4th Avenue South and South Main Street;



      10.   Intersection of 4th Avenue South and South 16th Street;



      11.   Intersection of 4th Avenue South and South 20th Street.








[The next page is 391]



CHAPTER 65
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



 

65.01  Temporary Embargo
 
65.03  Load Limits Upon Certain Streets


65.02  Permits for Excess Size and Weight
 
65.04  Load Limits on Bridges



 



65.01    TEMPORARY EMBARGO.



   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets
so designated by such signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)



65.02    PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.



   The Public Works Director may, upon application and good cause being
shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant
to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight
or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those
streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of
the City and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)



65.03    LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate
any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such
signs at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)



      1.   Five tons per axle limit on Ridge Road from Frontier Road
northeast to the corporate limits.  This weight limit provision shall be in
effect from February 15 to May 15 each year.



      2.   Four tons per axle limit on or over 20th Street from its
intersection with Ridge Road to its intersection with Frontier Road.



      3.   Seven and one-half tons per axle limit on 10th Street
from Charles Street north to the corporate limits.  This weight limit
provision shall be in effect from February 15 to May 15 each year.



      4.   Six tons per axle limit on 12th Avenue South from South
Main Street to Donna Reed Drive.



      5.   Four tons per axle limit on the east-west alley from the
north-south alley to North 14th Street in Block 72 of the Original City of
Denison.



(Ord. 1491 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



65.04    LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.



   It is unlawful to operate or drive a vehicle on, over or across the
bridge on South Main Street over the East Boyer River, and the bridge on,
over and across from Donna Reed Drive over the Chicago and Northwestern
Railroad right-of-way having a gross weight when loaded in excess of the
following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)



      1.   Category 1 – Straight Trucks (IDOT designation Type 4)
having a gross weight when loaded in excess of twelve (12) tons;



      2.   Category 2 – Truck and Semi-trailer (IDOT designation
Type 3S3) having a gross weight when loaded in excess of twelve (12) tons;



      3.   Category 3 – Truck and Trailer (IDOT designation Type
3-3) having a gross weight when loaded in excess of twelve (12) tons;



      4.   Category 4 – Equipment having a gross weight when
loaded in excess of four (4) tons per axle.



   These restrictions do not apply to fire trucks, emergency vehicles or
school buses utilizing the center of the bridge.



CHAPTER 66
PEDESTRIANS



 

66.01  Walking in Street
 
66.03  Pedestrian Crossing


66.02  Hitchhiking
 
66.04  Use of Sidewalks



 



66.01    WALKING IN STREET.



   Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk
on the left side of the street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)



66.02    HITCHHIKING.



   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)



66.03    PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.



   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)



66.04    USE OF SIDEWALKS.



   Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent street.



CHAPTER 67
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



67.01    ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.



   Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than
permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when
appropriate signs are in place.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])



      1.   Exchange Street from Broadway north to 1st Avenue North
is hereby established as a one-way street.  Southbound traffic on Exchange
Street is prohibited.



      2.   The north/south alley located in the 1300 block of
Broadway, from the south line of the City Parking Lot south to Broadway is
designated as a one-way alley.  Northbound traffic in this alley is
prohibited.



CHAPTER 68
PARKING REGULATIONS



 



68.01  Park Adjacent to Curb
 
68.11  No Parking / Loading Zones


68.02  Park Adjacent to Curb – One-Way Street
 
68.12  No Truck or Trailer Parking Zones


68.03  Angle Parking
 
68.13  Parking Limited to Fifteen Minutes


68.04  Angle Parking – Manner
 
68.14  Parking Limited to Two Hours


68.05  Maximum Parking Time; Parking for Certain
 
68.15  Snow Removal


Purposes Illegal
 
68.16  Snow Routes


68.06  Parking Prohibited
 
68.17  Parking on City Property


68.07  Parking in Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line
 
68.18  Prohibited Parking on Highway 39


68.08  Persons With Disabilities Parking
 
68.19  Parking Prohibited on Levy


68.09  No Parking Zones
 
68.20  School Bus Parking Zones


68.10  Police Parking Only Zones
 
68.21  Controlled Access Facilities




 



68.01    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter
provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand
side of one-way streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



68.02    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ––ONE–-WAY STREET.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a
one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except
as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



68.03    ANGLE PARKING.



   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



      1.   South 10th Street, on the east side, from Broadway south
to 1st Avenue South;



(Ord. 1489 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      2.   (Repealed by Ord. 1508 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      3.   Avenue B, on the west side, from Broadway north ½ block;



      4.   Exchange Street, on the east side, from Broadway north to
1st Avenue North;



      5.   South 12th Street, on both sides, from Broadway south to
1st Avenue South;



      6.   Avenue C, on both sides, from Broadway north to 1st
Avenue North;



      7.   Main Street, on both sides, from 2nd Avenue South north
to 1st Avenue North;



      8.   Main Street, on the west side, from 1st Avenue North to
2nd Avenue North;



      9.   15th Street, on the west side, from Broadway north to 1st
Avenue North;



      10.   15th Street, on the east side, from Broadway south to
1st Avenue South;



      11.   16th Street, on the west side, from Broadway south to
1st Avenue South;



      12.   2nd Avenue North, on both sides, from South 12th Street
east to Main Street;



      13.   1st Avenue North, on the north side, from Avenue B, east
to Exchange Street;



      14.   1st Avenue North, on both sides, from Exchange Street
east to 15th Street;



      15.   Center Street, on both sides, from Avenue C, east to
Main Street;



      16.   Broadway, on both sides, from 11th Street, east to 16th
Street;



      17.   1st Avenue South, on the south side, from 9th Street to
11th Street;



      18.   1st Avenue South, on the north side, from 10th Street to
11th Street;



      19.   1st Avenue South, on the north side, from 12th Street,
east to 15th Street.



68.04    ANGLE PARKING – MANNER.



   Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than
at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the
roadway as indicated by such signs and markings.  No part of any vehicle or
the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall
extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when
measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



68.05    MAXIMUM PARKING TIME; PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48
hours, unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for
any of the following principal purposes:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      1.   Sale.  Displaying such vehicle for sale;



      2.   Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial
washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an
emergency;



      3.   Advertising.  Displaying advertising;



      4.   Merchandise Sales.  Selling merchandise from such
vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or
licensed under this Code of Ordinances.



68.06    PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



      1.   Crosswalk.  On a crosswalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])



      2.   Center Parkway.  On the center parkway or dividing area
of any divided street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      3.   Mailboxes.  Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a
mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of
mail from vehicles on the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      4.   Sidewalks.  On or across a sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])



      5.   Driveway.  In front of a public or private driveway.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])



      6.   Intersection.  Within an intersection or within ten (10)
feet of an intersection of any street or alley.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])



      7.   Fire Hydrant.  Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])



      8.   Stop Sign or Signal.  Within ten (10) feet upon the
approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control
signal located at the side of a roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])



      9.   Railroad Crossing.  Within fifty (50) feet of the
nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such
rail and not exhibiting a red light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])



      10.   Fire Station.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance
when properly sign posted.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])



      11.   Excavations.  Alongside or opposite any street
excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would
obstruct traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])



      12.   Double Parking.  On the roadway side of any vehicle
stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])



      13.   Hazardous Locations.  When, because of restricted
visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to
moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may
cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or
standing signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])



      14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings.  A space
of fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of
any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping
rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other
building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which
space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing,
parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight,
and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)



      15.   Alleys.  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
(10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any
alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is
parked to deliver goods or services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      16.   Ramps.  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located
on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut
or ramp.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])



      17.   In More Than One Space.  In any designated parking
space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or
protrudes beyond the markings designating such space.



68.07    PARKING IN AREA BETWEEN LOT LINE AND CURB LINE.



   No vehicle shall be parked between the lot line and curb line in
violation of the following regulations:



      1.   No vehicle shall be parked in such area unless the area
is paved with Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete.



      2.   The following described vehicles shall not be parked in
such area:



         A.   Any vehicle not licensed for the current year as
provided by law;



         B.   A vehicle which is totally inoperable due to the
absence or defective condition of any part;



         C.   A vehicle with broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light or any other cracked or broken glass;



         D.   A vehicle with a broken, loose or missing fender,
door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid; or



         E.   Any utility trailer, motor home (as defined in
Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa), all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile,
watercraft, or non-motorized recreational vehicle or trailer.



      3.   No vehicle shall be parked in such area within sixty feet
of the curb line of any intersecting street.



      4.   No vehicle shall be parked in such area in a manner so as
to wholly or partially obstruct a sidewalk or the roadway of a street.



      5.   No vehicle shall be parked for the purpose of storage or
display of the vehicle unless a permit authorizing such use has been issued
by the Chief of Police.† 3



68.08    PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:



      1.   Establishment.  Persons with disabilities parking spaces
shall be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the
Code of Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18.  No unauthorized person
shall establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without
first obtaining Council approval.



      2.   Business District.  For the purpose of this section, the
Business District is defined as follows:



         A.   North side of 1st Avenue North from Avenue C to
14th Street;



         B.   South side of 1st Avenue North from Exchange Street
to 14th Street;



         C.   Center Street from Avenue C to North Main Street;



         D.   Broadway from Exchange Street to 15th Street;



         E.   1st Avenue South from 12th Street to 14th Street;



         F.   Exchange Street from Broadway to 1st Avenue North;



         G.   East side of South 12th Street from Broadway to 1st
Avenue South;



         H.   Avenue C from Broadway to 1st Avenue North;



         I.   Main Street from 2nd Avenue North to one-half block
south of 1st Avenue South;



         J.   14th Street from 2nd Avenue North to 1st Avenue
South.



      3.   Designation of Parking Spaces for Persons with
Disabilities.  The following individual parking spaces are hereby designated
as parking spaces for persons with disabilities:



         A.   1st Avenue North



            (1)   On the south side of 1st Avenue North, the
twelfth parking space east of Exchange Street;



            (2)   On the south side of 1st Avenue North, the
sixth parking space east of North Main Street;



            (3)   On the north side of 1st Avenue North, the
first parking space west of North 14th Street;



            (4)   On the north side of 1st Avenue North, the
fourteenth parking space west of North 14th Street;




            On the north side of 1st Avenue North, the sixth and
seventh parking spaces east of Avenue B.




(Ord. 1450 - Mar. 15 Supp.)




(Ord. 1434 - Feb. 14 Supp.)




         B.   Broadway



            (1)   On the north side of Broadway, the first
parking space west of North 14th Street;




            (2)   On the north side of Broadway, the twelfth
and thirteenth parking spaces west of North 14th Street; 





(Ord. 1434 - Feb. 14 Supp.)




            (3)   On the north side of Broadway, the third
parking space west of Avenue B;



            (4)   On the south side of Broadway, the fourth
parking space east of 12th Street;



            (5)   On the south side of Broadway, the
fourteenth parking space east of 12th Street;



            (6)   On the south side of Broadway, the first
parking space east of Main Street;



            (7)   On the south side of Broadway, the sixth
parking space east of 14th Street;



            (8)   On the south side of Broadway, the
twenty-fourth parking space east of 14th Street;



            (9)   On the south side of Broadway, the fifteenth
parking space east of 15th Street. (Ord. 1434 - Feb. 14 Supp.)




(Ord. 1363 – Oct. 09 Supp.)




         C.   1st Avenue South




            (1)   On the north side of 1st Avenue South, the
first three parallel parking spaces east of South 10th Street;



            (2)   On the north side of 1st Avenue South, the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and seventeenth parking spaces west of South 11th
Street;



            (3)   On the north side of 1st Avenue South, the
fourth parking space east of South Main Street;



            (4)   On the east side of South 14th Street, the
fourth parking space south of the alley located between Broadway and 1st
Avenue South.



            (5)   On the north side of 1st Avenue South, the
third parking space west of South Main Street.



            (6)   On the north side of 1st Avenue South, the
first parallel parking space west of South 14th Street;



            (7)   On the south side of 1st Avenue South, the
first parallel parking space west of Main Street;



            (8)   On the south side of 1st Avenue South, the
fourth parallel parking space east of South 14th Street;



            (9)   In the Library parking lot located east of
14th Street on 1st Avenue South, the first parking space.



(Ord. 1478 - May 18 Supp.)



         D.   2nd Avenue South



            (1)   On the north side of 2nd Avenue South, the
tenth parking space west of South Main Street.



         E.   3rd Avenue South



            (1)   On the north side of 3rd Avenue South, the
second and third parking spaces west of South 19th Street.



         F.   10th Street



            (1)   On the east side of South 10th Street, the
first three parking spaces north of 1st Avenue South.



         G.   Avenue C



            (1)   On the west side of Avenue C, the thirteenth
and fourteenth parking stalls south of 1st Avenue North;



            (2)   On the east side of Avenue C, the first
stall north of Center Street.



         H.   Main Street



            (1)   On the west side of North Main Street, the
first parking space north of 2nd Avenue North;



            (2)   On the west side of North Main Street, the
first parking space south of 2nd Avenue North;



            (3)   On the west side of North Main Street, the
first parking space south of Center Street;



            (4)   On the east side of North Main Street, the
tenth parking space north of Broadway;



            (5)   On the west side of South Main Street, the
eleventh parking space south of Broadway;



            (6)   On the west side of South Main Street, the
fifth parking space south of 1st Avenue South;



            (7)   On the west side of South Main Street, the
first, second and third stalls south of 2nd Avenue South;



            (8)   On the east side of South Main Street, the
first parking space north of 1st Avenue South;



            (9)   On the east side of South Main Street, the
eleventh parking space north of 1st Avenue South.



         I.   14th Street




            (1)   On the west side of North 14th Street, the
first parking space south of 2nd Avenue North;



            (2)   In the southern tier of the North 14 th
Street parking lot, the first, eleventh, and twelfth parking spaces;



(Ord. 1468 – Aug. 17 Supp.)



            (3)   In the City Parking Lot lying east of North
14th Street and south of 1st Avenue North, the first parking stall north of
the east/west alley;



            (4)   On the west side of South 14th Street, the
seventh parallel parking space south of Broadway;



            (5)   On the west side of South 14th Street, the
fourth parallel parking space south of 1st Avenue South.



            (6)   On the west side of South 14th Street, the
fifth parallel parking space south of 1st Avenue South.




(Ord. 1454 - Aug. 15 Supp.)




         J.   15th Street



            (1)   On the east side of South 15th Street, the
twelfth parking space north of 1st Avenue South.



         K.   16th Street



            (1)   On the west side of South 16th Street, the
sixth parking space south of Highway 30.



         L.   Avenue B



            (1)   On the west side of Avenue B, the tenth
parking stall north of Broadway.



         M.   Boulders Conference Center.  The following parking
spaces at the upper lot of the Boulders Conference Center are hereby
designated as parking spaces for persons with disabilities.



            (1)   In the second row from the south end of the
upper Boulders parking lot, the first two spaces on the west end of the row;



            (2)   In the third row from the south end of the
upper Boulders parking lot, the first space on the west end of the row;



            (3)   In the fourth row from the south end of the
upper Boulders parking lot, the first two parking spaces from the west end of
the row;



            (4)   In the fifth row from the south end of the
upper Boulders parking lot, the first two spaces from the west end of the row.




(Ord. 1434 - Feb. 14 Supp.)




      4.   Improper Use.  The following uses of a persons with
disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property,
constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which
is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])



         A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a
persons with disabilities parking permit;



         B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a
persons with disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person
issued a permit or being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of
the Code of Iowa;



         C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted
under Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.



      5.   Wheelchair Parking Cones.  No person shall use or
interfere with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:



         A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking
permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of
Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.



         B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair
parking cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section
321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa.



68.09    NO PARKING ZONES.



   No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      1.   7th Street on both sides from Highway 30 to Avenue C;



      2.   8th Street on the west side from 3rd Avenue South to 1st
Avenue South;



      3.   9th Street on the west side from 2nd Avenue North to
Broadway;



      4.   9th Street on the both sides from 6th Avenue North to
Avenue C;



      5.   9th Street on the south side from 4th Avenue South to
Broadway;



      6.   10th Street on the east side from 2nd Avenue South to 3rd
Avenue South;



      7.   10th Street on the west side from 4th Avenue South to 5th
Avenue South;



      8.   10th Street on both sides from Avenue C to 6th Avenue
North;



      9.   11th Street on the west side from 6th Avenue North to
Avenue C;



      10.   11th Street on both sides from 2nd Avenue South to 4th
Avenue South;



      11.   11th Street on the west side from 5th Avenue South,
north to the alley; 



      12.   12th Street on the west side from 2nd Avenue North to
5th Avenue North;



      13.   13th Place on the west side from 4th Avenue North to 2nd
Avenue North;



      14.   14th Street on the west side from 2nd Avenue North to
6th Avenue North;



      15.   15th Street on the west side from 4th Avenue North to
5th Avenue South;



      16.   15th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to
Broadway;



      17.   15th Street on the east side from 2nd Avenue North to
6th Avenue North;



      18.   15th Street on the east side from Bohnker Hill Road to
12th Avenue South;



      19.   16th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to the
end of the street;



      20.   17th Street on the east side from 4th Avenue South to
6th Avenue North;



      21.   18th Street on the west side from 4th Avenue South to
the east-west alley in Block 140;



      22.   18th Street on the east side from 4th Avenue South to
3rd Avenue North;



      23.   18th Street on the west side from 115 feet west of the
intersection with U.S. Highway 30;



      24.   18th Street on both side from 7th Avenue North to 8th
Avenue North;’



      25.   18th Street on the west side from 7th Avenue North to
4th Avenue North;



      26.   19th Street on the west side from Broadway to 4th Avenue
North;



      27.   19th Street on the east side between 4th Avenue North
and 6th Avenue North;



      28.   20th Street on the west side from Frontier Road north
600 feet;



      29.   20th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to 9th
Avenue North;



      30.   22nd Street on the east side from 2nd Avenue North to
Broadway;



      31.   24th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to 3rd
Avenue North;



      32.   24th Street on the east side from 3rd Avenue North to
the end of the street;



      33.   25th Street on the east side from Highway 30 to 1st
Avenue North;



      34.   26th Street on both sides from 1st Avenue South to 4th
Avenue South;



      35.   26th Street on the east side from Ridge Road south to
the end of the street;



      36.   27th Street on the east side from 1st Avenue South to
3rd Avenue South;



      37.   Avenue A on the southwest side from Broadway to 7th
Street;



      38.   Avenue B on the southwest side from Broadway to 7th
Street;



      39.   Avenue C on both sides from North 7th Street to 1st
Avenue North;



(Ord. 1508 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      40.   Avenue C on both sides from Highway 39 to 9th Street;



      41.   1st Avenue North on both sides from North 15th Street to
North 20th Street;



      42.   1st Avenue North on the south side from North 8th Street
to North 9th Street;



      43.   1st Avenue South on the south side from South 8th Street
to 200 feet east of South 9th Street;



      44.   1st Avenue South on the north side from South 11th
Street to South 12th Street;



      45.   1st Avenue South on the south side from one-half block
east of South 14th Street to South 15th Street;



      46.   1st Avenue South on the north side from South 15th
Street to South 16th Street;



      47.   1st Avenue South on the south side from South 16th
Street to South 20th Street;



      48.   1st Avenue South on the north side from Morningside
Drive to South 24th Street;



      49.   1st Avenue South on the north side from South 26th
Street to South 27th Street;



      50.   2nd Avenue North on the south side from the east
intersection of North 15th Street to North 20th Street;



      51.   2nd Avenue North on the north side west 50 feet from its
intersection to Avenue C;



      52.   2nd Avenue North on the south side from Avenue C to
Avenue B;



      53.   2nd Avenue South on the north side from South 7th Street
to South 10th Street;



      54.   2nd Avenue South on the south side from South 18th
Street to South 20th Street;



      55.   2nd Avenue South on the south side between South 11th
Street and South 14th Street;



      56.   2nd Avenue South on the north side between South 14th
Street and South 18th Street;



      57.   2nd Avenue South on the north side between South 24th
Street and South 27th Street;



      58.   3rd Avenue North on the south side from North 10th
Street to North 20th Street;



      59.   3rd Avenue South on the south side from South 8th Street
to South 11th Street;



      60.   3rd Avenue South on the north side from South 11th
Street to South 16th Street;



      61.   3rd Avenue South on the south side from South 16th
Street to South 19th Street;



      62.   3rd Avenue South on the north side from South 19th
Street to South 20th Street;



      63.   3rd Avenue South on the north side between South 26th
Street and South 27th Street;



      64.   4th Avenue North on both sides from North Main Street to
North 20th Street;



      65.   4th Avenue North on the south side from North 12th
Street to North Main Street;



      66.   4th Avenue South on both sides from Highways 59/141 to
South 20th Street;



      67.   5th Avenue North on the south side between North 10th
Street and North 19th Street;



      68.   5th Avenue South on the south side from South 16th
Street to South 17th Street;



      69.   5th Avenue South on both sides between 14th and 15th
Streets;



      70.   5th Avenue South on the north side from South Main
Street to South 8th Street;



      71.   6th Avenue North on the north side from North 15th
Street to North 18th Street;



      72.   6th Avenue North on both sides from North 18th Street to
North 20th Street;



      73.   6th Avenue North on the south side from North 20th
Street east 150 feet;



      74.   7th Avenue North on both sides from 16th Street to
Eighty-one feet (81') east of 16th Street and on the north side of 7th Avenue
North from Eighty-one feet (81') east of 16th Street to 20th Street. 




( Ord. 1465 - May. 17 Supp.)




      75.   8th Avenue North on both sides from 16th Street to 20th
Street;



      76.   9th Avenue North on the south side from North 20th
Street to North 24th Street;



      77.   10th Avenue North on the north side between Ridge Road
and North 24th Street;



      78.   Bel Aire Drive on the south side from 20th Street to
24th Street;



      79.   Bohnker Hill Road on the east side from its south
intersection with South Main Street to its north intersection with South Main
Street;



      80.   Broadway on both sides from 7th Street to 11th Street;



      81.   Broadway on the north side east 120 feet from its
intersection with 16th Street;



      82.   Broadway on the south side east 135 feet from its
intersection with 16th Street;



      83.   Broadway on both sides from 20th Street to 22nd Street;



      84.   Broadway on the north side from 22nd Street to 26th
Street;



      85.   Buena Vista Street on the north side from 10th Street to
Circle Road;



      86.   Charles Street from on the east side from east Circle
Drive north one block;



      87.   City View Drive on the east side from 12th Avenue South
to the northern intersection with Bohnker Hill Road; (Ord. 1395 – Mar. 11
Supp.)



      88.   Friendly Lane on the east side from 4th Avenue North and
North 20th Street;



      89.   Frontier Road on the south side from North 20th Street
to Ridge Road;



      90.   Lyon Avenue on the east side from Friendly Lane to 6th
Avenue North;



      91.   North Main Street on the east side from Oakwood Drive to
2nd Avenue North;



      92.   North Main Street on the west side from 3rd Avenue North
to Oakwood Drive;



      93.   South Main Street on both sides from 2nd Avenue South to
4th Avenue South;



      94.   South Main Street on both sides from 5th Avenue South,
south to the end of the street;



      95.   Morningside Drive on the east side from Broadway to 4th
Avenue South;



      96.   Morningview Street on the west side from Morningside
Drive to the end of the cul-de-sac.



      97.   Oakwood Drive on the south side between North 10th
Street and North Main;



      98.   Parkview Drive on the south side 70 feet west from its
intersection with 24th Street;



      99.   Parkview Drive on the east side from North 24th Street
to 6th Avenue North;



      100.   Ridge Road on both sides from its intersection with
North 20th Street to Frontier Road;



      101.   Ridge Road on the north side from its intersection with
Frontier Road to the corporate City limit;



      102.   Ridgeway Drive on the south side between Urbandale and
Sunset Drive;



      103.   Settlers Lane on the west side from Frontier Road to
Fort Street;



      104.   Settlers Lane on the east side from its north
intersection with Frontier Road to its south intersection with Frontier Road;



      105.   South Park Drive on the west side from 9th Avenue North
to Urbandale Drive;



      106.   Sunset Drive on the west side from Bel Aire Drive to
6th Avenue North;



      107.   Sunset Drive on the east side from 6th Avenue North to
7th Avenue North;



      108.   Sunset Drive on the west side from 7th Avenue North to
South Park Drive;



      109.   Urbandale Drive on the east side from North 20th Street
to 9th Avenue North;



      110.   Valley Drive on the east side from North 24th Street to
6th Avenue North;



      111.   Boulders Drive on both sides from its intersection with
Donna Reed Road to its termination in the southwest parking lot of the
Boulders Conference Center;



      112.   Northwood Drive on the south side from North 10th
Street to North 16th Street.



(Ord. 1423 - Oct. 12 Supp.)



68.10    POLICE PARKING ONLY ZONES.



   No persons except police officers shall park a vehicle in any of the
following named zones:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      1.   On the south side of 1st Avenue North, the third through
eleventh parking spaces east of Exchange Street;



      2.   On the south side of 1st Avenue North, the thirteenth
through eighteenth parking spaces east of Exchange Street.



68.11    NO PARKING / LOADING ZONES.



   Excepting only when a vehicle is actually engaged in the delivery or
receiving of merchandise or cargo within the prohibited area, no person shall
park or leave unattended a vehicle on any of the following streets:



      1.   Broadway on the north side, the seventeenth parking space
west of 14th Street.



68.12    NO TRUCK OR TRAILER PARKING ZONES.



   On all streets designated by this section as no truck or trailer
parking zones, signs giving notice of said prohibition shall be posted
adjacent to the roadway of the street.  When such signs have been posted, no
person shall park a truck, trailer, or semi-trailer on the roadway of a
street in a no truck or trailer parking zone.



      1.   Designation of Zones.  The following parts of streets
are hereby designated as no truck or trailer parking zones: 



         A.   South 7th Street on the east side from 2nd Avenue
South to 4th Avenue South.



         B.   South 9th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue
South to 5th Avenue South;



         C.   South 10th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue
South to 5th Avenue South;



         D.   South 11th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue
South to 5th Avenue South;



         E.   South 12th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue
South to 5th Avenue South;



         F.   5th Avenue South on both sides between 8th Street
and 12th Street.



         G.   The east-west alley from the north-south alley to
North 14th Street in Block 72 of the Original City of Denison.



(Ord. 1491 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      2.   Truck and Trailer Parking Restrictions in Residential
Areas.  On all streets lying in areas zoned as residential, no garbage
trucks or trailers, no vehicles or trailers used for hauling recycled
materials, no livestock trucks or trailers, and no trucks or trailers hauling
flammable or combustible materials shall park in excess of three hours,
except as provided in subsection 3 of this section.



      3.   Special Permit for Livestock Trailers.  The Police Chief
may grant a special permit for overnight parking of clean livestock trailers
in a residential area when such trailers are being used to move household
goods, provided that said trailers are not omitting any odor.



68.13    PARKING LIMITED TO FIFTEEN MINUTES.



   The following individual parking spaces are hereby designated as
fifteen-minute-parking zones.  When no time is specified, the limitation is
in effect from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. every day except Thursdays, on which
day the limitation is in effect from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      1.   On the north side of 1st Avenue North, the fifteenth
through nineteenth spaces west of North 14th Street every day from 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.;



      2.   On the north side of Broadway, the ninth parking space
west of Avenue C;



      3.   On the north side of Broadway, the first parking space
east of Avenue C;



      4.   On the north side of Broadway, the second parking space
east of 14th Street;



      5.   On the north side of Broadway, the eighth parking space
west of 14th Street;



      6.   On the south side of Broadway, the third parking space
east of 12th Street;



      7.   On the south side of Broadway, the thirteenth parking
space east of 12th Street;



      8.   On the south side of Broadway, the twelfth parking space
east of South Main Street;



      9.   On the south side of Broadway, the second parking space
east of 14th Street;



      10.   On the south side of Broadway, the twelfth parking space
east of 14th Street;



      11.   On the east side of South 12th Street, the first parking
space north of 1st Avenue South;



      12.   On the east side of North Main Street, the first and
second angular parking spaces north of 1st Avenue North from 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.;



      13.   On the east side of North Main Street, the fourth
parking space north of Broadway;



      14.   On the east side of North Main Street, the twelfth
parking space north of Broadway;



      15.   On the west side of South Main Street, the fourteenth
parking space south of Broadway;



      16.   (Repealed by Ord. 1436 - Feb. 14 Supp.)



      17.   On the west side of Main Street, the first parking space
north of Broadway;



      18.   On the west side of South 14th Street, the first parking
space south of Broadway;



      19.   On the east side of South 14th Street, between Broadway
and 1st Avenue South, the first two parallel parking spaces south of the
alley.



      20.   On the east side of Avenue C, the second parking stall
south of 1st Avenue North.




(Ord. 1464 - May. 17 Supp.)




68.14    PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS.



   It is unlawful to park any vehicle on the following designated streets
for a continuous period of more than two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday.



      1.   1st Avenue North, on the south side from Main Street to
Avenue C;



      2.   Broadway on both sides from 12th Street to 15th Street;



      3.   Broadway on the north side from Avenue B to 12th Street;



      4.   The east eleven parking spaces on the north side of 1st
Avenue South from its intersection with South Main Street;



      5.   South 11th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to
5th Avenue South;



      6.   South 12th Street on both sides from 4th Avenue South to
5th Avenue South;



      7.   South 12th Street on the east side from the alley, south
to 1st Avenue South;



      8.   North Main Street on the west side between 1st Avenue
North and 2nd Avenue North;



      9.   South Main Street on the west side between 1st Avenue
South and 2nd Avenue South;



      10.   Main Street on both sides from 1st Avenue North to 1st
Avenue South;



      11.   South 14th Street on the west side from Broadway, south
to the alley;



      12.   South 14th Street on the east side from Broadway to 1st
Avenue South.



(Ord. 1476 - Feb. 17 Supp.)



68.15    SNOW REMOVAL.



   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle in any of
the following snow removal zones during snow removal operations unless the
snow has been removed or plowed from said street, alley or parking area and
the snow has ceased to fall.



(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])



      1.   Exchange Street on both sides from 1st Avenue North to
Broadway;



      2.   South 12th Street on both sides from Broadway to 1st
Avenue South;



      3.   Avenue C on both sides from 1st Avenue North to Broadway;



      4.   Main Street on both sides from 3rd Avenue North to 1st
Avenue South;



      5.   14th Street on both sides from 2nd Avenue North to 1st
Avenue South;




(Subsections 4 & 5 - Ord. 1394 – Mar. 11 Supp.)




      6.   1st Avenue North on both sides from Exchange Street to
North 15th Street;



      7.   Broadway on both sides from 11th Street to 16th Street;



      8.   1st Avenue South on both sides from South 12th Street to
South 15th Street.




(Ord. 1481 - May 18 Supp.)




68.16    SNOW ROUTES.



   The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. 
When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated
snow route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block
traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])



68.17    PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall park any vehicle or store other property on any
property owned by the City, other than a street or alley, without the express
authorization of the Council, Board, Commission or officer having lawful
authority to supervise the use of the public property, except that a vehicle
may be parked on an area designated for the use of public for the parking of
vehicles.



68.18    PROHIBITED PARKING ON HIGHWAY 39. 



   The part of Highway 39 from its junction with Highways 59 and 141 to
the north corporate limits is hereby designated as a no parking zone.  Signs
giving notice of said prohibition shall be posted adjacent to the roadway on
both sides of said part of Highway 39.  When such signs have been posted, no
person shall park a vehicle on the roadway or on either shoulder of said
Highway 39.



68.19    PARKING PROHIBITED ON LEVY.



   No vehicle shall be parked on the levy or within 15 feet of the levy
footprint without permission.



68.20    SCHOOL BUS PARKING ZONES.



   No person shall park a vehicle on a street in a school bus parking
zone, except that a school bus may be parked in a school bus parking zone
while loading and unloading.  The following are designated school bus
parking zones:



      1.   On the south side of Broadway beginning 65 feet west of
16th Street to 226 feet west of 16th Street from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and
from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on days when school is in session;



      2.   On the north side of 2nd Avenue South beginning 110 feet
east of 10th Street to 198 feet east of 10th Street from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. on days when school is in session;



      3.   On the east side of 20th Street from the southeast curb
of 2nd Avenue North 187 feet south from 3:15 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when
school is in session.



68.21    CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.



   Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified
in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.



 


Notes

3 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  See Section 135.11 of this Code of Ordinances for
additional provisions regarding the issuance of a permit for the storage or
display of vehicles and other property in the area between the property lot
line and curb line.



CHAPTER 69
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



 

69.01  Arrest or Citation
 
69.04  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Unattended


69.02  Scheduled Violations
 
69.05  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking


69.03  Parking Violations
 
69.06  Impounding Vehicles



 



69.01    ARREST OR CITATION.



   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:



      1.   Immediate Arrest.  Immediately arrest such person and
take such person before a local magistrate, or



      2.   Issue Citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare
in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint
utilizing a State-approved computerized device.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)



69.02    SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.



   For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section
805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for
each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code
of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)



69.03    PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the
violation.  Failure to pay the fine may result in the violation being
charged and the case proceeding in the same manner as other traffic
offenses.  The fine imposed by this section shall be set by resolution of
the City Council and is listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees
contained in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1365 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1a] & 321L.4[2])



69.04    PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE UNATTENDED.



   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic
Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.



69.05    PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima
facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:



      1.   Described Vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in
the information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and



      2.   Registered Owner.  The defendant named in the
information was the registered owner at the time in question.



69.06    IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



      1.   Disabled Vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle.  When any vehicle is left
unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      3.   Snow Removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in
violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations.



      4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period.  When any vehicle is
left parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking
time.  If the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity
to remove the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



      5.   Unclaimed Vehicle.  When any vehicle is not reclaimed
within the period of time specified in Section 321.89, Code of Iowa, it shall
be presumed to be abandoned. 4



      6.   Impoundment Fees.  Any vehicle impounded by the police
department for any reason may be reclaimed by the owner by paying the cost of
towing the vehicle and a daily storage fee.  The daily storage fee imposed
by this section shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed
in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances.



 


Notes

4 
† See Chapter 78 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 75
SNOWMOBILE, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
AND OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLES



 

75.01  Purpose
 
75.07  Negligence


75.02  Definitions
 
75.08  Accident Reports


75.03  General Regulations
 
75.09  Violation of Snowmobile Regulations


75.04  Operation of Snowmobiles
 
75.10  Violation of ATV Regulations


75.05  Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
 
75.11  Violation of UTV Regulations


75.06  Operation of Off-Road Utility Vehicles
 
 



 



75.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and off-road utility vehicles within the
City.



75.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   "Snowmobile" means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one
thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless
belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any
combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or
ice.  "Snowmobile" does not include an all-terrain vehicle which has been
altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)



   2.   "All-terrain vehicle" or "ATV" means a motorized vehicle, with
not less than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited
in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters
and in total dry weight to less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds
and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   3.   "Off-road motorcycle" means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that
has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars
for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on
natural terrain.  "Off-road motorcycle" includes a motorcycle that was
originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under
Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that
enable operation over natural terrain.  An operator of an off-road
motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the
operation of all-terrain vehicles.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   4.   "Off-road utility vehicle" or "UTV" means a motorized vehicle,
with not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or
rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not
intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control
levers for control.  "Off-road utility vehicle" includes the following
vehicles:



      A.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 1" means an off-road
utility vehicle with a total dry weight of one thousand two hundred pounds or
less and a width of fifty inches or less.



      B.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 2" means an off-road
utility vehicle, other than a type 1 off-road utility vehicle, with a total
dry weight of two thousand pounds or less, and a width of sixty-five inches
or less.



      C.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 3" means an off-road
utility vehicle with a total dry weight of more than two thousand pounds or a
width of more than sixty-five inches, or both.



An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is subject to the provisions of
this chapter governing the operation of off-road utility vehicles.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   5.   "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed,
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



75.03    GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City in violation of
the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules
established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural
Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation,
nor shall any person operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or UTV within the
City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)



75.04    OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following
restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets
which have not been plowed during the snow season and in conformity with the
following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])



      A.   Authorized Use on Streets and Alleys.  Except as
provided by paragraph C of this subsection, registered snowmobiles may be
operated on the roadway of the streets and alleys of the City for the purpose
of transportation by a direct route from a point within the City to a
destination within the City, from a point within the City to the corporate
limits or from the corporate limits to a destination within the City.



      B.   Illegal Use on Streets and Alleys.  No person shall
operate a snowmobile on the roadway of a street or alley for any person other
than the purpose authorized by Paragraph A of this subsection.



      C.   Restricted Streets.  Except to the extent authorized by
subsection 2 and 4 of Section 321G.9 of the Code of Iowa, no person shall
operate a snowmobile on the roadway of the following streets:



         (1)   All primary highways located within the City;



            a.   Highway 30 from the eastern city limits to
the western city limits.



            b.   Highway 39 from the northern city limits to
Highway 59/141.



            c.   Highway 59/141 from the northern city limits
to the southern city limits.



         (2)   Main Street from 4th Avenue South to 2nd Avenue
North;



         (3)   Broadway from 11th Street to 16th Street.



   2.   Exceptions.  Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets
only under the following circumstances:



      A.   Emergencies.  Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow
upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])



      B.   Direct Crossing.  Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:



         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;



         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all
on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and



         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street with another street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on
an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile may be driven directly
across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])



   4.   Trails.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain
vehicle trails except where so designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])



   5.   Parks and Other City Land.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated
in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.  A snowmobile shall not be operated on any
City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.



   6.   Sidewalk or Parking.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon
the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking"
except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which
operation is authorized by this chapter.



   7.   Obedience to Traffic Ordinances.  Every person operating a
snowmobile on the roadway of a street or alley shall obey all of the
ordinances of the City regulating the operation of motor vehicles, except
those provisions which by their nature can have no application.



   8.   Speed Limits. 



      A.   No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of
twenty (20) miles per hour on a street.



      B.   No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of
ten (10) miles per hour on an alley.



   9.   Use on Private Property.  No person shall operate a snowmobile
on private property without the consent of the person in possession of the
property.



   10.   Registration and User Permit Required.  Each snowmobile used
on public land, public ice, or a designated snowmobile trail of this state
shall be currently registered.  A person shall not operate, maintain, or
give permission for the operation or maintenance of a snowmobile on public
land, public ice, or a designated snowmobile trail unless the snowmobile is
registered in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 321G.4 or applicable federal
laws or in accordance with an approved numbering system of another state and
the evidence of registration is in full force and effect.  A snowmobile must
also be issued a user permit in accordance with Chapter 321.G4A of the Code
of Iowa.



   11.   Exempt Vehicles.  Registration and user permits shall not be
required for the following described snowmobiles:



      A.   Snowmobiles owned by the United States, this state, or
another state, or by a governmental subdivision thereof, and used for
enforcement, search and rescue, or official research and studies, but not for
recreational or commercial purposes.



      B.   Snowmobiles used exclusively as farm implements.



   12.   Mufflers Required.



      A.   The exhaust of every internal combustion engine used in
any snowmobile shall be effectively muffled by equipment constructed and used
to muffle all snowmobile notice in a reasonable manner in accordance with
rules adopted by the commission.



      B.   The commission may adopt rules with respect to the
inspection of snowmobiles and testing of snowmobile mufflers.



      C.   A separate placard shall be affixed, permanently and
conspicuously, to any new snowmobile sold or offered for sale in this state
that does not meet the muffler requirements as state above.  The placard
shall designate each snowmobile which does not meet the muffler requirements.



      D.   A snowmobile manufactured after July 1, 1975, which is
sold, offered for sale or used in this state, except in an authorized special
event, shall have a muffler system that limits engine noise to not more than
seventy-eight decibels as measured on the "A" scale at a distance of fifty
feet.



   13.   Headlight - Taillight - Brakes.  Every snowmobile shall be
equipped with at least one headlight and one taillight.  Every snowmobile
shall be equipped with brakes.



   14.   Unlawful Operation.  A person shall not drive or operate a
snowmobile:



      A.   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all existing circumstances.



      B.   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage
thereto.



      C.   While under the influence of any intoxicating substance
to include but not limited to: beer, liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming
drugs.



      D.   Without a lighted headlight and taillight from sunset to
sunrise and at such other times when conditions provide insufficient lighting
to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of five
hundred feet ahead.



      E.   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages
or destroys growing stock.



      F.   On any public land, public ice, or designated snowmobile
trail, in violation of official signs of the commission prohibiting such
operation in the interest of safety for persons, property, or the environment.



      G.   In any park, wildlife area, preserve, refuge, game
management area, or any portion of a meandered stream, or any portion of the
bed of a nonmeandered stream which has been identified as a navigable stream
or river by rule adopted the department and which is covered by water, except
on designated snowmobile trails.  This paragraph does not prohibit the use
of ford crossings of public or private roads or any other ford crossing when
used for agricultural purposes; the operation of construction vehicles
engaged in lawful construction, repair, or maintenance in a streambed; or the
operation of snowmobiles on ice.



      H.   Upon an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile
may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established
crossing and, notwithstanding any other provisions of law, may, if necessary,
use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.  This paragraph does not apply to a law enforcement
officer or railroad employee in the lawful discharge of the officer's or
employee's duties or to an employee of a utility with authority to enter upon
the railroad right-of-way in the lawful performance of the employee's duties.



      I.   Upon the surface of any public water in a maneuver known
as water skipping, This paragraph does not apply to operation on rivers or
streams between November 1 and April 1.



      J.   Firearms.



         (1)   A person shall not operate or ride a snowmobile
with a firearm in the person's possession unless it is unloaded and enclosed
in a carrying case.  However, a non-ambulatory person may carry an uncased
and unloaded firearm while operating or riding a snowmobile.



         (2)   A person may operate or ride on a snowmobile with
a loaded firearm, whether concealed or not, without a permit to carry
weapons, if the person operates or rides on land owned or possessed by the
person, and the person's conduct is otherwise lawful.



         (3)   If a person is operating or riding on a snowmobile
on land that is not owned or possessed by the person, the person may operate
or ride the snowmobile with a loaded firearm, whether concealed or not, if
all of the following apply:  (i) The firearm is a pistol or revolver and is
secured in a retention holster upon the person.  (ii) The person has in the
person's possession and displays to a peace officer on demand a valid permit
to carry weapons which has been issued to the person.  (iii) The person's
conduct is within the limits of the permit to carry weapons.



         (4)   A person shall not discharge a firearm while on a
snowmobile, except that a non-ambulatory person may discharge a firearm from
a snowmobile while lawfully hunting if the person is not operating or riding
a moving snowmobile.




(Ord. 1461 - Oct. 16 Supp.)




      K.   A person shall not drive or operate a snowmobile on
public land or a designated snowmobile trail without a measurable snow cover.



   15.   Violation of Stop Signal.  A person who has received a visual
or audible signal from a peace officer to come to a stop shall not operate an
Off-Road Utility Vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the signal,
interfere with or endanger the officer or any other person or vehicle,
increase speed, or attempt to flee or elude the officer.



   16.   Operation by Minors.  Persons operating a snowmobile in the
City shall do so in accordance with Chapter 321G.20 of the Code of Iowa.



75.05    OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where ATVs may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance
with section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by ordinance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])



   2.   Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails
except where designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way.  ATVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way.  An ATV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law, may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])



   4.   Parks and Other City Land.  ATVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.



   5.   Sidewalk or Parking.  ATVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line
and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking".



   6.   An ATV may make a direct crossing of a highway provided all of
the following occur:



      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing.



      B.   The ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.



      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.



      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only
at an intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.



      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway
designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state agency, county, or city
to a street, roadway, or highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail
by a state agency, county, or city.



(Ord. 1474 -  Feb. 18 Supp.)



75.06    OPERATION OF OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLES.



   The operators of Off-Road Utility Vehicles shall comply with the
following restrictions concerning the operation of Off-Road Utility Vehicles
within the City:



   1.   Operation on Roadways.  A registered Off-Road Utility Vehicle
may be operated on public roadways and alleys within the city limits of
Denison with the exception of:



      A.   All primary highways located within the City to include:



         (1)   Highway 30 from the eastern city limits to the
western city limits.



         (2)   Highway 39 from the northern city limits to
Highway 59/141.



         (3)   Highway 59/141 from the northern city limits to
the southern city limits.



      B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an
Off-Road Utility Vehicle may make a direct crossing of a highway provided all
of the following occur:



         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing.



         (2)   The Off-Road Utility Vehicle is brought to a
complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the
highway.



         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.



         (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is
made only at an intersection of such highway with another public street or
highway.



         (5)   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or
highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state agency, county,
or city to a street, roadway, or highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle
trail by a state agency, county, or city.



(Ord. 1474 -  Feb. 18 Supp.)



   2.   Unlawful Operations.  A person shall not drive or operate an
Off-Road Utility Vehicle within the City:



      A.   Between the hours of official sunset of one day to the
official sunrise of the next day as established by the National Weather
Service.



      B.   At a rate of speed in excess of the posted speed limit,
nor greater than reasonable or proper under all existing circumstances.



      C.   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage
thereto.



      D.   While under the influence of any intoxicating substance
to include but not limited to: beer, liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming
drugs.



      E.   Without a lighted headlight and taillight at such times
when conditions provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible
persons and vehicles at a distance of five hundred feet ahead.



      F.   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages
or destroys growing stock.



      G.   On any public land, ice, or snow, in violation of
official signage prohibiting such operation in the interest of safety for
persons, property, or the environment.



      H.   In any park, wildlife area, preserve, refuge, game
management area, or any portion of a meandered stream, or any portion of the
bed of a nonmeandered stream, which has been identified as a navigable stream
or river by rule adopted by the Department of Natural Resources and which is
covered by water, except on designated riding areas and designated riding
trails.  This paragraph does not prohibit the use of ford crossing of public
roads or any other ford crossing when used for agricultural purposes; the
operation of construction vehicles engaged in lawful construction, repair, or
maintenance in a streambed; or the operation of all-terrain vehicles on ice.



      I.   On any public sidewalk or that portion of the street
located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly
referred to as the "parking".



      J.   Upon an operating railroad right-of-way.  An Off-Road
Utility Vehicle may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at
an established crossing and, notwithstanding any other provisions of law,
may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after
yielding to all oncoming traffic.  This paragraph does not apply to a law
enforcement officer's or employee's duties or to an employee of a utility
with authority to enter upon the railroad right-of-way in the lawful
performance of the employee's duties.



      K.   Firearms.



         (1)   A person shall not operate or ride an all-terrain
vehicle with a firearm in the person's possession unless it is unloaded and
enclosed in a carrying case.  However, a non-ambulatory person may carry an
uncased and unloaded firearm while operating or riding an all-terrain vehicle.



         (2)   A person may operate or ride on an all-terrain
vehicle with a loaded firearm, whether concealed or not, without a permit to
carry weapons, if the person operates or rides on land owned or possessed by
the person, and the person's conduct is otherwise lawful.



         (3)   If a person is operating or riding on an
all-terrain vehicle on land that is not owned or possessed by the person, the
person may operate or ride the all-terrain vehicle with a loaded firearm,
whether concealed or not, if all of the following apply:  (i) The firearm is
a pistol or revolver and is secured in a retention holster upon the person. 
(ii) The person has in the person's possession and displays to a peace
officer on demand a valid permit to carry weapons which has been issued to
the person.  (iii) The person's conduct is within the limits of the permit
to carry weapons.



         (4)   A person shall not discharge a firearm while on an
all-terrain vehicle, except that a non-ambulatory person may discharge a
firearm from an all-terrain vehicle while lawfully hunting if the person is
not operating or riding a moving all-terrain vehicle.




(Ord. 1461 -  Oct. 16 Supp.)




      L.   With more persons on the vehicle than it was designated
to carry.  This section does not apply to a person who operates an Off-Road
Utility Vehicle as part of a farm operation as defined in Chapter 352.2 of
the Code of Iowa.



      M.   On a designated riding area or designated trail unless
the riding area or trail is signed as open to Off-Road Utility Vehicle
operation.



      N.   A person shall not operate a vehicle other than an
Off-Road Utility Vehicle on a designated riding area or designated trail
unless the riding area or trail is signed as open to such other use.



      O.   Unless the operator is 18 years of age or older and has a
valid Driver's License in their immediate possession.



      P.   Unless the vehicle is duly registered as outline in
section 7 below.



      Q.   Unless the operator has proof of insurance in their
immediate possession which complies with that required of the operator of a
motor vehicle pursuant to applicable Iowa Statutes, Rules, and Regulations,
including but not limited to Chapters 321.20B and 321A.21 of the Code of Iowa.



   3.   Seatbelts/Safety Restraints.  The driver and front seat
occupants of an Off-Road Utility Vehicle shall each wear a properly adjusted
and fastened safety belt or safety harness any time the vehicle is in forward
motion on a street or highway in the City except that a child under eighteen
years of age shall be secured as required by Chapter 321.446 of the Code of
Iowa.



   4.   Mufflers Required.  An Off-Road Utility Vehicle shall not be
operated without suitable and effective muffling devices.  An Off-Road
Utility Vehicle shall comply with the sound level standards and testing
procedures established by the society of automotive engineers under SAE J1287.



   5.   Signals.  Persons operating an Off-Road Utility Vehicle within
the City will comply with those requirements concerning turning and signaling
turns as found in Chapters 321.311, 321.312, 321.314, 321.315, 321.316,
321.317, and 321.318 of the Code of Iowa.



   6.   Violation of Stop Signal.  A person who has received a visual
or audible signal from a peace officer to come to a stop shall not operate an
Off-Road Utility Vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the signal,
interfere with or endanger the officer or any other person or vehicle,
increase speed, or attempt to flee or elude the officer.



   7.   Identification Stickers.  Individuals who operate an Off-Road
Utility Vehicle on the roadways of the city limits must obtain an
identification sticker from the office of the Crawford County Recorder.  The
following conditions apply:



      A.   The owner of each Off-Road Utility Vehicle shall be
required to provide proof of ownership including but not limited to bill of
sale, registration, and other documentation as may be accepted by the
Recorder.



      B.   Each applicant for an identification sticker must provide
proof that the vehicle is properly registered pursuant to Iowa Code Section
321I.3 and DNR regulations.



      C.   Each applicant for an identification plate must pay a fee
in the amount of $25.00.



      D.   Identification Stickers shall be affixed to the
right-rear portion of all Off-Road Utility Vehicles in such a manner as to be
clearly visible.



   8.   Exempt Vehicles.  Registration shall not be required for
vehicles exempted under Chapter 321I.9(3) of the Code of Iowa.



75.07    NEGLIGENCE.



   The owner and operator of a snowmobile, ATV or UTV are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the snowmobile, ATV
or UTV.  The owner of a snowmobile, ATV or UTV shall be liable for any such
injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the snowmobile, ATV or
UTV at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
owner's consent to operate the snowmobile, ATV or UTV at the time the injury
or damage occurred.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)



75.08    ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   Whenever a snowmobile, ATV or UTV is involved in an accident resulting
in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone
acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer
and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)



75.09    VIOLATION OF SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS.



   Any person who willfully fails to abide by the applicable provisions of
the Iowa statutory laws listed in the following Section 75.09 (1) through
75.09 (17) relating to the operation of snowmobiles is in violation of this
chapter.  Said Code of Iowa sections listed herein are adopted by reference.



      1.   SECTION 321G.3  Resident/Non Resident registration or
user permit required



      2.   SECTION 321G.5  Display of identification number



      3.   SECTION 321G.9  Improper Operation on roadways/highways



      4.   SECTION 321G.11  Mufflers



      5.   SECTION 321G.12  Lights required and brakes required



      6.   SECTION 321G.13(1a)  Operate at a speed greater than
reasonable/proper



      7.   SECTION 321G.13(1b)  Operate in a careless/reckless
manner



      8.   SECTION 321G.13(1d)    Lights



      9.   SECTION 321G.13(1e)  Operate in a tree nursery or
planting damaging growing stock



      10.   SECTION 321G.13(1f)  Operate on public land/ice/snow in
violation of official signs



      11.   SECTION 321G.13(1g)  Operate in prohibited
park/wildlife areas/preserves/streambeds



      12.   SECTION 321G.13(1h)  Operate upon an operating railroad
right-of-way



      13.   SECTION 321G.13(1i)  Water skipping



      14.   SECTION 321G.13(2)  Operate or ride with a loaded or
uncased firearm



      15.   SECTION 321G.13(3)  Operate on public land without
measurable snow cover



      16.   SECTION 321G.17  Violation of Stop Signal



      17.   SECTION 321G.20  Operation by Minors



75.10    VIOLATION OF ATV REGULATIONS.



   Any person who willfully fails to abide by the applicable provisions of
the Iowa statutory laws listed in the following Section 76.09(1) through
76.09(16) relating to the operation of all-terrain vehicles is in violation
of this chapter.  Said Code of Iowa sections listed herein are adopted by
reference.



      1.   SECTION 321I.3  Resident/Non Resident registration or
user permit required



      2.   SECTION 321I.6  Display of identification number



      3.   SECTION 321I.10  Improper Operation on
highways/snowmobile trails



      4.   SECTION 321I.12  Mufflers



      5.   SECTION 321I.13  Headlight/Taillight lamp/brakes required



      6.   SECTION 321I.14(1a)  Operate at a speed greater than
reasonable/proper



      7.   SECTION 321I.14(1d)  Lights required



      8.   SECTION 321I.14(1e)  Operate in a tree nursery or
planting damaging growing stock



      9.   SECTION 321I.14(1f)  Operate on public land/ice/snow in
violation of officials signs



      10.   SECTION 321I.14(1g)  Operate in prohibited
park/wildlife areas/preserves/streambeds



      11.   SECTION 321I.14(1h)  Operate upon an operating railroad
right-of-way



      12.   SECTION 321I.14(2)  Operate or ride with a loaded or
uncased firearm



      13.   SECTION 321I.14(3)  Operate with more persons than
vehicle was designed to carry



      14.   SECTION 321I.14(4)  Operate an off-road utility vehicle
on a riding area/trail



      15.   SECTION 321I.14(5)  Prohibited vehicles on designated
riding areas/trails



      16.   SECTION 321I.18  Violation of Stop Signal



75.11    VIOLATION OF UTV REGULATIONS.



   Any person who willfully fails to abide by the applicable provisions
concerning the operation of Off-Road Utility Vehicles in the City is in
violation of this chapter.  The fines for violation of Section 75.06(1)
through 75.06(8) shall be set by resolution of the City Council and are
listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees contained in the Appendix
to this Code of Ordinances."




(Ch. 75 - Ord. 1438 - Aug. 14 Supp.)




CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS



 



76.01  Scope of Regulations
 
76.09  Riding on Sidewalks


76.02  Traffic Code Applies
 
76.10  Towing


76.03  Double Riding Restricted
 
76.11  Improper Riding


76.04  Two Abreast Limit
 
76.12  Parking


76.05  Bicycle Paths
 
76.13  Equipment Requirements


76.06  Speed
 
76.14  License Required


76.07  Emerging from Alley or Driveway
 
76.15  City License Sticker


76.08  Carrying Articles
 
76.16  Maintenance of License Records




 



76.01    SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.02    TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.  Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall
be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)



76.03    DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.  No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])



76.04    TWO ABREAST LIMIT.



   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2)
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.  All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the
roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.05    BICYCLE PATHS.



   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.06    SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.07    EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.08    CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handle bars.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.09    RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   The following applies to riding bicycles, skateboards, roller skates
and in-line skates on sidewalks:



      1.   Business District.  No person shall ride a bicycle or
skates or skateboard upon a sidewalk within the following Business District
areas:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



         A.   Main Street from 2nd Avenue North to 2nd Avenue
South;



         B.   Main Street on the west side from 2nd Avenue North
to 3rd Avenue North;



         C.   Broadway from 11th Street to 15th Street.



      2.   Other Locations.  When signs are erected on any sidewalk
or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no
person shall disobey the signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



      3.   Yield Right-of-Way.  Whenever any person is riding a
bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.10    TOWING.



   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow
any other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is
manufactured for such use.



76.11    IMPROPER RIDING.



   No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such
as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety
of the operator or others.



76.12    PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.13    EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and
using equipment as provided herein:



      1.   Lamps Required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime
shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and
with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300
feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)



      2.   Brakes Required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a
brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.14    LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person who resides within the City shall ride or propel a bicycle on
any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license sticker is
attached thereto as provided herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



      1.   License Application.  Application for a bicycle license
and City license sticker shall be made upon a form provided by the City and
shall be made to the Police Department. 



      2.   Issuance of License.  The police officer, upon receiving
proper application therefor is authorized to issue a bicycle license which
shall be effective immediately.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      3.   Transfer of License.  Upon the sale or other transfer of
ownership of a licensed bicycle the license shall be transferred to the new
owner and the records of the City changed to reflect the new ownership upon
request.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.15    CITY LICENSE STICKER.



   License stickers are required as follows:



      1.   Issued.  The police officer, upon issuing a bicycle
license, shall also issue a City license sticker bearing the license number
assigned to the bicycle and the name of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



      2.   Attached to Bicycle.  The police officer shall cause
such license sticker to be firmly attached to the bicycle for which issued in
such position as to be plainly seen.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



      3.   Removal.  No person shall remove a license sticker from
a bicycle during the period for which issued unless said bicycle is
dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



      4.   Lost License Sticker.  In the event a license sticker is
lost, destroyed, or stolen, the owner shall report such to the Police
Department immediately. 



76.16    MAINTENANCE OF LICENSE RECORDS.



   The Police Department shall keep a record of the number of each
license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued,
and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



CHAPTER 77
GOLF CARTS



 

77.01  Operation of Golf Carts on City Streets
 
77.03  Number of Passengers Restricted


77.02  Equipment Required
 
77.04  Riding on Sidewalks Prohibited



 



77.01    OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS.



   Persons holding a valid operator’s license may operate golf carts,
equipped as described below, on all City streets between sunrise and
sunset.  Operation of golf carts is prohibited on the following primary road
extensions:



   U.S. Highway 30, U.S. Highway 59, U.S. Highway 141 and State Highway 39.



   On the above listed primary road extensions, golf carts may only cross
by the most direct route.



77.02    EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.



   All golf carts operated on City streets must be equipped with a
slow-moving vehicle sign, a bicycle safety flag, and adequate brakes.



77.03    NUMBER OF PASSENGERS RESTRICTED.



   No golf cart shall be operated on City streets with more than two
persons, including the operator, occupying the golf cart.



77.04    RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   Golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk within any residential
or business district in the City.



CHAPTER 78
ABANDONED VEHICLES



 

78.01  Definitions
 
78.06  Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles


78.02  Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
 
78.07  Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles


78.03  Notice by Mail
 
78.08  Proceeds from Sales


78.04  Notification in Newspaper
 
78.09  Duties of Demolisher


78.05  Fees for Impoundment
 



 



78.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])



      1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:



         A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration
plates or two or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable.



         B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public
property for more than 24 hours.



         C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed
on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of
the property for more than 24 hours.



         D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order
of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10)
days.  However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within
the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.



         E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a
police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.



         F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to
Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has
not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency
responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.



      2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter
321H of the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk,
processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.



      3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place
or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the
servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.



      4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any
law enforcement agency of a county or city.



78.02    AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the
request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or
traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and
may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property.  The police
authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a
private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.  A property owner
or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity
which is a garage keeper (any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair,
or maintenance of motor vehicles) to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the
private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative.  If a police authority employs a private entity to
dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private
entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders
of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal
property found in the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])



78.03    NOTICE BY MAIL. 



   The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail,
the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record,
and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in
the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that
the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody.  Notice shall be deemed
given when mailed.  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and
vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property
found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the
vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their
right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after
the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation,
and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon
payment of the costs of the notice.  The notice shall also state that the
failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be
deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title,
claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the
vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police
authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may
claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of
Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity
hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming
rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the
planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or
private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to
contest those matters.  If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants
shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the
vehicle or the personal property.  A court in any case in law or equity
shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner,
lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming
period.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



(78.01, 78.02, 78.03 - Ord. 1366 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



78.04    NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.



   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity
and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Section 78.03.  The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the
same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in Section 78.03.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])



78.05    FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



   The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees
as established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be
released.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



78.06    DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether
or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



78.07    DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is
found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor
vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of
such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable.  The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of
authority.  The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a
junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu
of the certificate of title.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])



78.08    PROCEEDS FROM SALES.



   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law.  Any balance shall be held for the
owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and
then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund.  Where the sale of
any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police
authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



78.09    DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.



   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle.  A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle,
or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking
certificate issued for the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])



WATER



CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



 

90.01  Board of Trustees
 
90.06  Unlawful Excavation


90.02  Public Hydrants
 
90.07  Rules and Regulations


90.03  Exclusion from Liability
 
90.08  Meters


90.04  Interference with Waterworks
 
90.09  Connections on Vacated and Abandoned Property


90.05  Unlawful Delegation
 
 



 



90.01    BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The management of the City’s Waterworks Utility is the responsibility
of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as described in
Chapter 24 of this Code of Ordinances.



90.02    PUBLIC HYDRANTS. 



   All hydrants erected for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby
declared to the be public hydrants, and no person, except members of the Fire
Department, City employees, or DMU employees – and then only in the
exercise of authority delegated by said Council – shall open any of said
hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same, or at any time attempt to
undercover or remove protection from or in any manner interfere with any of
the hydrants.



90.03    EXCLUSION FROM LIABILITY.



   The City does not guarantee a constant supply of water to any consumer
and shall not be liable for any damages for any failure to supply the same,
nor shall it be liable for any claim or damage by reason of breaking of any
service pipe, curb stop and box or other equipment or if for any reason the
supply of water shall be shut off to make repairs, connections, or extensions
or for any other purpose that may be found necessary.  The right is reserved
to cut off the supply of water at any time.



90.04    INTERFERENCE WITH WATERWORKS. 



   It is unlawful to break, injure, mar or deface, interfere with or
disturb any building, machinery, apparatus, fixtures, attachments or
appurtenances of the waterworks, or any hydrant, curb stop and box, meter,
water supply or service pipe or any part thereof, or deposit anything in any
curb stop and box, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the
intended use of any of the above mentioned property, without permission of
DMU or Fire Chief or excepting cases herein or otherwise provided by
ordinance.



90.05    UNLAWFUL DELEGATION. 



   It is unlawful for any person authorized to open hydrants to delegate
his or her authority to another, or to let or suffer another person to take
wrenches or tools furnished to such authorized person, or suffer the same to
be taken from any fire station or fire apparatus except for the purposes
strictly connected with the Fire Department.



90.06    UNLAWFUL EXCAVATION. 



   It is unlawful to make any excavations in any street or highway within
six feet of any laid water pipe, while the ground is frozen, or dig up or
uncover so to expose to frost any of the water pipes or sewers of the City
except by special permission of DMU.



90.07    RULES AND REGULATIONS. 



   The following rules and regulations for the government of water users,
licensed plumbers, and others are hereby adopted and established.



      1.   No person shall connect water pipes to any main or part
of the water system in the City of Denison, Iowa.  Any person desiring such
connection shall make application therefor to the Secretary of the Board of
Trustees of the Denison Municipal Utilities and the City Council upon such
form as may be prescribed by said Board and City Council and provided for
that purpose and pay the charges therefor as fixed by said Board and City
Council.  The application must state fully and truly all the uses to which
the water is to be applied and no different or additional uses will be
allowed, except by written permission issued by the Board of Trustees of the
Denison Municipal Utilities upon proper application being made therefor. 
Not more than one house or premises shall be supplied from one tap. 
Cross-connections are prohibited.



      2.   Each applicant for a water connection to the main shall
pay the cost of such connection to the Denison Municipal Utilities.  When
such connection is made the Denison Municipal Utilities will furnish a water
meter to use at such connection without further charge for rental of said
meter.  Said meter shall, however, remain the property of the Denison
Municipal Utilities.



      3.   Upon the filing of said application and the payment of
said charges, the tapping of said main shall be done by an authorized
employee of the Denison Municipal Utilities and no person, except such
employees, shall be permitted to repair any connections with the City water
main.



      4.   Service Connections.  All service connections with the
City water supply from the main to and including the curb box at the lot line
shall be installed by an authorized contractor, but the cost thereof shall be
at the expense of the property to be served and shall be paid to the said
Board before any water is furnished through said connection.



      5.   Excavations for Service Lines.  No person shall commence
any excavation or make any pavement cut for water service, sewer, or any
other service within the City streets or alleys until the permit herein
referred to is granted by the Building Inspector, and such excavation shall
be under the supervision of Building Inspector.  No person shall back-fill
any service ditch in any street or alley except under the supervision of the
Building Inspector.



      6.   All bills must be paid promptly when due, and the
municipality will hold the owner of the property responsible for all water
rents and will look only to them for the same, should any tenant or occupant
fail to pay the same when due.  All officials of the waterworks department
and of the City are positively prohibited from allowing credit to anyone.



      7.   Water will not be turned on in any house or private
service except by order of DMU.



   This rule shall not be construed to prohibit plumbers from turning
water into any pipes to test the same for that purpose only.



      8.   All persons using water shall keep the hydrants, taps,
hose, water closets, urinals, bath or other fixtures allotted to their use,
closed, except when obtaining water for use, and shall be responsible for any
damage or injury that may result to others from the improper use of water.



      9.   All house boilers shall be constructed with a vacuum
valve at the top of the inlet pipe, and be sufficiently strong to bear the
pressure of the atmosphere when under a vacuum.  The curb stop and box and
other appurtenances must be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure and ram
of the water in the mains and pressure of at least 125 pounds to the square
inch.



      10.   All persons taking water shall keep their own service
pipe, curb stop and box, and apparatus in good repair and protected from
frost at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste
of water, and it is expressly stipulated that no claim be made against it by
reason of the breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or if for any
cause the supply of water should fail or from damage arising from shutting
off the water to repair mains, making connections or extensions, or for any
other purpose that may be deemed necessary, and the right is hereby reserved
to cut off the supply of water at any time, any permit granted or regulation
to the contrary notwithstanding.



      11.   All water service pipes shall conform to the
requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 



      12.   Every service pipe must be sufficiently waving and laid
in such a manner as to prevent rupture by settlement, as provided in the
Uniform Plumbing Code.



      13.   Mains must be tapped on the top and not in any case
within 18 inches of the hub.



      14.   All service pipes must be laid a minimum of five feet
deep from the top of the soil.



      15.   Curb stops shall be placed in every service pipe at the
outer sidewalk line and protected by a curb stop box of a pattern approved by
the Council, reaching from the curb stop to the surface of the ground, of a
suitable size to admit a stop key for turning on and off the curb stop and
with a heavy metal cover, having the letter “W” marked thereon, visible
and even with the pavement or ground.  There shall be separate curb stops
for each individually owned property.



      16.   There shall be a full opening shut off valve, of a
pattern and weight approved by the Uniform Plumbing Code, attached to every
service pipe at a point where it enters the building, inside the same, easily
accessible, and so situated that the water can be shut off and drained.



      17.   Service pipes must be thoroughly flushed before a meter
is attached.  All meters with a horn or loop shall be installed in a
vertical position.  Meters without a horn or loop shall be installed in a
horizontal position.



      18.   In making excavations in streets or highways for the
laying of service pipes or making repairs, the excavated material shall be
deposited in such a manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the
public and provide for the passage of water along the gutter.  No excavation
shall extend completely across any street at one time entirely blocking
traffic thereon unless by written permit from the Building Inspector.  All
excavations shall have proper barricades erected and warning lights
maintained thereon.   



      19.   After the service pipes are laid, in refilling the
excavation, the earth must be laid in layers and each layer thoroughly tamped
and packed to prevent settlement, and this work, together with the
replacement of the sidewalk, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make
the street at least as good as it was before the excavation was made to the
satisfaction of the Street Superintendent.



      20.   No hydrant or fountain, except public drinking
fountains, shall be placed within the limits of any street unless the hydrant
or drinking fountain are securely closed and protected against general use. 
And no drinking fountain shall be erected for public use, which has openings
by which it can be used as a source of domestic supply.



      21.   Water service may be disconnected upon notice to DMU
whenever the premises is to be unoccupied and may be reconnected upon notice
of occupation.



90.08    METERS. 



   Meters shall be installed as per Section 90.07(2) of this chapter.



90.09    CONNECTIONS ON VACATED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.



      1.   Disconnection.  The owner of real estate to which water
service is being given by the City of Denison, Iowa, shall upon the vacation
and abandonment of said real estate notify the Denison Municipal Utilities of
said vacation.  It is the property owner’s responsibility to disconnect. 
An approved contractor shall disconnect all water service to said real estate
five feet from the property line unless the service line is lead or
galvanized pipe, in which case the line is disconnected at the main.  Such
cost for said service shall be borne by the property owner.



      2.   Inclusions.  Vacation or abandonment of real estate
shall not include temporary vacation of houses, stores, or buildings but
shall apply in all instances where buildings are being torn down and the land
cleared and in all instances where the buildings on the real estate are
permanently vacated. 



CHAPTER 91
PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED



 

91.01  Permit Required; Fee
 
91.03  Connection to City Water Main


91.02  Requirements for Private Well Installation
 
91.04  Groundwater Heat Pumps



 



91.01    PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   No person shall install a private water well within the City limits
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City.  Each application
for a private well permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution
of the Council.



91.02    REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIVATE WELL INSTALLATION.



   No person shall install a private water well within the City limits
unless a determination has been made by the Building Inspector that the
following requirements are met:



      1.   The point of water use is greater than 300 feet from an
accessible distribution water main owned and controlled by the Denison
Municipal Utilities.



      2.   The proposed private well is located outside the
influence of an existing or proposed well owned by the Municipal Utilities.



      3.   The proposed private well is needed due to extraordinary
circumstances of the location of the property within the City which, if
private groundwater sources were not used, would work an extraordinary
hardship on the property.



91.03    CONNECTION TO CITY WATER MAIN.



   The City may require owners of existing private wells to connect to a
City distribution water main in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 90
of this Code of Ordinances if the conditions stated in Section 91.02 are not
satisfied.  Such connection shall be completed within 90 calendar days after
official notice to do so, and the existing private wells abandoned as
required by State law.



91.04    GROUNDWATER HEAT PUMPS.



   This chapter does not prohibit the installation of self-contained
groundwater heat pumps which do not inject materials into the surrounding
soil or water.  No groundwater heat pump may be installed without prior
issuance of a permit issued by the Building Inspector.



SANITARY SEWER



CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



 



95.01  Board of Trustees
 
95.11  Backfilling


95.02  Permits Required
 
95.12  Location of Sewer Connections


95.03  Applications for Permits
 
95.13  Separate Connections


95.04  Permit and Inspection Fee
 
95.14  Quality of Pipe and Foundation


95.05  Sewer Connection Fees
 
95.15  Grade


95.06  Issuance of Permits
 
95.16  Storm Water


95.07  Inspection
 
95.17  Subdivisions


95.08  Plumber’s Licenses Required
 
95.18  Prohibited Discharges


95.09  Compliance with Plumbing Code and Chapter
 
95.19  Prohibiting Outdoor Privies


95.10  Excavations
 




 



95.01    BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The management of the City’s Sanitary Sewer System is the
responsibility of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as
described in Chapter 24 of this Code of Ordinances.



95.02    PERMITS REQUIRED. 



   No person shall cause any sewer connection to be made to a public
sanitary sewer unless a sewer connection permit authorizing such connection
has first been issued as provided by this chapter.



95.03    APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS. 



   Any person desiring to make a connection to a public sanitary sewer
shall file an application for a sewer connection permit with the Denison
Municipal Utilities (DMU) on a form provided by the DMU offices.  The
application shall state the location of the premises to be connected to the
sewer, the intended use of said premises, the name of the owner of said
premises, and the name of the licensed plumbing contractor who is to make the
connection.  The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit
fee.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.04    PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE.



   The person who makes the application shall pay a fee to the Denison
Municipal Utilities to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspecting the work.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.05    SEWER CONNECTION FEES.



      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a sewer connection
permit, the General Manager of the Denison Municipal Utilities shall
determine whether the premises to be connected to the sewer have been
specifically assessed for the cost of construction of the public sanitary
sewer.  If said premises have not been so assessed, the General Manager of
DMU shall submit the application for review to the Board of Trustees of the
Denison Municipal Utilities or its designee for a determination of a sewer
connection fee.



      2.   The amount of the sewer connection fee shall be
determined by the Board of Trustees of the Denison Municipal Utilities.



      3.   If the premises to be connected to the sewer are subject
to the payment of a sewer connection fee under this section, the General
Manager of DMU shall receive the sewer connection fee before issuing a sewer
connection permit.



      4.   This section shall not apply to subdivisions in which the
sanitary sewers were constructed by the developer and accepted as public
sewers by the City and in which the developer has performed all of the
developer's obligations with respect to the public sewer system.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.06    ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. 



   If the General Manager of DMU determines that the sewer connection as
proposed in an application complies with this chapter and with all other
applicable statutes and regulations, the General Manager shall issue to the
applicant a written sewer connection permit authorizing the connection.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.07    INSPECTION.



      1.   All connections to a public sanitary sewer shall be
subject to inspection by the General Manager of DMU, or his designated
representative.  The General Manager, or his designated representative,
shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purposes of making
such inspection.



      2.   The person to whom a sewer connection permit has been
issued shall give the General Manager notice that the connection is ready for
inspection.  Such notice shall be given not less than 24 hours before the
connection is to be inspected.



      3.   No person shall cause any connection to a public sanitary
sewer to be covered before the connection has been inspected and approved by
the General Manager of DMU.



      4.   If the General Manager of DMU finds that a connection to
a public sanitary sewer does not comply with this chapter and all other
applicable statutes and regulations, the General Manager shall deliver to the
person to whom the sewer connection permit was issued a written statement of
the changes necessary to comply with said chapter, statutes, and
regulations.  The person to whom the permit was issued shall make the
necessary changes within fifteen days after the written statement is
delivered.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.08    PLUMBER’S LICENSES REQUIRED. 



   No connection to a public sanitary sewer shall be made by any person
other than a licensed plumbing contractor or a licensed journeyman plumber
acting as an officer, partner or employee of a licensed plumbing contractor. 



95.09    COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE AND CHAPTER. 



   All connections to a public sanitary sewer shall be made in compliance
with the Uniform Plumbing Code and in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.  In the event of a conflict between a requirement of the
Uniform Plumbing Code and a requirement of this chapter, the more restrictive
standard shall apply.



95.10    EXCAVATIONS. 5



      1.   Any excavations made for the purpose of making a
connection to a public sanitary sewer shall have barricades at all times, and
warning lights shall be in operation at said barricades at all times from
one-half hour before sunset until one-half hour after sunrise.



      2.   In making an excavation across the roadway of a street at
least one lane shall remain open for passage of traffic at all time, unless
temporary closing of the street has been authorized by the City Engineer.



      3.   If an excavation is made within five feet of the pavement
in a street, the trench shall be refilled and the street returned to be as
good condition as before the excavation was made within five days after the
beginning of the excavation.



      4.   If an excavation is made in public property other than
within five feet of the pavement in a street, the work shall be completed and
notice of readiness for inspection shall be given to the General Manager of
DMU within ten days after the beginning of the excavation.  The trench shall
be refilled and the property returned to as good condition as before the
excavation within five days after the work is approved by the General Manager
of DMU.



      5.   In the event of any violation of this section, in
addition to all other remedies, the City may do all work necessary to correct
the violation.  The City may recover the cost of such work by legal action
against the person who made the excavation and by action on the plumbing
contractor's bond.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.11    BACKFILLING.



      1.   Before any backfill is placed in any excavation made for
the purpose of making a connection to a public sewer, the pipe shall be
checked with a light and each unit shall show a good light circle throughout
its length.



      2.   Backfill shall be washed concrete sand or suitable earth
free from boulders and free from roots, sod, and other vegetation.  Backfill
shall first be carefully hand-tamped under and around the pipe, up to twelve
inches above the top of the pipe, in lifts not to exceed four inches loose
thickness.  Care shall be used to place and tamp the bedding course as not
to disturb the joints, alignment, or grade of the pipe.



      3.   In areas under or within five feet of an existing or
proposed pavement, after completion of the bedding course, the remainder of
the trench shall be backfilled with an approved material and tamped in lifts
not to exceed six inches loose thickness.  Such tamping shall be done with a
mechanical tamper of a type approved by the City Engineer.  The density of
the completed backfill shall not be less than ninety-five percent of standard
proctor density of the backfill material according to A.A.S.H.O. Test T-99.



      4.   In areas more than five feet from an existing or proposed
pavement, after completion of the bedding course, the remainder of the trench
shall be backfilled in appropriate lifts with sufficient tamping to achieve
final backfill density of not less than ninety percent of standard proctor
density according to A.A.S.H.O. Test T-99.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.12    LOCATION OF SEWER CONNECTIONS. 



   Every connection to a public sanitary sewer shall be made at the
regular junction or "Y" built into the sewer for that purpose, unless the
General Manager of DMU finds that there is no such junction or "Y" or that
connection to the sewer at that point is not practical.  Connection to the
sewer at any point other than such junction or "Y" shall be made with a
saddle, approved by the General Manager of DMU.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.13    SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.



      1.   Except as provided by Subsection 2 of this section, every
building and structure shall be separately and independently connected to the
public sanitary sewer.



      2.   In the case of a duplex or an apartment complex, the
General Manager of DMU may authorize the connection of more than one building
or structure to the same building sewer if the General Manager of DMU finds
that such connection will be satisfactory and convenient for the City and for
present and future users of the buildings or structures.



      3.   The sewer from the building or structure to the
connection to the public sanitary sewer shall be constructed and maintained
by the owner of the building or structure.



      4.   When a private sanitary sewer is built to connect with a
public sanitary sewer on an adjacent street, it shall be laid according to
plans approved by the City Engineer.  Private sanitary sewers constructed on
public property shall not run more than one hundred fifty feet parallel with
the street.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.14    QUALITY OF PIPE AND FOUNDATION.



      1.   From three feet outside of the building or structure,
where the soil is of sufficient density for a proper foundation, the piping
shall conform to the adopted Uniform Plumbing Code.



      2.   All joints shall conform to the adopted Uniform Plumbing
Code.



      3.   The sewer pipe shall be laid on a smooth bottom with a
groove cut for the bell so that the entire length of the pipe has a uniform
bearing on the ground.  When the trench bottom is unstable, it shall be
excavated six inches below grade and brought to grade with an approved
granular material.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.15    GRADE. 



   All sewer pipes must be laid with a uniform grade from the public sewer
to the building or structure.  No off setting shall be allowed unless the
City Engineer finds that is necessary due to special conditions peculiar to
the premises.




(Ord. 1466 - May. 17 Supp.)




95.16    STORM WATER.



   No connection for storm water or rainwater shall be made to the public
sanitary sewers.



95.17    SUBDIVISIONS. 



   In any subdivision platted after the effective date of this chapter the
sewer main shall be not less than eight inches in diameter.  It shall be
material permitted by the Uniform Plumbing Code and approved by the Denison
Municipal Utilities.



95.18    PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. 



   No person shall cause to be discharged  into the public sanitary sewer
system any substance which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy or materially damage the pipes or joints or interfere unduly with the
sewage disposal process.



95.19    PROHIBITING OUTDOOR PRIVIES.



   The purpose of this section is to eliminate outside toilet facilities
and provide for sanitary sewer toilet connections.



      1.   Prohibition.  It is unlawful to have an outside toilet
on any lot, any boundary of which is within 200 feet of a public sanitary
sewer.



      2.   Sewer Connections.  The owner of any real property being
used as a residence or business establishment, (intended or used for
habitation, occupance or use), the boundary of which is within 200 feet of a
public sewer, must connect sewage facilities to the public sewer and install
in said residence or business establishment a water closet for the use of
persons occupying or using said residence business establishment.



      3.   Septic Tank Connections.  In those cases where the
boundary or real property is within 200 feet of the public sewer but it is
impossible or impractical by reason of sewer elevation or other causes to
connect thereto the owner must install septic tank sewer facilities for the
use in any residence or business establishment on said property and install a
water closet for the use of persons occupying or using said residence or
business establishment.



      4.   Mandatory Installation.  Owners of property having a
residence or place of business not connected with the public sewer, or septic
tank facilities, as provided in this section, shall be given notice by the
Mayor of the City of Denison, to make connection to the public sewer, remove
any outside toilet facilities, and install water closets on said premises,
and in the event said order is not complied with within a period of 90 days
from service of said notice, the City of Denison, Iowa, shall cause said
sewer connection to be made, or install necessary septic tank sewage
facilities, and shall remove outside toilet facilities and install water
closets as provided herein, and pay the bill therefor from municipal funds,
and the amount paid therefor shall become a debt to the City of Denison,
Iowa, from the said property.  The City of Denison, Iowa, shall thereupon
send a statement of costs to the owner of said property, and if the same is
not paid within 30 days, the amount shall be certified to the County Auditor
as a special tax against said lands, and shall be collected the same as other
taxes.



 


Notes

5 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  See also Chapter 141 of this Code of Ordinances for
conditions required for right-of-way occupancy.



CHAPTER 96
FAT, OIL AND GREASE



 



96.01  Purpose and Policy
 
96.12 Interceptor Construction Requirements


96.02  Administration
 
96.13  Grease Trap Construction


96.03  Facilities Required to Remove Grease
 
96.14  Abandoned Grease Receptors


96.04  Food Waste Disposal Units
 
96.15  Record Keeping and Inspections


96.05  Best Management Practices
 
96.16  Reporting


96.06  New Construction
 
96.17  Variance from Grease Interceptor


96.07  Exiting Users
 
96.18  Severability


96.08 Grease Interceptor Sizing Criteria
 
96.19  Enforcement


96.09  Grease Trap Sizing Criteria
 
96.20  Administrative Fee


96.10  Grease Removal System Maintenance
 
96.21  Definitions


96.11  Bacteria, Enzymes and Other Chemical Additives
 
 




 



96.01    PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Food Service
Establishments (FSEs) that discharge wastewater to the City of Denison, Iowa,
sanitary sewer. The objectives of this chapter are:



      1.   To prevent the excessive introduction of fats, oil and
grease (FOG) into the sewer system and the wastewater treatment plant;



      2.   To prevent the accumulation of grease within the sewer
system which can lead to sanitary sewer pipe blockages and subsequent back
ups and sanitary sewer overflows (SSO);



      3.   To reduce the costs of maintaining the sewer system by
preventing the accumulation of grease and residue within the sewage system
lines and ensure that the cost of maintaining the public sewer system is
equitably distributed amongst users;



      4.   To clarify grease disposal requirements for Food Service
Establishments;



      5.   To protect public health and safety from pollution caused
by SSO.



96.02    ADMINISTRATION.



    Except as otherwise provided herein, the pretreatment coordinator or
designated representative shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



96.03    FACILITIES REQUIRED TO REMOVE GREASE.



   Class one FSEs shall install grease interceptors to prevent the
discharge of FOG to the building drainage system and the public sewer system.
Grease interceptors shall be installed to receive drainage from plumbing
fixtures and equipment with grease-laden wastewater located in FSEs such as
restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, factory kitchens,
cafeterias or clubs. Grease interceptors are not required for residential
users.



96.04    FOOD WASTE DISPOSAL UNITS. 



   All food waste disposal units shall be removed from all existing FSEs
classes within 180 days of the effective date of this Ordinance, except when
expressly allowed by the pretreatment coordinator. The use of food waste
disposal units is prohibited.



96.05    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   To minimize the discharge of FOG into the sanitary sewer system, the
following Best Management Practices shall be implemented by all classes of
FSEs. This includes kitchen practices and employee training that are
essential in minimizing FOG discharges:



      1.   Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be
installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. This includes
kitchen sinks, floor drains and mop sinks.



      2.   Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All
waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling
receptacles. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained to ensure that
they do not leak. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling facility
must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil.



      3.   Disposal of food waste. Food wastes shall be disposed of
directly into the trash or garbage, and not in the drain.



      4.   Employee training. Employee training shall be provided as
part of the normal orientation process and annually thereafter including, at
a minimum, the following subjects.



         A.   How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work
areas before washing to remove grease.



         B.   How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in
enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to
prevent leaking and odors.



         C.   The location and use of absorption products to
clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or
dripped. All FSEs are responsible to safely install materials to meet this
requirement.



         D.   How to properly dispose of grease or oils from
cooking equipment into a grease receptacle without spilling.



      5.   Kitchen signage. FOG control practices shall be posted in
food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times.



      6.   Grease removal devices. All FSEs shall maintain their
grease removal devices in accordance with this Ordinance.



96.06    NEW CONSTRUCTION.



   All new class one FSEs shall install grease interceptors in accordance
with the City of Denison, Iowa Plumbing Code. All FSEs classes are required
to submit the drainage plumbing plans to the pretreatment coordinator or
designee for approval prior to construction. Failure to submit plans or
construct in accordance with approved plans is a violation of this ordinance.
New facilities that are required to maintain a grease interceptor by this or
other applicable ordinances, shall install such a unit prior to commencement
of discharge to the sanitary sewer.



96.07    EXISTING USERS.



   1.   Existing class one FSEs not equipped with a grease interceptor
shall, within 24 months of the effective date of this Ordinance, install an
adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of
this Ordinance.



   2.   Existing class one FSEs that are unable to install a grease
interceptor, as determined by the pretreatment coordinator, shall install
adequately sized grease trap(s) in accordance with the specifications of this
Ordinance.



   3.   An Existing Facility changing from a class two FSE (exempt
facility) to a class one FSE shall be required to install an approved grease
interceptor.



   4.   A class one FSE may submit an application for a variance from
the grease interceptor requirement to the pretreatment coordinator.



96.08    GREASE INTERCEPTOR SIZING CRITERIA.



   All grease interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
pretreatment coordinator and shall be so located to be easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. The size, type and location of each grease
interceptor shall be approved by the pretreatment coordinator before
installation. The pretreatment coordinator is authorized to make
determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based upon a review
of relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance,
maintenance, and facility site and building plan review and to require
repairs to, and modification or replacement of such interceptors.



      1.   The minimum approved grease interceptor size is 500
gallons, working capacity. The size of the interceptor shall be determined
using the following flow based criteria:



      Fixture Type      # of Fixtures      Flow
(GPM)      Total Flow (GPM)
      Kitchen Area Sinks:
      Single Compartment ____________     x       20
=      _________________
      Double Compartment ____________     x       25
=      _________________
      Triple Compartment _____________     x       30 =
      _________________
      Mop/Clean-up __________________  x       20 =
      _________________
      Dishwashers:
      up to 30 gallon capacity __________     x       15 =
      _________________
      30 to 50 gallon capacity ___________ x       25 =
      _________________
      50 to 100 gallon capacity __________ x       40 =
      _________________
                  Grand Total Flow = _________________
               Detention Time Factor (x10) = _________________
            Required Grease Interceptor Capacity = _________
gallons




      2.   FSEs that propose the use of alternate sizing techniques
and/or procedures that result in specifications that differ from requirements
calculated under subsection 1, must submit formulas and other basis to
support the proposed grease interceptor size/installation signed by a
professional mechanical engineer registered in the state of Iowa.



96.09    GREASE TRAP SIZING CRITERIA.



   Grease traps shall be sized according to fixture volume to allow for
proper FOG removal. The volume of the fixtures connected to the grease trap
cannot exceed two and one half times the flow rate in gallons per minute of
the grease trap. The following table provides the criteria that shall be used
for grease trap sizing:



 


Rate of flow, gpm

 

Grease retention capacity, lbs.

 

Max. allowable fixture volume, gal.




20

 

40

 

50




25

 

50

 

62.5




35

 

70

 

87.5




50

 

100

 

125




 



96.10    GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.



   The owner or lessee of every FSE required to install and use a Grease
Removal Device shall, at its own expense, inspect, clean, and maintain the
Grease Removal Device in efficient operating condition at all times.



      1.   Facilities with Grease Interceptors.



         A.   Unless otherwise specified by the pretreatment
coordinator, each interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once
every three months or when the total accumulation of surface FOG (including
floating solids) and settled solids reaches twenty-five percent (25%) of the
grease interceptor's overall liquid depth (25 Percent Rule), whichever comes
first. The pretreatment coordinator may specify cleaning more frequently when
quarterly pumping is shown to be inadequate. The pretreatment coordinator may
change the required maintenance frequency to reflect changes in actual
operating conditions. Any Food Service Establishment desiring a schedule less
frequent than quarterly shall submit a request to the pretreatment
coordinator along with the maintenance records for the last four (4)
interceptor cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the
floating FOG and bottom solids layer, and volume removed.



         B.   A reduction in cleaning frequency may be granted by
the pretreatment coordinator when it has been determined that the FOG
interceptor has adequate detention time for FOG removal. The cleaning
frequency will depend on variables such as the capacity of the device, the
amount of grease in the wastewater, the amount of solids in the wastewater
and degree of adherence to the FOG BMPs. 



         C.   FSEs shall require the liquid waste hauler,
transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to
completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater,
bottom solids, and grease during servicing.  Skimming the surface layer of
waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that
does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited.
The suction of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other
contents. After complete evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the
interceptor shall then be thoroughly scraped and the residue removed.  Upon
completion of the servicing, the manager (of the Food Service Establishment)
or his/her designated representative shall inspect the interior of the
   interceptor and then document this servicing in the facility's
Interceptor Maintenance Log. In the event that the interceptor is larger than
the capacity of the vacuum truck, it shall be completely evacuated within a
twenty four hour period.



         D.   The discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids
back into an interceptor during and/or after servicing is prohibited. 
Decanting or discharging of any grease removal device wastes back into the
grease removal device, any private sewer, any sewage drainage piping, or
storm sewer system from which the waste was removed or any other grease
removal device is prohibited.



      2.   Facilities with Grease Traps.



         A.   Greased traps shall be serviced at least weekly or
when the amount of grease captured is at 50% of the trap's capacity,
whichever is sooner. After the accumulated grease has been removed, the
grease trap shall be thoroughly inspected to make certain that the inlet,
outlet, and air relief ports are clear of obstructions.



         B.   A flow control device must be installed before each
grease trap.



         C.   A dishwasher shall not be connected to a grease
trap.



         D.   Grease traps must be regularly inspected for
leaking seams, pipes, and flow control fitting(s) and repaired if necessary.
Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG
and other waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the
maintenance process.



         E.   Grease and other waste removed from the grease trap
shall not be disposed.



      3.   Facilities with grease removal devices other than grease
traps or grease interceptors must follow the manufacturer's recommendations
for operation and maintenance.



96.11    BACTERIA, ENZYMES AND OTHER CHEMICAL ADDITIVES.



   The introduction of bacteria, emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers, surface
active agents, degreasers, or enzymes either directly or indirectly into a
grease trap or grease interceptor, other than in typical business operation
practices such as dishwashing or sanitation, is strictly prohibited.



96.12    INTERCEPTOR CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. 



   Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the City of
Denison, Iowa, Plumbing Code. Notwithstanding, there shall be a minimum of
one (1) manhole per ten (10) feet of interceptor length to provide access for
cleaning. Manhole covers shall be gastight in construction and have a minimum
opening dimension of twenty-four (24) inches. Concrete covers are not
acceptable. In areas where traffic may exist, the interceptor shall be
designed for the appropriate traffic load. The access manholes shall extend
at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent surface
and ground water from entering the grease interceptor.



96.13    GREASE TRAP CONSTRUCTION.



   Requirements. In the event that an outside grease interceptor is not
practicable, a grease trap(s) shall be required on waste lines leading from
kitchen floor drains, mop sinks, food preparation and washing sinks, and
other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer
system. FSEs that have grease traps or that are required to install them, are
subject to the requirements below:



      1.   The grease trap may be set on the floor or partially or
fully recessed in the floor to suit piping and structural conditions. Baffle
systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable to facilitate
cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times.



      2.   There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of
the trap cover for cleaning. The trap shall be equipped with a flow control
fitting. A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of each
trap in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to the
underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two or more sinks or fixtures
are combined for use by one grease trap, a single flow control fitting shall
be used. All grease traps shall have a vented waste line to retain water and
prevent siphoning.



96.14    ABANDONED GREASE RECEPTORS.



   An FSE that abandons grease interceptors shall have them removed.



96.15    RECORD KEEPING AND INSPECTIONS. 



   Each FSE shall maintain a grease removal device maintenance log. The
log shall include the dates of service, who performed the service and the
disposal method. A record of maintenance, repairs, and a log of pumping and
waste hauling of contents shall be maintained and provided to the
pretreatment coordinator upon request.



      1.   All FSEs will be inspected periodically by the City. FSEs
shall allow the City ready access at all reasonable times for the inspection
of grease removal devices and all pertinent maintenance records for the
grease removal devices.



      2.   Upon the showing of proper credentials, the pretreatment
coordinator shall have the authority to enter an FSE's premises for scheduled
or unscheduled inspections. Failure of the pretreatment coordinator to make
prior arrangements for an inspection shall not be considered a legitimate
reason to refuse admittance. An FSE must keep records associated with waste
cooking oil collection and disposal, interceptor hauling and maintenance
records on-site for a minimum of three (3) years and must be available for
inspection by the pretreatment coordinator during normal business hours. A
separate maintenance log shall be maintained for each grease removal device.
Grease removal device maintenance logs shall include at a minimum the
following information:



         A.   Identification of the grease removal device.



         B.   The date that maintenance occurred.



         C.   The volume of grease removed in gallons.



         D.   The thickness of the bottom solids and floating
grease layer in inches that is removed.



         E.   The name of company and person(s) performing the
maintenance.



   The waste removed from the grease removal device must be disposed of in
accordance with federal, state and/or local laws.



96.16    REPORTING.



   When the pretreatment coordinator has determined that an FSE must
provide written reports, these reports shall be submitted in accordance with
the requirements of the pretreatment coordinator. Written reports required by
this title will be deemed submitted upon actual receipt by the pretreatment
coordinator.



96.17    VARIANCE FROM GREASE INTERCEPTOR.



      1.   Requirements.  A variance from the grease interceptor
requirements may be allowed if it is shown that an alternative pretreatment
technology is equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge or, if an
FSE demonstrates that it is impossible or impracticable to install a grease
interceptor. In determining whether or not to grant a variance, the
pretreatment coordinator may consider the following:



         A.   Whether or not there is adequate space for
installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. The FSE must
demonstrate that the installation of a grease interceptor is not
   feasible or advisable.



         B.   Whether or not the FSE can justify and demonstrate
that an alternative pretreatment technology is equivalent or better than a
grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge.



         C.   Any request for a variance involving an extension
to an installation deadline must be made in writing to the pretreatment
coordinator. The written request must include the reasons for the FSE's
failure or inability to comply with the compliance date as set forth, the
additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be
taken to    avoid future delays.



      2.   Upon a determination by the pretreatment coordinator that
there are sufficient reasons to justify a variance or waiver, the FSE will be
relieved to the extent expressly provided for in the variance. A variance
shall contain terms and conditions that serve as basis for its issuance. A
variance may be revoked at any time if any of the terms and conditions for
its issuance are not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the variance
was based change to the extent that the justification for the waiver no
longer exists. The variance shall be valid so long as the FSE remains in
compliance with the terms and conditions specified in the variance.



      3.   For class one FSEs where the installation of grease
interceptors is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can
be installed, a variance from the requirement of a grease interceptor may be
granted along with the imposition of a surcharge based on the increased costs
due to accelerated cleaning frequency of the collection system and additional
treatment of these wastes. Additional requirements may be imposed to mitigate
the discharge of FOG into the sewer system, including the installation and
servicing of grease traps.



96.18    SEVERABILITY.



   In the event that any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid,
illegal, unconstitutional or unenforceable under the laws of the State of
Iowa or the United States of America, such defect shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter which can be given
effect without the defective provision or of this chapter as a whole. To this
end, the provisions of this chapter are declared severable.



96.19    ENFORCEMENT.



   In the event that a FSE fails to maintain a grease removal device as
required in this chapter, the FSE shall be given a seven day notice to
perform the maintenance required by this chapter on the grease removal
device. If after the seven day notice, the grease removal device is not
serviced, the City may order the work to be performed by an approved
contractor. The cost of the work shall be billed to the FSE. If the FSE fails
to pay the full amount of the bill, the outstanding amount may be assessed
against the property where the maintenance was performed.



96.20    ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   No fee will be charged for an annual inspection. However, if the Food
Service Establishment's grease removal device is not in compliance with this
Ordinance, a $50.00 re-inspection fee may be charged for each inspection
thereafter until compliance is achieved.



96.21    DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
definitions represent the meanings of terms as they are used in this title:



      1.   "Best Management Practices ("BMPs")" - A schedule of
activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the
sanitary sewer system.



      2.   "Fats, Oils, and Grease ("FOG")" - Any substance, such as
vegetable, animal or other product that is used in, or is a by product of,
the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous
or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. Grease may
originate from, but not limited to, discharges from scullery sinks, pot and
pan sinks, dishwashing machines, soup kettles and floor drains located in
areas where grease-containing materials may exist.



      3.   "Food Service Establishment ("FSE")" - Food service
facility licensed by the City of Denison that prepares and/or provides food
for consumption.



         A.   "Class 1 FSE" - Any establishment where a grill,
deep fry unit, broaster, wok or similar    device is located and used to
prepare food.  All "Class 1 FSE's" are required to install an approved
grease interceptor.



         B.   "Class 2 FSE" - Any establishment using only a
heat-producing device, such as a microwave, conventional oven, toaster oven,
hot dog rotisserie, coffee maker, etc. to prepare food. Any food
establishment that prepares and/or serves meals 2 or fewer times per week or
satellite food service establishments where primary food preparation is
conducted offsite or initial preparation of foods does not occur. A satellite
food service facility is one that maintains thoroughly cooked food hot. All
"Class 2 FSE's" facilities must install an approved grease trap.



      4.   "Food Waste Disposal Unit" - A device that shreds or
grinds up solid or semisolid waste material into smaller portions for
disposing it in the sanitary sewer. These devices are also referred to as
grinders, garbage grinders and garbage disposals.



      5.   "Grease Interceptor" - A vault that is located on the
exterior of the building which has a minimum of two compartments. The
capacity of the interceptor provides adequate residence time so that the
wastewater has time to cool, allowing grease to congeal and rise to the
surface where it accumulates until the interceptor is cleaned.



      6.   "Grease Interceptor Waste" - Any grease, food particles,
organic or inorganic solid or semisolid waste collected and intercepted by a
grease interceptor usually in layers of floatable, suspended and settleable
substances, which are ultimately removed from a grease interceptor for proper
disposal.



      7.   "Grease Trap" - A device located in the facility. It is
smaller than a grease interceptor, which is required to have an approved
designed.



      8.   "Grease Removal Device" - An interceptor, trap or other
mechanical device designed, constructed, and intended to remove, hold, or
otherwise prevent the passage of grease to the sanitary sewer.



      9.   "Sanitary Sewer Overflow" (SSO) - Any unplanned discharge
from the separate sanitary sewer system.



      10.   "Twenty-five percent rule" - A requirement of when
grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned. This rule/requires
that when the combined FOG (including floating solids) and the settled solids
accumulation reaches 25% of the total designed hydraulic depth of the grease
interceptor, the grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned.
This requirement will help to ensure that the minimum hydraulic detention
time and the required available hydraulic volume are maintained to
effectively intercept and retain FOG in the interceptor.



(Ch. 96 - Ord. 1499 - May 19 Supp.)



GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE



CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL AND RECYCLING



 



105.01  Definitions
 
105.11  Separation of Yard Waste Required


105.02  Solid Waste Disposal Program Adopted
 
105.12  Recyclable Materials To Be Separated


105.03  Sanitary Disposal Required
 
105.13  Preparation and Placement of Recyclables


105.04  Health and Fire Hazard
 
105.14  Placement of Solid Waste at Curbside


105.05  Littering Prohibited
 
105.15  Collection by Unauthorized Persons


105.06  Open Dumping Prohibited
 
105.16  Enforcement and Administration


105.07  Dumping of Unauthorized Materials in Yard Waste
 
105.17  Fees and Charges


Disposal Site Prohibited
 
105.18  Payment of Bills


105.08  Lead Acid Batteries
 
105.19  Lien for Nonpayment


105.09  Tires
 
105.20  Penalties


105.10  Waste Oil and Waste Oil Filters
 
 




 



105.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter and in Chapter 106, the following terms are
defined:



      1.   “Aluminum cans” means empty all-aluminum beverage and
food containers, except those aluminum beverage cans returned by the resident
for redemption at a can and bottle redemption center.



      2.   “Bimetal containers” means empty beverage or food
containers having sides and bottom of steel and an aluminum top.



      3.   “Collector,” for purposes of collecting and
transporting solid waste and/or recyclables, means the City of Denison, Iowa,
or its duly authorized contractors.



      4.   “Commercial establishment” means any premises engaged
in retail trade or sale of goods.  Expressly included are all restaurants
and taverns, all industrial or manufacturing businesses, and all types of
offices, including governmental agencies.



      5.   “Corrugated paper” means paperboard or cardboard
boxes constructed in a fluted manner.



      6.   “Curbside recycling collection” means the scheduled
collection and transportation of recyclable materials placed at the curb line
or other area designated by the collector.



      7.   “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



      8.   “Dwellings”:



         A.   Multi-family facility:  a building or portion
thereof containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one-
or two-family dwelling.



         B.   One-family dwelling:  a building containing one
dwelling unit only.



         C.   Two-family dwelling:  a building containing two
dwelling units only.



      9.   “Enforcement officer” means the official designated
herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering the
chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to the control and collection
of solid waste and recycling.



      10.   “Glass containers” means bottles and jars made of
flint glass or green or amber glass; except those glass jars returned by the
resident for redemption at a can and bottle redemption center.  Expressly
excluded are non-container glass, plate glass, blue glass, lead crystal, and
porcelain and ceramic products.



      11.   “High Density Polyethylene (HDE) containers” means
plastic bottles and jars made exclusively from high-density polyethylene.



      12.   “Magazines” means printed matter printed on slick or
glossy paper containing contaminants not found in newsprint.



      13.   “Municipal waste” means any garbage, refuse,
industrial, lunchroom, or office waste or other material, including solid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities.  Also included is any sludge not meeting the
definition of residual or hazardous waste in Section 455B.411, Code of Iowa,
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility.  This term
does not include source-separated recyclable materials.



      14.   “Newspaper” means paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals.  Expressly
excluded are newspapers which have been soiled.



      15.   “Occupant” means any person living and/or sleeping
in a dwelling unit.



      16.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record
titleholder, any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating
or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.



      17.   “Person” means any individual, partnership,
municipal waste hauler, scrap dealer, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, Federal Government
or agency, State institution or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.  In any
provisions of these chapters prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or
any combination of the foregoing, the term “person” includes the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.



      18.   “Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) containers” means
plastic soda bottles or other containers composed of the polymer PET.



      19.   “Recyclable materials” means any used material
having an economic value in the secondary materials market and includes
aluminum cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass containers, corrugated paper,
magazines, computer printout paper, computer tab cards, office paper, steel
cans, newspaper, paper products not chemically coated, plastic Polyethylene
Terephthalate (PET) bottles, plastic High Density Polyethylene (HDPE)
containers and other materials designated by the City as having value.



      20.   “Steel cans” means empty all-steel food and beverage
containers.



      21.   “Yard waste” means organic debris (e.g., grass
clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is
produced as part of yard and garden development and maintenance.  Yard waste
does not include tree trunks or tree stumps.



105.02    SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL PROGRAM ADOPTED.



   The City hereby establishes a mandatory program for the separation of
recyclable materials from municipal waste by occupants of one-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, and other dwellings serviced by a curbside
recycling collection route within the City limits.  Occupants of dwelling
units shall be responsible for the separation and preparation of recyclable
materials from solid waste and their placement at curbside or at sites
established herein.



105.03    SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of
all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance.  Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of
more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may
proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
50 of this Code of Ordinances or by initiating proper action in district
court.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)



105.04    HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.



   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste
that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.



105.05    LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except
that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles
provided for such purpose.  When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle,
the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case
where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually
discarded the litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)



105.06    OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of
any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of
water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the
Director of the State Department of Natural Resources, unless a special
permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person
has been obtained from the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources.  However, this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone,
brick, or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or
grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)



105.07    DUMPING OF UNAUTHORIZED MATERIALS IN YARD WASTE DISPOSAL SITE
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dispose of any material except yard waste in sites
designated by the City for disposal of yard waste.  Only yard waste from
residential property owners is permitted to be disposed of at the City’s
designated yard waste disposal site.  Commercial dumping of any yard waste,
including (but not limited to) residential yard waste, is prohibited. 



105.08    LEAD ACID BATTERIES.



   No person shall place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid
waste, or discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery except by
delivery to an automotive battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead
smelter licensed by the Environmental Protection Agency, or to a collection
or recycling facility authorized under the laws of the State of Iowa.



105.09    TIRES.



   No person shall place a tire that is no longer suitable for its
originally intended purpose due to wear, damage, or defect in mixed municipal
solid waste, discard or otherwise dispose of such tire except to a waste tire
collection site authorized under the laws of the State of Iowa.



105.10    WASTE OIL AND WASTE OIL FILTERS.



   No person shall place any waste oil or untreated waste oil filters in
mixed municipal solid waste, discard, or otherwise dispose of waste oil and
untreated filters except to a collection or recycling facility authorized
under the laws of the State of Iowa.



105.11    SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.



   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all
other solid waste and shall be composted on the premises or properly disposed
of and shall not be placed at curbside with solid waste material.




(Ord. 1440 – Aug. 14 Supp.)




105.12    RECYCLABLE MATERIALS TO BE SEPARATED.



   Occupants serviced by curbside recycling collection are required to
separate from their municipal waste the following materials:



      1.   Amber, green, and flint glass bottles and jars;



      2.   Aluminum beverage cans;



      3.   Bimetal and steel food and beverage containers;



      4.   PET and HDPE plastic containers;



      5.   Newspaper, cardboard, and fabric.



105.13    PREPARATION AND PLACEMENT OF RECYCLABLES.



   The following provisions apply to curbside residential collection of
recyclables:



      1.   Preparation.  Materials will be prepared in the
following manner:



         A.   Clear glass bottles and jars (flint glass, green,
and amber) will be rinsed of all food or beverage residue and lids will be
removed.  Labels and neck rings may remain.



         B.   Aluminum, bimetal, and steel cans will be rinsed of
all food or beverage residue and may be flattened.  Labels may remain on
bimetal and steel cans. 



         C.   Plastic PET and HDPE containers will be rinsed of
all product residue and may be flattened.  Labels may remain.



         D.   Newspaper will be tied with string in bundles not
to exceed 12 inches in height, or slipped inside a paper grocery bag. 
Newspaper should not be included for collection on rainy days.



         E.   Cardboard will be broken down and tied in small
bundles.



      2.   Placement for Collection.  Materials will be placed for
collection in the following manner:



         A.   Recycling containers provided by the City (and
thereafter maintained and replaced if needed by the occupant) will be used to
store recyclable materials.  The recycling containers shall remain at all
times the property of the City.



         B.   The occupant will place properly prepared
recyclab1es into the recycling container with aluminum, bimetal, steel cans,
glass bottles and jars, and plastic PET and HDPE containers on the bottom,
and bundled newspapers, bundled cardboard and fabric on top and place the
recyclable container at curbside no sooner than 7:00 p.m. on the night before
the next scheduled pickup.  Recyclable containers shall be removed from the
curbside by 11:59 p.m. on the day of pickup, and shall be stored adjacent to
the dwelling unit or screened from view.  Recyclables shall not be placed at
curbside when it is raining or snowing.



(Ord. 1477 -  Feb. 18 Supp.)



105.14    PLACEMENT OF SOLID WASTE AT CURBSIDE.



   Solid waste containers shall be placed at curbside no earlier than 7:00
p.m. on the night before the next scheduled pickup.  Solid waste containers
shall be removed from the curbside by 11:59 p.m. on the day of pickup, and
shall be stored adjacent to the dwelling unit or screened from view.



(Ord. 1477 -  Feb. 18 Supp.)



105.15    COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.



   Any recyclables located at the curbside, in transfer stations, or in
storage or transfer bins associated with commercial, municipal, or
institutional establishments are the property of the City of Denison, Iowa. 
It is a violation of this Code of Ordinances for any person to collect or
remove or cause to be collected or removed any such recyclable materials
specified in Section 105.12 of this chapter unless authorized by the City. 
Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.



105.16    ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.



   The City shall appoint an enforcement officer or officers to enforce
and administer the provisions of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances
pertaining to the control and collection of solid waste and recycling.



105.17    FEES AND CHARGES.



   The collection and disposal of solid waste and recycling are declared
to be benefits to the property served or eligible to be served.  Fees and
charges for the collection and disposal of solid waste and recycling (whether
such services are actually used or are available for use) are as follows:



      1.   The sum of $14.00 per month per household for a 35-gallon
container;



      2.   The sum of $15.00 per month per household for a 65-gallon
container;



      3.   The sum of $16.00 per month per household for a 96-gallon
container;



      4.   The sum of $22.00 per month per household for two
96-gallon containers;



      5.   All other electric meters – $4.00 per month.



105.18    PAYMENT OF BILLS.



   All fees and charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions as payment for combined utility services as established by the
Denison Municipal Utilities Board of Trustees. 



105.19    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall
be jointly and severally liable for solid waste and recycling charges to the
premises.  Charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the premises served and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes. 



105.20    PENALTIES.



      1.   Nonparticipation.  Upon the discovery of any violation
of the terms of this chapter, the City shall, through its authorized agent,
give notice to the owner and occupant (or either of them as the case may be)
of violation hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner or
occupant, by United States mail directed to the last known address of such
person or persons, as shown in the records of the Crawford County Recorder
and Treasurer, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation
occurs.  On neglect or refusal of the occupant of any dwelling serviced by
curbside collection, multi-family housing program, or a commercial,
municipal, or institutional program to separate recyclable materials from
municipal solid waste and place them at curbside or sites established by the
City, such person shall, upon a finding of such violation, be guilty of a
municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.  Each
violation shall constitute a separate infraction.



      2.   Unauthorized Collection.  If any person not authorized
by the City to do so collects or removes or causes to be collected or removed
any recyclable materials in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such
person shall, upon finding of such violation, be guilty of a municipal
infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.  Each violation shall
constitute a separate infraction.



      3.   Pilfering of or Damage to Collection Containers.  If any
person is responsible for pilfering of or damage to collection containers
issued to a residence for either curbside collection or any other recycling
program under this Code of Ordinances, such person shall, upon a finding of
such violation, be guilty of a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this
Code of Ordinances.  Each violation shall constitute a separate infraction.



CHAPTER 106
LICENSED COLLECTORS AND COLLECTION SERVICE



 

106.01  Licensing of Collection Services
 
106.04  Collection and Transportation


106.02  Collection License
 
106.05  Frequency of Collection


106.03  Vehicles Used For Collection
 
106.06  Penalties for Violation



 



106.01    LICENSING OF COLLECTION SERVICES.



   Solid waste collection in the City shall be done only by collectors
licensed by the City.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned,
occupied, or used by said owner, provided that such solid waste is disposed
of properly in an approved landfill.  No license is required for the
removal, hauling or disposal of dirt, gravel and rock from grading or
excavation; however, all such material shall be hauled in vehicles so
constructed and maintained so that none of the dirt, gravel, and rock spills
on the public roads or right-of-way.



106.02    COLLECTION LICENSE.



   Except as provided in Section 106.01 above, no person shall engage in
the business of collecting, transporting, processing, or disposing of solid
waste and/or recyclable materials without first obtaining from the City an
annual license.



      1.   Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk
and shall state the applicant’s full name and address.  If the applicant
is a corporation or association, the names and addresses of the officers and
registered agent shall be stated.  The application shall also contain a
complete listing of the number and types of collection and transportation
equipment proposed to be used by the applicant.



      2.   Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance.  Such certificate shall certify satisfactory public liability
insurance covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to the
application and all equipment and vehicles to be used for solid waste and/or
recyclable collection and transportation.  The amount of the limits of such
insurance shall be at least the following:



   Bodily Injury:   – $100,000 per person. 



         – $300,000 per occurrence.



   Property Damage:   – $ 50,000.



   In addition, each certificate shall certify that the applicant has
statutory worker’s compensation insurance for all employees of the
applicant.  All insurance policies certified hereunder shall include
provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City of the
expiration, cancellation or other termination of coverage not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such action.



      3.   Each application shall be accompanied by a license fee. 
This fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the
Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix to this Code of
Ordinances.  If the license applied for is not issued, the fee shall be
refunded to the applicant.



      4.   If the Council finds the application to be in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and determines that the applicant will
operate the solid waste and/or recyclable materials collection or
transportation business without endangering public health or the environment
and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 105 of this
Code of Ordinances and otherwise in conformance with the law, the requested
license may be issued to be effective for a period of one year.



      5.   An annual license may be renewed upon payment of the
required fee, reaffirmation of the original application information, or
amendments thereto to reflect changes in vehicles and equipment, and
submission of a current insurance certificate.



      6.   No license authorized by this chapter may be transferred
to another person or company.



106.03    VEHICLES USED FOR COLLECTION.



   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such
materials or recyclable materials shall be leak-proof, durable and of easily
cleanable construction.  Such vehicles or containers shall be cleaned
regularly to prevent nuisances, pollution, and insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.



106.04    COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.



   Vehicles and containers used for the collection and transportation of
solid waste or recyclable materials shall be operated in such a manner that
the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom.  Such vehicles and
containers shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of any material.  If
any spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the
collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container.  The area
where such spillage occurred shall be properly cleaned.



106.05    FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.



   Solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week.



106.06    PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   Any person or firm which engages in the business of solid waste and/or
recyclable material collection or transportation without first securing a
license from the City shall be guilty of a municipal infraction.  Any person
or firm who conducts a solid waste and/or recyclable material collection or
transportation business contrary to the provisions of this chapter or Chapter
105 shall be guilty of a municipal infraction.  Repeated violations of any
such provisions shall also be grounds for license revocation.



CHAPTER 107
OPEN BURNING



 

107.01  Definitions
 
107.04  Burning Impregnated Wood


107.02  Open Burning
 
107.05  Penalty for Violation


107.03  Incinerators
 



 



107.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



      1.   “Backyard burning” means the burning of leaves,
twigs, and landscape waste originating on the premises by individuals
domiciled on the premises.



      2.   “Chimney or stack” means any flue, conduit, or duct
permitting the discharge or passage of air contaminants into the open air, or
constructed or arranged for such purpose.



      3.   “Garbage” means all solid and semi-solid animal and
vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
and serving of food or of material intended for use as food, but excluding
recognized industrial byproducts.



      4.   “Open burning” means any burning of combustible
materials wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a chimney or stack.



      5.   “Refuse” means garbage, rubbish, and all other
wastes, except sewage and water-carried trade wastes.



      6.   “Rubbish” means all waste materials not subject to
becoming readily decayed, decomposed, or rotten.



      7.   “Salvage operation” means any business, industry, or
trade engaged wholly or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any project or
material, including (but not limited to) chemicals, drums, metals, motor
vehicles, or shipping containers.



      8.   “Trade waste” means all solid or liquid material or
rubbish resulting from building operations, construction, or the conduct of
any business, industry, or trade, including (but not limited to) chemicals,
cinders, grease, paint, plastic products and other forms of liquid or solid
waste materials.



107.02    OPENING BURNING.



   No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of refuse,
including trade wastes, or conduct a salvage operation by open burning,
except where a variance has been granted by the air pollution control
authority of the State and except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:



      1.   Cooking of Food.  Open fires used only for the cooking
of food for human consumption, or for recreational purposes except for the
premises of permanent commercial establishments.



      2.   Backyard Burning.  Backyard burning (not including
garbage) at dwellings of four family units or less.  Backyard burning shall
only be done during two one-week periods in the fall and a ten-day period in
the spring as designated by proclamation of the Mayor and shall only be done
after sunrise and before sunset.  No backyard burning shall be done on any
public sidewalk, curb, or street.



      3.   Disaster Rubbish.  The open burning of rubbish produced
during community disasters in cases where an officially declared emergency
condition exists.



      4.   Flare Stacks.  Flare stacks for the combustion of waste
gases.



      5.   Training Fires.  Fires set for the purpose of bona fide
instruction and training of public or industrial employees in the methods of
fighting fires.



      6.   Clearing and Grubbing Rubbish.  The open burning of
combustible materials produced in clearing, grubbing, and construction
operations, provided that such burning shall be limited to areas located at
least one-fourth (1/4) mile from any inhabited building and further provided
that a permit for such burning be first issued by the Fire Chief.



107.03    INCINERATORS.



   Equipment or facilities for enclosed burning of refuse shall have a
stack adequate to maintain a draft sufficient for efficient combustion and
the stack shall have a screen sufficiently fine to prevent ejection of
particles of burning material.  Such equipment and facilities shall not be
installed until approved by the Fire Chief and Building Inspector.  Such
equipment and facilities shall be maintained and operated so that no
objectionable smoke or odor shall result in accordance with State law and
rules on particulates and smoke density.



107.04    BURNING IMPREGNATED WOOD.



   Wood, such as that used for utility poles, railroad ties, and other
purposes, without exclusion, which has been coated or impregnated with
creosote, pentachlorophenol, or other chemical or paint, which when burned
emits volatiles that create vapors which are a nuisance, likely to be
unhealthful for humans and animals, or tend to deposit any film on objects
such as furnishings, cloth, walls or other exposed surfaces or on plant life,
shall not be burned in equipment used for heating or destruction of wastes or
be burned in the open.



107.05    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall commit a
municipal infraction.  Each day upon which such violation occurs after
notice constitutes a separate offense.  Any condition which fails to comply
with the health standards or the aforementioned rules may be declared a
nuisance and an injunction may be sought as provided by law.



FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES



CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE



 



110.01  Franchise Granted
 
110.10  Relocation of Installations


110.02  Rights and Privileges
 
110.11  Right to Regulate Reserved


110.03  Pipes and Mains
 
110.12  Availability of Service


110.04  Construction and Maintenance
 
110.13  Claimed Failure


110.05  Excavations
 
110.14  Franchise Limited


110.06  Indemnification
 
110.15  Validity


110.07  Applicable Regulations
 
110.16  Franchise Effective


110.08  Quality and Quantity
 
110.17  Repeal Conflicting Ordinances


110.09  Franchise Fee
 
 




 



110.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED.



   There is hereby granted to Black Hills/Iowa Gas Utility Company, LLC,
d/b/a Black Hills Energy, a Delaware Limited Liability Company, hereinafter
called “Company,” and to its successor and assigns the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City of
Denison, Iowa, hereinafter called “City,” a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and
right of ways of the City to serve customers within and without the City and
to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants.  The City
Council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other public
places upon the request from the Company.  This franchise shall be effective
fifteen (15) years from its publication following its acceptance as provided
herein. 6



110.02    RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.



   The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the
restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, or as
subsequently amended or changed.



110.03    PIPES AND MAINS.



   The Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for
the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains,
conduits, and other facilities provided that the same shall be reasonably
placed so as not to interfere with any water pipes, drains or sewers or the
flow therefrom, or other facilities which have been or may hereafter be
located by the authority of the City.



110.04    CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
installations on, over or under any public street or alley or public
right-of-way thereof in the City in such manner as the City may at any time
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any public
improvement of, in or about any such street or alley in accord with this
franchise and any neutral regulation the City may make regarding the
placement of facilities or structures of utilities, and other right-of-way
users’ facilities or structures, in the right-of-way.  The Company shall
not be required to relocate its facilities at Company expense if said
relocation is for the benefit of a non-government entity.



110.05    EXCAVATIONS.



   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys and public places
for the placing of gas mains, service and facilities necessary to deliver
natural gas, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall promptly replace the surface, restoring the original
conditions as nearly as practicable.  Before finalizing plans for any
construction, the Company shall submit copies of the plan to the City Manager
for review and comment.  The City Manager shall approve or reject the
Company plan promptly after its submission to the City.  Plans submitted
upon and after the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter
shall identify Company facilities proposed to be located in the right of way
and those that would be located on property owned in fee by the Company or in
private easements.  If facilities are proposed to be located within the
existing right of way or within thirty (30) feet of the right of way line
referenced for the ultimate roadway classification as shown in the then
current comprehensive plan and identified as such by the City Manager,
approval prior to installation is required from the City Manger which
approval shall not be withheld or conditioned except for reasonable and
recognized engineering or safety reasons.  No permission shall be required
for facilities located more than thirty (30) feet outside the existing right
of way and any right of way line referenced for the ultimate roadway
classification as shown in the then current comprehensive plan.  The Company
shall not use any method of construction which may result in the cutting of
any pavement unless the method is first approved in writing by the City
Manager.  In approving any method of construction the City Manger shall
consider the impact of any method upon traffic flows, traffic and public
safety.  In the event of an emergency situation the Company is authorized to
proceed with the excavation and repair.  The Company shall notify the City
as soon as possible either during or after the repair has been completed. 



110.06    INDEMNIFICATION.



   The Company shall indemnify and save harmless City from any and all
claims, suits, losses, damages, cost or expenses on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused
or occasioned, in whole or in part, by Company’s negligence in
construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the gas
utilities authorized by this franchise, however, that the Company shall not
be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or
damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or
agents.



110.07    APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain
the system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa
Utilities Board or its successors and State and Federal law.



110.08    QUALITY AND QUANTITY.



   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural
gas in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable regulations of the
Iowa Utilities Board or its successors. 



110.09    FRANCHISE FEE.



   The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee on the gross
revenue pursuant to the Code of Iowa.  The franchise fee shall only be
imposed through the adoption of an ordinance authorizing said franchise
fee.  The City shall work with the Company to develop a methodology to
implement the franchise fee.  The City shall provide the Company with 90
days advance notice of the effective date of any franchise fee put into
effect by the City.  The City agrees that any franchise fee paid by Company
will not exceed the lowest franchise fee paid by any other entity supplying
natural gas within the City.



110.10    RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS.



   The City reserves to itself the right to make reasonable regulation of
the Company’s use of streets and other public property.



      1.   The City may require the Company to relocate its lines,
excluding facilities located in private easements (whether titled in Company
exclusively or in Company and other entities) at its sole expense if the
right-of-way is needed for a public improvement or other public purpose, or
when the public health, safety or welfare require relocation when necessary
to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of  travel in the
right-of-way, and when the City has provided a reasonable alternative to the
Company. 



      2.   The City may prohibit expansion of use of the
right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate the expanded use
and the City has provided a reasonable alternative location to the Company. 



      3.   In areas where the City has assigned particular corridors
for utility use and the Company is required to relocate under this section
the Company shall relocate in the corridor assigned to it, reserving to the
Company the right to request additional corridors or space, which request the
City will review.  The City acknowledges that it is a generally accepted
safety practice that gas facilities be located near street pavement with the
right-of-way.  The City will not unreasonably deny a Company request for
additional corridor space.  If additional corridor space is not available
the Company shall not be prohibited from acquiring private easements and
placing and operating facilities therein. 



      4.   In new areas of the City where the City has designated
utility corridors in the right-of-way, the Company shall locate its services
in its assigned corridor.  The Company shall not be required to relocate its
facilities at its sole cost from any right-of-way which is vacated or
modified in favor of a non-governmental entity. 



      5.   The City shall not prohibit the Company from, at its own
expense, procuring or utilizing private easements, or installing, maintaining
or operating its facilities in any private easement to which the Company
holds title separately or in conjunction with another entity.  The City
shall not prevent the Company from participating as a party to private
easements. 



      6.   Where any gas service line is in the future placed
anywhere within the corporate limits of the City, or in unincorporated areas
within two miles of the then current corporate limits of the City and not in
a public street or street right-of-way, the Company shall provide the City a
description of the intended route for such line and shall consult with the
City regarding the consistency of the proposed line placement with the
comprehensive plan and street plan of the City regarding the construction of
infrastructure and street placement.  The City shall have no authority over
the placing of utility facilities within the corporate limits of another
incorporated city.  The City shall promptly review the Company’s proposals
and consult with the Company.  If the Company locates a line or facilities
in compliance with this section and the City later requires the line or
facilities to be relocated, the City shall reimburse the Company the cost of
relocation.  If the Company places a line or facilities without consultation
as required by the provisions of this section (or against the advice of the
City given after consultation under this section) and the City later requires
the line to be relocated, the Company shall relocate the line or facilities
at its own expense.



110.11    RIGHT TO REGULATE RESERVED.



   In the event the State of Iowa or the United States ceases to regulate
any aspect of the delivery of gas service now regulated by either or both,
consistent with any statues, rules or other authorizations implementing that
cessation, the City reserves the right upon such cessation to regulate such
matters to the extent such matters are local affairs impacting the health,
safety or welfare of residents of the City.



110.12    AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE.



   The Company shall maintain the availability of service throughout the
entire City (including newly annexed areas) by extending lines or facilities
in a manner consistent with the regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or
its successors.  The City shall in the extension or modification of streets
and roads make provision for the placement of Company mains, services and
facilities.



110.13    CLAIMED FAILURE.



   If either party believes the other party has failed to abide by any
part, provision or term of this franchise that party may give the other party
notice in writing setting out the claimed failure and providing not less than
sixty (60) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days to correct the claimed
failure.  The party receiving notice shall acknowledge receipt of notice and
either agree to correct the claimed failure or request a meeting to resolve
the differences, which meeting must be held within thirty (30) days of
request.  Compliance with this chapter is not a condition precedent to
either party seeking any other remedy to which it believes itself entitled.



110.14    FRANCHISE LIMITED.



   This franchise is limited to gas service.  No other services shall be
provided to the public by the Company pursuant to this franchise.



110.15    VALIDITY.



   If any section, provision, or part of this chapter, including any
franchise fee subsequently imposed pursuant to Section 110.09, shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any section, provision, or
part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



110.16    FRANCHISE EFFECTIVE.



   This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa
law and the written acceptance by the Company.  The Company shall, within
(30) thirty days after the City Council approval of this chapter, file in the
office of the City Clerk, its acceptance in writing of all the terms and
provisions of this chapter.  Following City Council approval of this chapter
shall be published in the official newspaper of the City of Denison, Iowa. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be the date of publication.  In the
event that Black Hills/Iowa Gas Utility Company, LLC, d/b/a Black Hills
Energy, a Delaware Limited Liability Company does not file its written
acceptance of this chapter within thirty (30) days after its approval by the
City Council this chapter shall be void and of no effect.



110.17    REPEAL CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   Upon the effective date of this chapter, all prior gas franchises
granted to Company to furnish natural gas services to the City and its
inhabitants are hereby repealed and all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith are also hereby repealed. 



 


Notes

6 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 1338, adopting a natural gas franchise
for the City, was passed and adopted on September 2, 2008. 



CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC UTILITY



111.01    BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The management of the City’s Electric Utility is the responsibility
of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as described in
Chapter 24 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS



112.01    BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The management of the City’s Cable Telecommunications Utility is the
responsibility of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as
described in Chapter 24 of this Code of Ordinances.



REGULATION OF BUSINESS AND VOCATIONS



CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



 

120.01  License or Permit Required
 
120.05  Prohibited Sales and Acts


120.02  General Prohibition
 
120.06  Amusement Devices


120.03  Investigation
 
120.07  CityplaceSale of Alcoholic Beverages at Special Events


120.04  Action by Council
 
120.08  Outdoor Service Areas



 



120.01    LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep
for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor
control license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)



120.02    GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the
Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil
penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)



120.03    INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct
an investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the application. 
The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to
the requirements of the City.  The Council shall not approve an application
for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)



120.04    ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the
liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its
approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application,
necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic
Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further
action as is provided by law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])



120.05    PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.



   A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit
and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:



      1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one
simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])



      2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on
the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption
thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following
Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of
selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and
2:00 a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any
class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit
may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the
premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday
when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the
premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the
following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)



      3.   Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on
credit, except with a bona fide credit card.  This provision does not apply
to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide
registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention
center, civic center, or events center.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])



      4.   Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the
sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the
premises where sold.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])



      5.   In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly
allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine
or any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])



      6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with
Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or
immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or
permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])



      7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on
the premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])



      8.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any
alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from
the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and
except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate
consumption.  However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the
licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages
Division.



(Ord. 1427 - Oct. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])



      9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any
container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or
wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents, or
remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or
knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])



      10.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or
employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed
premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is
designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])



      11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine which
is used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed
in a vaporized form.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])



      12.   Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years
of age to enter into or remain upon a licensed establishment, as prescribed
in Section 45.02(1) and (2) of this Code of Ordinances, except as permitted
in subsection 3 of said section.



120.06    AMUSEMENT DEVICES. 



   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of
Iowa.  (Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control
license or beer permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)



      1.   As used in this section, "registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device" means an electrical or mechanical device
required to be registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals,
as provided in Section 99B.53 of the Code of Iowa.



      2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) to participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical
amusement device.



      3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a
person owning or leasing a registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device, to knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.



      4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in
the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with
a person under the age of 21.




(Ord. 1455 - Aug. 15 Supp.)




120.07    SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT SPECIAL EVENTS.



   The term “special event” as used in this section means a facility
or area for which a temporary or limited license to sell alcoholic beverages
has been issued or lawfully transferred, such as a street dance, community
celebration, temporary beer garden, and similar types of activities.  The
sale of any alcoholic beverage at a special event shall be subject to the
following restrictions:



      1.   The alcoholic beverages shall be served only in a
specially designated bar area or areas which are physically separated from
the remainder of the premises in a manner reasonably acceptable to the Chief
of Police.



      2.   Only persons who are twenty-one (21) years of age or over
shall be admitted to the specially designated bar area, except as otherwise
specifically designated by City Council.



(Ord. 1485 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



      3.   Event organizers will ensure that all persons entering
into or remaining within the specially designated bar area have been
identified to ensure that they are 21 years of age or older.



      4.   Persons who are 21 years of age or over and are admitted
to the special bar area shall receive some form of physical identification,
such as a distinctive stamp or a wristband, which identifies their legal
ability to purchase, possess, and consume alcoholic beverages.



      5.   No person shall be permitted to leave the specially
designated area with any alcoholic beverages. 



      6.   Event organizers are required to provide sufficient
security personnel to ensure that only those over the age of 21 are permitted
into the special bar areas and that no alcoholic beverages are removed from
the special bar area.



      7.   All alcoholic beverages sold at special events shall be
sold in aluminum cans, plastic bottles, or plastic cups.  The sale of any
beverage at a special event in a glass bottle or container is strictly
prohibited.



120.08    OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS.



   It is unlawful to permit consumption of liquor, wine, or beer in an
outdoor service area located within 500 feet of a residential area or a hotel
or motel after the hours of 11:00 p.m. and before the hours of 7:30 a.m. 
The Chief of Police may extend the service hours listed in this section on a
case-by-case basis for special events.  In deciding whether to extend the
hours, the Chief of Police shall take into consideration the date, location,
and type of special event being proposed.



CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS



 

121.01  Definitions
 
121.06  Refunds


121.02  Permit Required
 
121.07  Persons Under Legal Age


121.03  Application
 
121.08  Self-service Sales Prohibited


121.04  Fees
 
121.09  Permit Revocation


121.05  Issuance and Expiration
 



 



121.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)



      1.   “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in
which ten or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are
offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.



      2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or
in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or
shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being
flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has
a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material.  However, this
definition is not to be construed to include cigars.



      3.   “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind
in which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or
otherwise distributed to consumers.



      4.   Place of business' is construed to mean and include any
place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold or where cigarettes or
tobacco products are stored within or without the state of Iowa by the holder
of an Iowa permit or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption; or if sold
from any vehicle or train, the vehicle or train on which or from which such
cigarettes or tobacco products are sold shall constitute a place of business;
or for a business within or without the state that conducts delivery sales,
any place where alternative nicotine products or vapor products are sold or
where alternative nicotine products or vapor products are kept for the
purpose of sale.



(Ord. 1473 - Feb. 18 Supp.)



      5.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes
or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for
consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number
of sales or who engages in the business of selling tobacco products to
ultimate consumers.



      6.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product
display, placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may
take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from
the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.



      7.   “Tobacco products” means the following:  cigars;
little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut,
ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist
tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a
pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean
cigarettes.



      8.   "Alternative nicotine product" means a product, not
consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the
body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means.  "Alternative nicotine
product" does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products, or
a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and
Drug Administration under chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act.



      9.   "Vapor product" means any noncombustible product, which
may or may not contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power
source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical
means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a
solution or other substance.  "Vapor product" includes an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution
or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.  "Vapor product"
does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States
Food and Drug Administration under chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.




(Ord. 1443 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




121.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



      1.   Cigarette Permits.  It is unlawful for any person, other
than a holder of a retailer permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at retailer and no retailer shall distribute,
sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products within the City without a valid permit for each place of
business.  The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the
place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons
authorized to inspect the place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)



      2.   Tobacco Permits.  It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of business without first
having received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for each place of
business owned or operated by the retailer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)



   A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain
a tobacco permit.  However, if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and
that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell
any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products during such time.




(Ord. 1443 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




121.03    APPLICATION.



   A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk.  Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June.  If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the
costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.04    FEES.



   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as provided
in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa. 



121.05    ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.



   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall
be issued.  Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business
for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable.  All permits expire on
June 30 of each year.  The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application
for a permit, and any permit issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of
the Department of Commerce within thirty (30) days of issuance.



(Ord. 1414 - Oct. 11 Supp.)



121.06    REFUNDS.



   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule
of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.07    PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



   No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products or cigarettes to
any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  The provision of this section
includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products from a vending machine.  If a retailer
or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the
Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other
penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:



      1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a
civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00).  Failure to
pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in
automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.



      2.   For a second violation within a period of two (2) years,
the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer's permit shall be suspended
for a period of thirty (30) days.  The retailer may select its preference in
the penalty to be applied under this subsection.



      3.   For a third violation within a period of three (3) years,
the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer's permit shall be suspended
for a period of thirty (30) days.



      4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three (3)
years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer's permit shall be
suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.



      5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four (4) years,
the retailer's permit shall be revoked.



   The Clerk shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the retailer by
mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the
application for a permit.  The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear
and be heard. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])




(Ord. 1443 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




121.08    SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.



   Except as provided in  section 453A.36, subsection 6 of the Code of
Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes through the use
of a self-service display.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)




(Ord. 1443 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




121.09    PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as
provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the
Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder.  If a permit is revoked, a new
permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or
to any other person for the place of business at which the violation
occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good
cause to the contrary is shown to the Council.  The Clerk shall report the
revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30) days of the
revocation or suspension.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)



(Ord. 1414 - Oct. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



 



122.01  Purpose
 
122.11  Revocation of License


122.02  Definitions
 
122.12  Notice


122.03  License Required
 
122.13  Hearing


122.04  Application for License
 
122.14  Record and Determination


122.05  License Fees
 
122.15  Appeal


122.06  Bond Required
 
122.16  Effect of Revocation


122.07  License Issued
 
122.17  Rebates


122.08  Display of License
 
122.18  License Exemptions


122.09  License Not Transferable
 
122.19  Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations


122.10  Time Restriction
 




 



122.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants and to
provide rules, regulations and restrictions concerning the sale of any
consumable food, beverage or non-food item upon any publicly-owned City
property including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks,
rights-of-way, parking lots and other public grounds owned by the City. The
provisions of this chapter are enacted for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



      1.   "Peddler" means any person carrying goods or merchandise
who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise
from house to house or upon the public street. 



      2.   "Solicitor" means any person who solicits or attempts to
solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or
donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be
delivered at a future date.



      3.   "Transient merchant" means any person who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such
business hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or
who operates out of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City
limits. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or
auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a
part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer
does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.



      4.   "Vendor" means any person who sells any consumable food,
beverage or non-food item upon any publicly-owned City property to the public
in the City.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.03    LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, vending or in the business
of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as
herein provided is in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.04    APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license
under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant's name,
permanent and local address, and business address if any. The application
shall also set forth the applicant's employer, if any, the employer's
address, the nature of the applicant's business, the last three places of
such business, a list of any vehicles used in the business and the license
plate number of any such vehicles and the length of time sought to be covered
by the license. At the time of application all applicants will present to the
Clerk a form of identification containing the applicants photograph.  All
food vendors shall comply with the Iowa Department of Health rules and
regulations governing the sale of food for consumption on the premises.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.05    LICENSE FEES.



   The fees for the issuance of a license under this chapter shall be set
by resolution of the City Council and are listed in the Schedule of Civil
Penalties and Fees contained in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.



122.06    BOND REQUIRED.



   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant,
an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed
a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code
of Iowa.



122.07    LICENSE ISSUED.



   If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be
correct, and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.



122.08    DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each solicitor, peddler or vendor shall keep such license in possession
at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of
prospective customers or City official, exhibit the license as evidence of
compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant
shall display publicly such merchant's license in the merchant's place of
business.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.09    LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not
transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person
filing the application.



122.10    TIME RESTRICTION.



   All peddler's and solicitor's licenses shall provide that said licenses
are in force and effect only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.11    REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   After notice and hearing, the City may revoke any license issued under
this chapter for the following reasons:



      1.   Fraudulent Statements.  The licensee has made fraudulent
statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the
business.



      2.   Violation of Law.  The licensee has violated this
chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.



      3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety.  The
licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public
welfare, safety, order, or morals.



122.12    NOTICE.



   The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the
possible revocation of a license.  Such notice shall contain particulars of
the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State
statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the
matter.



122.13    HEARING.



   The City Manager shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and
any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged
in the complaint and notice.  Should the licensee, or authorized
representative, fail to appear without good cause, the City Manager may
proceed to a determination of the complaint.



122.14    RECORD AND DETERMINATION.



   The City Manager shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions
of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record
the City Manager finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation
of this chapter or State law.



122.15    APPEAL.



   If the City Manager revokes or refuses to issue a license, the City
Manager shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor.  The licensee,
or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its
next regular meeting.  The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the
decision of the City Manager by a majority vote of the Council members
present and the City Manager shall carry out the decision of the Council.



122.16    EFFECT OF REVOCATION.



   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible
for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
the revocation.



122.17    REBATES.



   Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be
entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered
before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing
the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued
and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In
all cases, at least ten dollars ($10.00) of the original fee shall be
retained by the City to cover administrative costs.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.18    LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.



      1.   Newspapers.  Persons delivering, collecting for, or
selling subscriptions to newspapers.



      2.   Club Members.  Members of local civic and service clubs,
Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar
organizations.



      3.   Local Residents and Farmers.  Local residents and
farmers who offer for sale their own products.



      4.   Churches.  Local churches and affiliated sub-groups,
such as Youth Groups, Women's Guilds, Adult Fellowship Boards, etc.



      5.   Students.  Students representing any School District
within Crawford County conducting projects sponsored by organizations
recognized by the school.



      6.   Route Sales.  Route delivery persons who only
incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales.



      7.   Resale or Institutional Use.  Persons customarily
calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products
for resale or institutional use.



      8.   City Sponsored.  City sponsored and/or community events
held on City property with the knowledge and prior consent of the City
Council.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



122.19    CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of
Sections 122.04 and 122.05.  All such organizations are required to submit
in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such
activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of
the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried
on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the
solicitor and the amount thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is
a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of
charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the
event the Clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the
organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.15 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1377 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 123
MOVING OF BUILDINGS



 

123.01  Definitions
 
123.07  Protection of Property


123.02  Permit Required
 
123.08  Permit Fee


123.03  Application
 
123.09  Appeal


123.04  Application Approval
 
123.10  Building Permit Required


123.05  Terms and Conditions
 
123.11  Exemptions


123.06  Liability Insurance
 



 



123.01    DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions are given with regard to words used in this
chapter.



      1.   “Street” means any public street, road, highway,
alley or other public place.



      2.   “Structure” means any house, garage, building or
shelter which, when transported on the streets of the City, results in total
combined dimensions of the moving vehicle and structure which exceed eight
(8) feet in width or thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches in height.  The term
“structure” also includes anything which when moved on the streets of the
City would cause an unreasonable hazard to the safety of any persons or
property.



123.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall move any structure on or over the streets of the City
without a permit issued by the City Building Inspector, who shall also
consult with the Street Superintendent, Police Chief, and Denison Municipal
Utilities prior to issuing the permit.



123.03    APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring such a permit shall file with the City Building
Inspector an application in writing on forms furnished by the City.  The
application shall include the following:



      1.   The character, size, and weight of the structure to be
moved.



      2.   The purpose for which the structure is to be used.



      3.   The locations from which and to which the structure is to
be moved.



      4.   The streets over which the structure is intended to be
moved.



123.04    APPLICATION APPROVAL.



   No permit to move a structure to a site within the corporate limits of
the City shall be issued until it has been approved by the Building
Inspector.  In acting upon such a request for moving permit, the Building
Inspector shall consider the following:



      1.   Conformance of the proposed structure with the applicable
regulations and standards established under this Code of Ordinances.



      2.   Compatibility of the structure with existing or permitted
uses within 300 feet of the proposed site, in terms of building height, bulk
and scale, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping and site development and
access and circulation features.



      3.   Potentially unfavorable effects or impacts on other
existing or permitted uses within 300 feet of the proposed site.



      4.   Modifications or improvements to the structure which
would result in increased compatibility, or would mitigate potentially
unfavorable impact or which are necessary to conform to applicable
regulations and standards to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



      5.   Potential danger to citizens of the community,
particularly owners and users of abutting property.



123.05    TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   The granting of a moving permit shall be limited by conditions
reasonable and proper for the protection of persons and property, including
(but not limited to) the following:



      1.   Restrictions on the public streets or other public
property over which the structure shall be moved.



      2.   Requirements of changes, alterations, or repairs to be
made to the structure for the purpose of protecting the property of the City
and its residents, to protect the public safety and the public welfare.



123.06    LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Every person moving a structure in the City shall file with the City
Clerk a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a
certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State, which policy
shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section.  In lieu
of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a certificate of insurance
issued by an insurance corporation may be filed.  The certificate must show
that a policy meeting the requirements of this section has been issued and
shall set forth the expiration date of said policy.  The liability policy
required under this section shall insure the person moving the structure
against loss from liability imposed by law for injury to or death of any
person or damage to any property arising out of the moving of such structure
to the limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit.



123.07    PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.



   The person to whom a moving permit is granted shall notify the General
Manager of Denison Municipal Utilities, the Street Superintendent, the Police
Chief, and the owner’s agent or representative of any utility system, to
move or remove any utility and shall make satisfactory arrangements for
removing and replacing the same, giving such owner’s agents or
representatives of any utility system and the General Manager of Denison
Municipal Utilities a minimum of at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice of
the necessity of such removal.  If, in the judgment of the Street
Superintendent, planking is necessary for the protection of the City streets,
the permittee shall plank all paved streets in such a manner as to protect
the paving and shall also protect all sidewalks, poles and other City
property, and in the event of damage, repair the damages to property.  All
costs and expenses incurred by the City or the owners of any utility system
which may be necessary for the protection of the rights of any owner or any
other party interested in any property affected shall be paid by the party to
whom the moving permit is issued.



123.08    PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the issuance of a moving permit issued under this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the City Council and is listed in the Schedule
of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



123.09    APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the refusal to grant a permit hereunder shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment within forty-eight (48)
hours of the denial of the permit.  Such appeal shall be perfected within 48
hours by filing with the City Clerk, during normal business hours, a
statement that an appeal is requested to the Board of Adjustment, together
with a brief statement of the reasons or facts upon which the appeal is
based.  Pursuant to its rules and regulations, the Board shall then hear the
appeal and grant the permit or sustain the decision of the City Building
Inspector in denying the permit.  If the denial is sustained, the Board
shall state the reasons therefor.



123.10    BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve or
excuse the applicant from complying with the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City, Chapters 165 through 171 of this Code of Ordinances,
including (but not limited to) the requirement of obtaining a building permit.



123.11    EXEMPTIONS.



      1.   Moving Through the City:  When a structure is being
moved through the City to a point outside of the City, and the person moving
the structure has been issued a moving permit by the State of Iowa or
Crawford County, such person may be exempted from obtaining a permit as
required by this chapter if it appears that no damage, inconvenience, or
interference will be done to the property of the City or its citizens as a
result of such move.



      2.   Moving of Mobile Homes:  When a mobile home is to be
moved from outside the City to a mobile home park within the City, or moved
from a mobile home park within the City to a place outside of the City, or
moved from one mobile home park within the City to another mobile home park
within the City, the person moving the structure may be exempted from
obtaining a permit as required by this chapter if it appears that no damage,
inconvenience, or interference will be done to the property of the City or
its citizens as a result of such move.



      3.   Persons, entities, or movers exempted from obtaining a
permit as outlined in subsection 2 are not relieved of their duty to notify
those City officials listed in Section 123.07 of this chapter of the date,
time, location, and route of travel pertaining to moving the mobile home.



CHAPTER 124
LICENSING TAXICABS



 




(Repealed by Ord. 1463 - May-17 Supp.)




CHAPTER 125
PAWNBROKERS



 



125.01  Definition
 
125.09  Inspection of Register and Property


125.02  License Required
 
125.10  Ticket for Property Received


125.03  Exemptions
 
125.11  Holding Period


125.04  Affidavit Rerquired
 
125.12  Police Order to Hold Property


125.05  Application
 
125.13 Prohibited Acts


125.06  Surety Bond
 
125.14  Denial, Suspension or Revocation


125.07  Records Register Required
 
125.15  Maximum Interest Rates


125.08  Weapons
 
 




 



125.01    DEFINITION.



   For use in this chapter, "pawnbroker" means any person or business who
loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable
thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable
thing on the condition of selling the item back to the seller again at a
stipulated price and who has taken possession of the property or any part
thereof, or who purchases personal property or other items of value.



125.02    LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall carry on or engage in business as a pawnbroker in the
City without first having obtained a license therefor from the City and
paying an annual license fee. The fees for the issuance of a license under
this chapter shall be set by resolution of the Council and are listed in the
Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees contained in the Appendix to this Code
of Ordinances.  Any person having several or separate places of business
shall pay the license fee and procure a license for each place.  The license
provided for herein is valid only for the location designated in the
application pursuant to Section 125.05 and shall be prominently displayed
therein at all times.  Upon any change in any of the information required to
be submitted as part of the application, the licensee shall within three (3)
days of such change notify the Chief of Police of such change, in writing,
and in the event of a change of address where doing business, the license
shall be returned to the Chief of Police and an amended license issued
designating the new location.  The amended license will be valid for the
length of the time remaining on the original license.  All licenses issued
under this chapter shall expire one year after the original date of
issuance.  There shall be no automatic renewal.  An application for renewal
shall be filed and the fee paid not less than forty-five (45) days prior to
the expiration of the current license.



125.03    EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to or include the following:



      1.   The sale of secondhand goods at yard sales, garage sales
or moving sales.



      2.   The sale of secondhand books or magazines.



      3.   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed
auctioneer.



      4.   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand
goods taken as part or full payment for new goods and where such business is
incident to and not the primary business of a person.



      5.   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or
wholesaler having an established place of business or of goods sold at open
sale from bankrupt stock.



      6.   Goods sold at the public market, e.g., farmers market,
etc.



      7.   Goods sold at a bona fide antique, used furniture or used
clothing store, i.e., a business in which seventy-five percent (75%) of the
business's revenue is derived through the sale of antiques, used furniture or
used clothes.



125.04    AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED.



   Before any license required by this chapter is issued, the applicant
therefor shall file with the Chief of Police an affidavit that the applicant
will observe and carry out the requirements of any provisions of this Code of
Ordinances in force at the time of the application, or any provision of this
Code of Ordinances passed thereafter and during the time the applicant's
license is in force, in relation to pawnbrokers or their business.



125.05    APPLICATION.



   Any applicant for a pawnbroker license must complete an application
form provided by the Chief of Police.  The application form shall contain
the following information:



      1.   Name, place of birth, date of birth and home address of
the applicant.



      2.   Designation of location, including street and number,
where business is to be transacted, plus name and address of the owner of the
premises.



      3.   A detailed drawing of the interior of the place of
business and any other storage facilities used by the pawnbroker for storing
items in the dealer's possession.



      4.   A statement as to whether, within the previous five (5)
years, the applicant has been convicted of any felony or other crime relating
to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance,
including the nature and date of the offense and the penalty received.



      5.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
or partnership and:



         A.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners;



         B.   If the applicant is a corporation, the state of
incorporation and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.



      6.   If the applicant is an individual, the application shall
be signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by its President and
Secretary.



   The Police Department shall investigate and verify the facts set forth
in the application.  The applicant shall furnish to the Police Department
such evidence as it may reasonably require in support of the statements set
forth in the application.



125.06    SURETY BOND.



   Each applicant for a license shall, before the license is issued to the
applicant, file with the City Clerk a bond, with a surety approved by the
Council, in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned
that the applicant will comply with and observe the terms and conditions of
all provisions of this Code of Ordinances relating to pawnbrokers or their
business, will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on account of the
applicant's failure to observe such provisions and will pay all damages
resulting to any person by reason of the wrongful and knowingly purchase or
receiving of any stolen property or property from any minor, which bond shall
be approved by the Council and filed with the Clerk.



125.07    RECORDS REGISTER REQUIRED.



       1.   Every pawnbroker is required to keep a record register
in which the dealer accurately, intelligently and legibly enters, in ink, in
the English language, and at the time of purchasing or receiving any article
or item:



         A.   The retail fair market value of the article;



         B.   The amount paid, advanced or loaned for the article;



         C.   A detailed, complete and accurate description of
the article, including identifying marks;



         D.   The article's serial number and model number, if
any;



         E.   The name of the person from whom the article is
purchased or received, his or her residential address and telephone number,
date of birth, driver's license or non-operator's identification number,
height and general description as evidenced by a photograph and confirmed by
a picture identification;



         F.   The date, time and place of the transaction;



         G.   The time and date when the article is to be
redeemed or bought back;



         H.   Any security interest or bill of sale taken, or
receipt or pawn ticket given;



         I.   When, and by whom, an article was bought back or
redeemed;



         J.   When, to whom and how an article was disposed of.



      2.   Every pawnbroker shall also record the date of
disposition of the article or any part or portion thereof.  The disposition
report shall be located in the same book and at the same place where the
receiving records for the article are located.



      3.   Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to
make the required entries therein, or intentionally or knowingly makes any
false or unintelligible entry or any entry which the dealer has reason to
believe is untrue, or who fails to make the inquiries necessary to enable the
dealer to make such entries or any of them, or who fails to produce the
records when requested, or who destroys or negligently permits such records
to be destroyed or lost is in violation of this chapter.



      4.   Every pawnbroker shall submit to the Police Department,
by noon on Friday of each week, a record of each item received on pawn or
purchased outright.  Such record shall include all information required by
subsection 1.  A pawnbroker who fails to submit such record on each item
received is in violation of this chapter.



125.08    WEAPONS.



   If a pawnbroker receives as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol,
blackjack, shotgun, rifle or any kind of firearm whatsoever, the pawnbroker
shall submit to the Police Department, within forty-eight (48) hours, all
information pertaining to the transaction, including but not limited to the
owner, the owner's address, a description of the firearm and the firearm's
serial number (when applicable).  All such transactions shall be fully
compliant with all state and federal regulations governing the purchase, sale
or trade of such weapons.



125.09    INSPECTION OF REGISTER AND PROPERTY.



   The pawnbroker's register required by this chapter shall at all times
be open to inspection by a duly authorized officer of the City without
warrant.  The pawnbroker shall also, upon request, show to any duly
authorized officer any articles purchased, taken or received by the
pawnbroker or deposited with the pawnbroker and in the pawnbroker's
possession.



125.10    TICKET FOR PROPERTY RECEIVED.



   To each person selling, negotiating, depositing or leaving any property
with a pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall give a ticket upon which shall be
printed or written a copy of all entries required by this chapter to be made
in the pawnbroker's register with reference to the transactions with such
person.  No charge shall be made by the pawnbroker for such ticket.



125.11    HOLDING PERIOD.



   Any item received by a pawnbroker shall not be redeemed by customer,
sold, transferred, altered, removed from the premises or otherwise disposed
of for thirty (30) days after the date of purchase.  Failure to hold any
item for the required holding period is deemed a violation of this chapter.



125.12    POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   The Police are authorized to seize property, without warrant, or to
require the dealer to hold property which they have probable cause to believe
is stolen property.  A receipt will be given to the pawnbroker for all
property seized.



125.13    PROHIBITED ACTS.



      1.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall sell
or pawn any item with any pawnbroker, nor shall any pawnbroker receive any
items from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



      2.   No pawnbroker shall receive any goods unless the seller
presents two (2) forms of identification, at least one of which is a
government issued photo I.D.  Proper identification shall consist of, but
not be limited to, driver's license, passport, government issued picture
I.D., Medicare card, draft card and/or major credit card.  The pawnbroker
shall make a photo copy of each form of identification presented and retain
these with the record of the transaction(s).



      3.   No goods or merchandise shall be stored or continuously
displayed on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or public parking.



125.14    DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:



      1.   The proposed use is in conflict with the Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   The proposed use is in conflict with any health,
building, building maintenance or other provision of this Code of Ordinances
or State law.



      3.   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in securing
a license.



      5.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the
course of the applicant's business.



      6.   Conviction within the preceding five (5) years of any
felony or any other public offense relating to theft, or damage or trespass.



   The Chief of Police may, upon receipt of information alleging that
grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke the license of any applicant or
licensee under this chapter, and after consultation with the legal
department, report the circumstances to the Council, which in such cases may
cause a notice to be served on the applicant or licensee, which notice shall
state that a denial, suspension, or revocation hearing has been set before
the Council, the grounds for the proposed denial, suspension or revocation,
the date and time of the hearing and the place where the hearing will be
conducted.  Upon such hearing, if the Council determines that one or more of
such grounds do exist, it may deny an application or suspend or revoke an
existing license.  In the event such license is revoked, no license under
this chapter shall be issued to the licensee for a period of one (1) year.



125.15    MAXIMUM INTEREST RATES.



   Licensees under this chapter shall not charge a rate of interest in
excess of thirty percent (30%) for each thirty-day period.  No additional
charges or fees shall be assessed or collected.



(Ch. 125 - Ord. 1376 - Aug. 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 126
SPECIAL EVENTS



 



126.01  Purpose
 
126.09  Obstruction of Traffic Prohibited


126.02  Definitions
 
126.10  Amplified Sound, Music or Noise


126.03  Exemptions
 
126.11  Permit Expiration


126.04  Permits and Licenses Required
 
126.12  Exhibiting  Permit


126.05  Application  for Special Event Permit
 
126.13  Contractual Arrangements


126.06  Coordination of Application
 
126.14  Revocation or Suspension of Permit


126.07  Decision of City Council
 
126.15  Appeals


126.08  Insurance Requirement
 





126.01    PURPOSE.




   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that special events are
promoted and staged in a manner which preserves the safety of both our
citizens and visitors to our City; to ensure that all promoters of these
events are treated fairly and in accordance with their particular needs in
the promotion of the event; to promote the economic well-being of our
community through the orderly attraction of people to these events; and to
ensure City personnel adequate opportunity to prepare for and provide
services for the events so as to provide them the maximum opportunity for
success.



126.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter certain terms and words are hereby
defined.



   1.   “Special event” means an event sponsored by an individual,
organization, club, group, partnership or corporation in which the public is
invited to attend and which requires the use of public streets, public
property as a staging area for promotion of the event, or requires the use of
public resources to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public.



   2.   “Special event area” means a place designated by the
special event promoter as provided in this chapter where the general public
is invited to gather for an event and where the area of interest of the
promoter will be promoted and/or celebrated and where, in connection with the
special event, there may be displays, speeches, the performance of music or
the arts, games, and other similar celebrations, and the sale and/or
distribution of literature, antiques, crafts, curios, art or artifacts, food,
and other similar items, all under the sponsorship of a “special event
promoter” as defined in this section.  The area designated as a special
event area may include property which is privately owned, provided that the
inclusion of private property within the special event area shall not be
construed as requiring the owner of the private property to participate in or
otherwise allow the property to be used in the special event without his, her
or its consent, or as prohibiting the owner of the private property from
using the private property in a manner otherwise allowed by law.



   3.   “Special event merchant” means an individual, organization,
club, group,
partnershiporcorporationwhichengagesinthesaleofitemswithina“specialevent
area” asdefined inthis section through the permissionof the special event
promoter.



   4.   “Special  event  promoter”  means  an  individual, 
organization,  club,  group, partnership or corporation which organizes,
sponsors, promotes or makes space available for a special event or is
otherwise considered the organizer of the special event.



126.03    EXEMPTIONS.



   The following events are exempt from obtaining a Special Event Permit:



   1.   An event conducted entirely on the property of a church,
educational institution, college, or university campus;



   2.   An event conducted entirely on City-owned property subject to a
contract, lease, or agreement;



   3.   An event conducted entirely on property containing an occupied
private residence;



   4.   An event that requires a police escort only such as funerals,
convoys, and similar type events.



126.04    PERMITS AND LICENSES REQUIRED. 



   1.   No individual, organization, club, group, partnership or
corporation shall act as a special event promoter within the City without
first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter.



   2.   Special event promoters granted a permit hereunder and special
event merchants selling pursuant to that permit shall comply with all
applicable State food and health rules and regulations.



   3.   The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only in full
compliance with the Code of Iowa and Chapter 120 of the City of Denison Code
of Ordinances.



126.05    APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.



   1.   A special event promoter shall file with the City Clerk an
application for a special event permit at least 30 days prior to the event
requiring the Special Event Permit, except for a Special Event Permit when a
liquor license is required, then the time period shall be 45 days.



   2.   The application shall be on a form furnished by the City Clerk
and shall contain information concerning the requested dates and hours of the
event, a preliminary map or drawing showing the area to be designated as the
special event area, other information required by this chapter, and such
other information as may be reasonable in relation to the event for which the
permit is requested.



   3.   At the time of application for the special event permit, the
special event promoter shall make a request for any necessary street or
right-of-way closings.



   4.   The City may require the special event promoter to provide any
necessary security, crowd control, trash receptacles or other clean up
services, and portable toilet facilities to accommodate the reasonably
anticipated crowd and activities for the special event.



   5.   The special event promoter shall pay a permit fee in the amount
listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees located in the Appendix of
this Code of Ordinances.  The fee shall be paid upon issuance of the permit
and shall be nonrefundable.  The special event promoter may charge a special
event merchant a fee for participation in the special event.  This fee shall
be separate from the permitting requirements of the City. The permit fee may
be waived by an affirmative vote of the City Council if the special event is
designated as a City Sponsored Event by the City.



   6.   In addition, a special event promoter conducting a special
event in a public location or on public property shall pay a refundable
deposit in the amount listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees
located in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. The deposit shall be
returned upon verification by the City that the location assigned to the
special event is returned in a clean and undamaged condition and that all of
the special event property and materials used or generated as part of the
special event have been removed.



126.06    COORDINATION OF APPLICATION.



   1.   Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the
City Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Chief, the Fire Chief,
the Public Works Director, the Street Commissioner, the Utilities Director
and such other City personnel as may be appropriate for the coordination of
street closings, barricades, and City personnel and service requirements. 
If the Police Chief deems it necessary for the protection of the public good,
the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of the special event promoter
and the proposed special event.  The Chief shall submit findings and any
other comments to the City Council for its consideration in making a final
decision on the application.



   2.   Upon review of a special event promoter’s application, all
affected Department Directors shall attach their comments to the application
and return the application to the City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall submit
the Directors’ comments to the City Council for its consideration in making
a final decision on the application.



   3.   Any permit approved by the Council will also include all
comments from City Departments and will be provided to the applicant for
compliance.



126.07    DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL.



   1.   The City Council shall approve or deny the permit application
in its sole discretion based upon the facts and comments presented to it and
the overall effect the special event would have on the City and/or its
citizens.



   2.   If the City Council determines that any proposed special event
poses an unacceptable risk to public health, safety and welfare, it may deny
the issuance of a permit or may issue a permit conditioned upon compliance
with restrictions.



   3.   The requirement for a Special Event Permit fee may be waived by
resolution of the City Council under circumstances deemed to be in the best
interest of the City.



   4.   A permit granted under this section shall not be transferable.



126.08    INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.



   1.   The approval by the City Council of an application for a
special event permit shall be contingent upon the special event promoter
providing the City a certificate of liability insurance coverage naming the
City as an “additional insured” in a minimum amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00).  The policy must contain a non-waiver of
governmental immunity endorsement and provide for thirty (30) day advance
notice of cancellation.  Upon receipt of the certificate of insurance the
City Clerk shall issue the permit to the special event promoter.



   2.   Any employee, either on or off duty, utilizing City resources
to maintain the safety and well-being of the special event (as approved at
the time the special event is approved) shall be construed as operating in
the official capacity of the City and will follow all work rules and
regulations adopted by the City, State and Federal government.



126.09    OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   The special event for which a permit is issued shall be conducted
within the designated special event area.  The special event shall not be
conducted in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic outside of the designated special event area.



126.10    AMPLIFIED SOUND, MUSIC OR NOISE.



   Amplified sound, music, or noise is prohibited between the hours of
11:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Sound levels of outdoor entertainment shall be
reasonable under the circumstances, time and location, and shall be subject
to the control of the police department.



126.11    PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   A special event permit as issued shall set forth the time period for
which the permit is issued.  The time period for which the permit is
effective shall include a reasonable period for cleanup.  The permit shall
expire at the end of the time period specified in the permit.



126.12    EXHIBITING PERMIT.



   A special event promoter shall be required to provide a copy of its
permit to each special event merchant for exhibit by the special event
merchant during the term of the permit period.



126.13    CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS.



   The special event promoter shall be solely responsible for any
contractual arrangements between itself and any special event merchants
and/or private property owners operating or located within the designated
special event area.



126.14    REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to monitor all outdoor entertaining
events and take such action as may be necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare, including termination of such event.  A
permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Police Chief, without notice, for any of the following
causes:



   1.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or an incorrect statement contained
in the application for permit, or made in the course of promoting the special
event.



   2.   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any
other applicable chapter contained within this Code of Ordinances.



   3.   Promoting the special event in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.



126.15    APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Chief in revoking or
suspending a permit or by the action of the City Council in the denial of a
permit may appeal to the City Council.  Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the City Clerk, within fourteen (14) days after the notice of the action
complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for such
appeal.  The City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing on such
appeal and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the appellant at its
last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for
hearing.  The decision of the City Council regarding an appeal shall be
final.



(Ch. 126 - Ord. 1439 – Aug. 14 Supp.)



STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



 



135.01  Removal of Warning Devices
 
135.09  Maintenance of Parking or Terrace


135.02  Obstructing or Defacing
 
135.10  Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace


135.03  Placing Debris On
 
135.11  Storage and Display of Vehicles or Other Property


135.04  Playing In
 
135.12  Breaks in Curbs


135.05  Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
 
135.13  Dumping of Snow 


135.06  Washing Vehicles
 
135.14  Unsurfaced Driveway Approaches Prohibited


135.07  Burning Prohibited
 
135.15  Driveway Culverts


135.08  Excavations
 




 



135.01    REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 



135.02    OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street
or alley in any manner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



135.03    PLACING DEBRIS ON.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or
alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed
into the storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)



135.04    PLAYING IN.



   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.05    TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.



   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any
street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares
placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police
officer or member of the Fire Department.



135.06    WASHING VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or
alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment,
or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a
business.  This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or
her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or
alley.



135.07    BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.



135.08    EXCAVATIONS.



   No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street,
parking, or alley except in accordance with Chapter 141 of this Code of
Ordinances. 



135.09    MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to
maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall
not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned
property or right-of-way.  Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming
trees and shrubs and picking up litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])



135.10    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE.



   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required
under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e]) 



135.11    STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF VEHICLES OR OTHER PROPERTY.



   No person shall cause the part of any street between the curb line and
the property line to be used for the storage or display of vehicles or of any
property other than vehicles, unless a permit authorizing such use has been
issued.



      1.   The Chief of Police may issue a permit authorizing the
use of the area between the property line and curb line for such storage or
display if the Chief of Police finds that such use does not constitute a
nuisance and that such use is of a temporary nature and not of a permanent or
continuing nature.



      2.   The permit shall state the name of the person to whom it
is issued, the type of use which is authorized, the place where such use is
authorized and the dates when such use is authorized, and it shall be signed
by the Chief of Police.



      3.   No permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall cover
a period of more than two days unless it is approved by the Council.



135.12    BREAKS IN CURBS.



      1.   No more than one break shall be made in the curb of the
street abutting on any lot. 



      2.   No break exceeding 35 feet in width shall be made in the
curb of any street abutting on a lot used for commercial or industrial
purposes. 



      3.   No break exceeding 28 feet in width shall be made in the
curb of any street abutting on a lot used for other than commercial or
industrial purposes.



      4.   No break in the curb of any street shall be made within
20 feet of the property line of any intersecting street.



      5.   No break in the curb of any street shall be made if such
break in the curb will cause a nuisance or interfere with the drainage of
surface water.



      6.   The Council shall by resolution adopt detailed
regulations governing the construction of breaks in curbs and the
construction of driveway approaches and parking areas on the part of the
street lying between the curb line and the property line.



135.13    DUMPING OF SNOW.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks,
or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct
gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to
create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move
the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent.  Arrangements for the
prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.14    UNSURFACED DRIVEWAY APPROACHES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause any part of a street between the curb line and
property line to be used as a driveway approach unless it is paved with
Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete.



135.15    DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.



   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert
deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property; and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained
from the City.  In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such
repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the
right to make the repairs.  If the property owner fails to reimburse the
City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County
Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.



CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



 



136.01  Purpose
 
136.11  Interference with Sidewalk Improvements


136.02  Definitions
 
136.12  Encroaching Steps


136.03  Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
 
136.13  Openings and Enclosures


136.04  Responsibility for Maintenance
 
136.14  Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks


136.05  City May Order Repairs
 
136.15  Defacing


136.06  Sidewalk Construction Ordered
 
136.16  Debris on Sidewalks


136.07  Permit Required
 
136.17  Obstructing Sidewalks


136.08  Sidewalk Standards
 
136.18  Merchandise Display


136.09  Barricades and Warning Lights
 
136.19  Sales Stands


136.10  Failure to Repair or Barricade
 




 



136.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.



136.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



      1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made
by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 



      2.   “Defective sidewalk” means a sidewalk which:  (i)
has any part missing to the full depth of the sidewalk; (ii) is not safe for
use by pedestrians because of holes, depressions, excessive vertical
separations, excessive horizontal separations or improper grade, or (iii)
collects water or mud because of inadequate drainage.



      3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by
the City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed. 
 



      4.   “One-course construction” means that the full
thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture
throughout.



      5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to
property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for
purposes of notification required herein.  For all other purposes,
“owner” includes the lessee, if any. 



      6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except
bituminous cement. 



      7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in
business, residential or suburban areas.



      8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction,
reconstruction, repair, replacement, or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or
the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way
in connection therewith. 



      9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is
made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.



136.03    REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.



   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove
snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks.  If a property owner
does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within a reasonable time, the
City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection
in the same manner as a property tax.  The snow removal fees required by
this chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council and are listed in
the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])



136.04    RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair,
replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed,
all broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines or traveled portion of the public street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c]) 



136.05    CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.



   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required,
the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the
owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time
and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the
Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])



136.06    SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)



136.07    PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such
person has obtained a permit from the Building Inspector and has agreed in
writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with
all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work.  A written
application for such permit shall be filed with the City and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount set by resolution of the Council.



136.08    SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



   Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:



      1.   Cement.  Portland cement shall be the only cement used
in the construction and repair of sidewalks. 



      2.   Construction.  Sidewalks shall be of one-course
construction. 



      3.   Sidewalk Base.  Concrete may be placed directly on
compact and well-drained soil.  Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch
sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid.  The
adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City. 



      4.   Sidewalk Bed.  The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that
the constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.



      5.   Length, Width and Depth.  Length, width and depth
requirements are as follows:




         A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4)
feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than
four (4) feet in length.



         B.   All sidewalks throughout the Business District
shall be constructed from lot line to the curb line unless the location of
the sidewalk is varied by an appropriate resolution of the Council upon
application by the landowner.



         C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6)
inches in thickness.



      6.   Location.  Residential sidewalks shall be located with
the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the
property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to
special circumstances.



      7.   Grade.  Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline
of the street which shall be the established grade.



      8.   Elevations.  The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at
an elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½)
inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.   



      9.   Slope.  All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch
per foot toward the curb.



      10.   Finish.  All sidewalks shall be finished with a
“broom” or “wood float” finish. 



      11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with
Disabilities.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)




         A.   If a street, road, or highway in this state is
newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed
or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or highway with a
sidewalk or path.  If a sidewalk or path in this state is newly built or
altered, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each
intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road. 



         B.   Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required
pursuant to this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance
with applicable federal requirements adopted in accordance with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act, including but not limited to the guidelines
issued by the federal architectural and transportation barriers compliance
board.



(Ord. 1387 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



136.09    BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or
when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may
be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous
places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material
deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or
flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect
sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. 
The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in
this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or
property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties,
or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by
this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.



136.10    FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.



   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or
the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the
event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to
install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.



136.11    INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any
portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being
improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto,
or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach
thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or
destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.



136.12    ENCROACHING STEPS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to
any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution
of the Council.



136.13    OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.



   It is unlawful for a person to:



      1.   Stairs and Railings.  Construct or build a stairway or
passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk,
or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council. 



      2.   Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover
to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards
to protect the public. 



      3.   Protect Openings.  Neglect to properly protect or
barricade all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.



136.14    FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk
or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.



136.15    DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)   



136.16    DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any
glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2]) 



136.17    OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall willfully obstruct the free passage of or injure or
deface sidewalks by digging or breaking or placing objects on such sidewalks
without permission from the Mayor.



136.18    MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.



   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any
goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere
with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no
case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be
occupied for such purposes, and only with a permit issued by the Mayor, which
permit shall allow such use on a temporary basis only. 



136.19    SALES STANDS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or
stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on
any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.



CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



 

137.01  Power to Vacate
 
137.04  Findings Required


137.02  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
137.05  Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys


137.03  Notice of Vacation Hearing
 
137.06  Disposal by Gift Limited



 



137.01    POWER TO VACATE.



   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest
of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds,
the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])



137.02    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by
the Council.  The Commission shall submit a written report including
recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the
proposed vacation is referred to the Commission. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



137.03    NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.



   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of
the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.



137.04    FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be
vacated unless the Council finds that:



      1.   Public Use.  The street, alley, portion thereof, or any
public ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public,
and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 



      2.   Abutting Property.  The proposed vacation will not deny
owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.



137.05    DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.



   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of
the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public
ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section
364.7, Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)



137.06    DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.



   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a
governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.



(Ord. 1367 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.


Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted


380
 
10/3/27
 
602
 
11/4/63
 
826
 
1/9/78


381
 
12/5/27
 
604
 
3/9/64
 
830
 
5/8/78


384
 
6/26/28
 
608
 
4/6/64
 
835
 
7/10/78


391
 
7/28/30
 
613
 
5/12/64
 
839
 
9/11/78


392
 
7/28/30
 
614
 
7/6/64
 
843
 
1/8/79


393
 
7/28/30
 
615
 
7/6/64
 
863
 
12/10/79


399
 
4/5/32
 
616
 
7/6/64
 
869
 
4/14/80


401
 
4/3/33
 
617
 
7/6/64
 
878
 
11/10/80


415
 
8/12/35
 
618
 
7/6/64
 
881
 
1/12/81


420
 
7/6/36
 
626
 
4/12/65
 
894
 
6/25/82


423
 
11/12/37
 
631
 
11/1/65
 
921
 
10/9/84


426
 
4/1/38
 
640
 
2/7/66
 
939
 
7/14/86


429
 
8/7/39
 
647
 
8/1/66
 
966
 
5/10/88


440
 
11/12/42
 
652
 
9/6/66
 
986
 
4/25/89


447
 
5/16/45
 
658
 
2/6/67
 
995
 
11/14/89


462
 
4/7/47
 
659
 
2/6/67
 
1006
 
8/14/90


464
 
9/2/47
 
664
 
8/7/67
 
1038
 
6/9/92


467
 
12/17/47
 
665
 
8/7/67
 
1041
 
8/11/92


468
 
2/16/48
 
666
 
8/7/67
 
1077
 
7/12/94


473
 
5/2/49
 
667
 
9/5/67
 
1093
 
9/12/95


476
 
7/5/49
 
676
 
1/17/68
 
1113
 
11/4/96


487
 
7/19/51
 
684
 
10/7/68
 
1116
 
2/3/97


489
 
9/4/51
 
696
 
7/7/68
 
1118
 
3/3/97


512
 
7/5/55
 
713
 
4/13/70
 
1120
 
6/2/97


525
 
 
714
 
4/13/70
 
1122
 
6/2/97


527
 
 
715
 
4/13/70
 
1137
 
4/6/98


530
 
7/1/57
 
716
 
4/13/70
 
1144
 
10/5/98


542
 
5/7/58
 
722
 
9/24/70
 
1151
 
12/7/98


539
 
3/17/58
 
725
 
10/12/70
 
1157
 
2/1/99


543
 
8/13/58
 
726
 
12/14/70
 
1159
 
2/2/99


546
 
10/16/58
 
733
 
7/12/71
 
1180
 
7/10/00


547
 
12/1/58
 
746
 
7/10/72
 
1187
 
9/11/00


549
 
1/5/59
 
752
 
4/10/73
 
1206
 
12/3/01


550
 
1/5/59
 
753
 
5/29/73
 
1214
 
8/5/02


553
 
6/1/59
 
755
 
7/2/73
 
1240
 
10/21/03


555
 
10/5/59
 
765
 
4/29/74
 
1247
 
2/2/04


556
 
10/5/59
 
766
 
4/29/74
 
1265
 
5/2/05


560
 
3/23/60
 
792
 
1/12/76
 
1282
 
3/6/06


563
 
6/14/60
 
805
 
11/8/76
 
1288
 
7/5/06


579
 
6/5/61
 
807
 
11/8/76
 
1321
 
11/19/07


580
 
7/5/61
 
811
 
5/9/77
 
1327
 
2/4/08


584
 
9/5/61
 
817
 
6/27/77
 
1337
 
7/21/08


593
 
5/7/62
 
819
 
8/8/77
 
1347
 
11/17/08


596
 
11/5/62
 
823
 
11/14/77
 
1349
 
12/15/08




 



 

Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted



 

1353
 
3/16/09
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1361
 
8/3/09
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1369
 
10/19/09
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1384
 
8/17/10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1409
 
7/19/11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1435
 
12/17/13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1453
 
7/7/15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 



CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES



 

138.01  Established Grades
 
138.02  Record Maintained



 



138.01    ESTABLISHED GRADES.



   The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been
heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and
established as official grades.



138.02    RECORD MAINTAINED.



   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.


Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted


363
 
5/16/27
 
1175
 
1/10/00
 
 
 
 


522
 
11/9/56
 
1181
 
8/7/00
 
 
 
 


548
 
 
 
1182
 
8/7/00
 
 
 
 


581
 
 
 
1205
 
11/12/01
 
 
 
 


597
 
 
 
1235
 
7/15/03
 
 
 
 


600
 
 
 
1236
 
7/25/03
 
 
 
 


605
 
 
 
1248
 
3/2/04
 
 
 
 


612
 
 
 
1385
 
9/7/10
 
 
 
 


660
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


661
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


662
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


719
 
6/8/70
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


735
 
8/23/71
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


898
 
10/11/82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


899
 
10/11/82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


925
 
4/8/85
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


940
 
7/14/86
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


950
 
4/13/87
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


987
 
5/2/89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1002
 
5/8/90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1011
 
11/13/90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1024
 
7/1/91
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1082
 
10/11/94
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1088
 
7/11/95
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1089
 
7/11/95
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1109
 
6/3/96
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1125
 
7/21/97
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1132
 
11/3/97
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1147
 
10/5/98
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS



 

139.01  Naming New Streets
 
addressStreet139.04  Official Street Name Map


139.02  Changing Name of Street
 
139.05  Revision of Street Name Map


139.03  Recording Street Names
 



 



139.01    NAMING NEW STREETS.



   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:



      1.   Extension of Existing Street.  Streets added to the City
that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of
the existing street.



      2.   Ordinance.  All street names, except streets named as a
part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by ordinance. 



      3.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  Proposed street names
shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.



139.02    CHANGING NAME OF STREET.



   The Council may, by ordinance, change the name of a street.



139.03    RECORDING STREET NAMES.



   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the
Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and
County Assessor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)



139.04    OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.



   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name
Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.  The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature
of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: 
“This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to
in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Denison, Iowa.”



139.05    REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.



   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made
in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name
Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council with an
entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows:  “On (date), by official
action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official
Street Name Map:  (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the
Mayor and attested by the Clerk.  No amendment to this chapter which
involves naming or changing the name of a street shall become effective until
after such change and entry has been made on said map.



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted naming streets and remain in full force and effect.


Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted
 
Ordinance No.
 
Adopted


424
 
3/7/38
 
 
 
 


571
 
11/7/60
 
 
 
 


876
 
10/13/80
 
 
 
 


941
 
9/8/86
 
 
 
 


961
 
11/9/87
 
 
 
 


972
 
8/9/87
 
 
 
 


1032
 
12/10/91
 
 
 
 


1110
 
7/8/96
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



 

140.01  Exercise of Police Power
 
140.05  Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility


140.02  Definition
 
140.06  Permitted Access Points


140.03  Right of Access Limited
 
140.07  Prohibited Parking


140.04  Access Controls Imposed
 



 



140.01    EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.



   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the
City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1) 



140.02    DEFINITION.



   The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only
a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for
any other reason.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2) 



140.03    RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.



   No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands
onto or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated
points at which access is permitted.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4) 



140.04    ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.



   There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities
within the City, described as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3) 



      1.   Project No. NRM-412.  On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. NRM-412, Primary Roads No. U.S. 59 and
Iowa 4 and 141.  Points of access, as now designated by the Iowa Department
of Transportation Highway Commission and communicated to the City, in
segments of highway herein established as controlled access facilities are as
follows:



 

STATION
 
SIDE OF STREET
 
WIDTH
 
USE OF DRIVE OR ENTRANCE


2+42
 
East
 
13 feet
 
Field Entrance


10+95
 
West
 
20 feet
 
Field Entrance


18+09
 
West
 
16 feet
 
Field Entrance


28+18
 
East
 
22 feet
 
Field Entrance



 



Part of the area from Station 10+10 to Station 10+60, east side, serving as
an entrance to County Fair Grounds.



   Part of the area from Station 10+96 to Station 11+33, east side,
serving as an entrance to County Fair Grounds.



   Part of the area from Station 17+92 to Station 18+19, east side,
serving as an entrance to County Fair Grounds.



   Part of the area from Station 26+65 to Station 27, east side, serving
as an entrance to County Fair Grounds.



   Part of the area from Station 27+78 to Station 28+50, west side,
serving as a farm drive.



   Part of the area from Station 21+71, west side, serving as a farm drive.



      2.   Projects No. FN-232, F-1053 and F-232(5).  On the
Primary Road System extension improvement, Projects No. FN-232, F-1053 and
F-232(5), comprising portions of U.S. Highway 30, within the City.



      3.   Project No. F-232.  On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Project No. FN-232, comprising portions of U.S. Highway 30 and
U.S. Highway No. 59, from Station 557+96.0 to Station 567.00.0, inclusive,
and from Station 876+97.7 to Station 887+40.0, and from Station 1881+67.0 to
Station 1884+00.0.



      4.   Project No. F-232 (8).  On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. FN-232(8), U.S. Highway No. 30 from
Station 834+61.8 to Station 1615+00.00.



      5.   Project No. F-412(6).  On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. F-412(6), Iowa State Highway No. 4 from
Station 1594+74.0 to Station 1615+00.0, inclusive.



      6.   Project No. F-FG-1059(1).  On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. F-FG-1059(1), U.S. Highway No. 59 from
Station 552+74.0 to Station 557+96.0, inclusive.



      7.   Project No. F-FG-1059(2).  On the Primary Road System
extension improvement, Project No. F-FG-1059(2), U.S. Highway No. 59 from
Station 567+00 to Station 605+05, inclusive.



140.05    UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)



      1.   Crossing Dividing Line.  Drive a vehicle over, upon, or
across any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing
line on such controlled access facilities.



      2.   Turns.  Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn
except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb
section, separation, or line.



      3.   Use of Lanes.  Drive any vehicle except in the proper
lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right
of the central dividing curb, separation, section, or line.



      4.   Enter Facility.  Drive any vehicle into the controlled
access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided
for that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line
which separates such service road from the controlled access facility
property. 



      5.   Park.  Stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon
such controlled access facilities except when such stop results from
mechanical failure or accident, or in response to the command of a mechanical
signal or an officer or firefighter, or to park within 35 feet from the back
sidewalk line of said facilities on intersecting street approaches to such
controlled access facilities.



140.06    PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.



   The following are hereby designated as access stations permitted along
segments of U.S. Highway 30:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)



 

Station
 
Side
 
Width
 
Description




886+34
 
north
 
34 feet
 
Drive entrance


886+45
 
south
 
31 feet
 
Drive entrance


887+75
 
south
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 9th


887+75
 
north
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 9th


880+80
 
north
 
13 feet
 
Curb Drop


889+30
 
north
 
16 feet
 
Curb Drop


889+94
 
south
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


890+23
 
north
 
29 feet
 
Curb Drop


890+45
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


891+61
 
north
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


891+72
 
south
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 10th


892+11
 
north
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


893+09
 
north
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


894+06
 
south
 
43 feet
 
Curb Drop


895+65
 
south
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 11th


895+65
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 11th


896+36
 
north
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


897+29
 
north
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


898+06
 
south
 
37 feet
 
Curb Drop


898+64
 
south
 
34 feet
 
Curb Drop


899+73
 
south
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 12th


899+73
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 12th


900+74
 
north
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


900+74
 
south
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


901+46
 
south
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


902+60
 
north
 
34 feet
 
Curb Drop


902+61
 
south
 
39 feet
 
Curb Drop


903+12
 
north
 
30 feet
 
Curb Drop


903+16
 
south
 
39 feet
 
Curb Drop


903+98
 
south
 
30 feet
 
City Street – ––South Main–


903+98
 
north
 
43 feet
 
City Street – ––South Main–


905+43
 
south
 
45 feet
 
Curb Drop


905+46
 
north
 
36 feet
 
Curb Drop


906+10
 
north
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


906+55
 
north
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


906+89
 
south
 
25 feet
 
Curb Drop


908+01
 
south
 
37 feet
 
City Street – South 14th


908+01
 
north
 
36 feet
 
City Street – South 14th


909+12
 
south
 
34 feet
 
Curb Drop


909+72
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


910+07
 
south
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


910+42
 
north
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


910+64
 
south
 
16 feet
 
Curb Drop


911+17
 
north
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


911+95
 
north
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


912+51
 
north
 
23 feet
 


913+29
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 15th


913+29
 
south
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 15th


914+11
 
south
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


916+10
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


916+72
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


916+76
 
north
 
17 feet
 
Curb Drop


917+86
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop




 



 

Station
 
Side
 
Width
 
Description




918+56
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


918+57
 
north
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


920+19
 
south
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 16th


920+19
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 16th


921+55
 
north
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


921+55
 
south
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


921+92
 
south
 
16 feet
 
Curb Drop


922+26
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


923+41
 
south
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 17th


923+41
 
north
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 17th


924+14
 
north
 
34 feet
 
Curb Drop


925+02
 
north
 
44 feet
 
Curb Drop


925+17
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


925+97
 
north
 
36 feet
 
Curb Drop


926+23
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


926+94
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


927+40
 
south
 
30 feet
 
Curb Drop


927+42
 
north
 
32 feet
 
City Street – South 18th


928+93
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


929+34
 
north
 
21 feet
 
Curb Drop


929+94
 
south
 
35 feet
 
Curb Drop


929+98
 
north
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


930+45
 
north
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


931+24
 
south
 
30 feet
 
City Street – South 19th


931+25
 
north
 
25 feet
 
City Street – South 19th


932+61
 
north
 
21 feet
 
Curb Drop


932+61
 
south
 
16 feet
 
Curb Drop


933+16
 
south
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


933+37
 
north
 
36 feet
 
Curb Drop


934+09
 
south
 
18 feet
 
Curb Drop


934+46
 
north
 
28 feet
 
City Street – South 20th


938+95
 
south
 
12 feet
 
Entrance Drive


945+18
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street–Morningside Dr––


945+20
 
south
 
14 feet
 
Entrance Drive


947+72
 
south
 
36 feet
 
Entrance Drive


948+38
 
south
 
34 feet
 
Entrance Drive


948+38
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 24th


952+50
 
north
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 25th


952+55
 
south
 
26 feet
 
Entrance Drive


954+75
 
north
 
12 feet
 
Alley


955+28
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Entrance


956+91
 
south
 
26 feet
 
City Street – South 26th


956+91
 
south
 
17 feet
 
Entrance


957+88
 
north
 
26 feet
 
Curb Drop


958+88
 
south
 
24 feet
 
Curb Drop


959+43
 
south
 
23 feet
 
Curb Drop


960+46
 
south
 
24 feet
 
City Street – South 27th


961+100
 
north
 
22 feet
 
Entrance Drive




 

Part of the area from Station 940+20 to Station 941+89 on the south side
serving as an entrance








140.07    PROHIBITED PARKING.



   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle along the
following designated areas:



      1.   Project No. F-232 on Highway U.S. No. 30 and U.S. No. 59
from Station 557+96.0 to Station 557+00.00 and from Station 876+97.7 to
Station 887+40.0 and from Station 1881+67.0 to Station 1884+00.00, inclusive;



      2.   Project No. F-232(8) on U.S. Highway No. 30 from Station
834+61.8 to Station 851+00.6;



      3.   Project No. 412(6) on State Highway No. 4 from Station
1594+740 to Station 1516+00.0 and on present U.S. Highway No. 59 from Station
1890+50 to Station 1894+50;



      4.   Project No. F-FG-1059(1) on U.S. Highway No. 59 from
Station 522+56.8 to Station 557+96.0;



      5.   Project No. F-FG-1059(2) on U.S. Highway No. 59 from
Station 567+00.0 to Station 605+05, and for a distance of 35 feet back of the
right-of-way line of intersection street approaches in said designated areas.



CHAPTER 141
RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY



 



141.01  Statement of Purpose and Intent
 
141.21  Interference With Use of Right-of-Way


141.02  Definitions
 
141.22  Permits Required


141.03  Administration
 
141.23  Permit Application


141.04  Persons Subject to Registration, Permit and
 
141.24  Liability Insurance


License Requirements
 
141.25  Permit Fees; Management Fees


141.05  Registration
 
141.26  Issuance of Permits


141.06  Unregistered Users and Occupants of the Right-of-
 
141.27  Refusal to Issue Permit


Way
 
141.28  Records


141.07  Mapping Data Required of Registrants
 
141.29  Right-of-Way Restoration


141.08  Location of Equipment
 
141.30  Qualification to Perform Restoration Work


141.09  Relocation or Removal of Equipment
 
141.31  Disqualification of Person Previously Qualified to


141.10  Pre-excavation Equipment Location
 
Perform Restoration Work


141.11  Damage to Other Equipment
 
141.32  Inspection


141.12  Right-of-Way Vacation
 
141.33  Work Done Without Permit


141.13  Indemnification and Liability
 
141.34  Supplementary Notification by Permittee


141.14  No Special Duty Created
 
141.35  Revocation


141.15  Abandoned and Unused Equipment
 
141.36  City’s Remedies Not Exclusive


141.16  Sale, Assignment or Change in Use of Registrant’s
 
141.37  Duty to Defend, Indemnify and Hold Harmless


Equipment or Business
 
141.38  Sewer and Water Connections


141.17  Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers
 
141.39  Boring


141.18  Severability and Effect of Declaration of Invalidity
 
141.40  Traffic Control Devices, Lighting and Plating


141.19  Existing Franchises
 
141.41  Administrative Penalties


141.20  Construction of Chapter
 
141.42  Appeals




 



141.01    STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The City Council makes the following findings and adopts the following
statement of purposes:



      1.   The City’s street and alley rights-of-way are owned or
held by the City primarily for the purpose of pedestrian and vehicular
passage and for the City’s provision of essential public safety services,
including police, fire, and emergency medical response services; and public
health services, including sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage services.



      2.   Pedestrian and vehicular passage and the public safety
and public health services mentioned in subsection 1 of this section should
in all cases be considered and treated as the dominant and preeminent uses of
public rights-of-way.



      3.   All other uses of public rights-of-way, including use for
the provision of utility services, private communication services, and
private utility services, must in all cases be subordinate to the use of the
rights-of-way for pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the provision of
the public safety and public health services mentioned in subsection 1 of
this section.



      4.   In order to provide for the health, safety, and
well-being of its citizens, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of
its streets and the use of the rights-of-way, the City strives to keep its
rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances.  Although the general population bears the financial burden
for the upkeep of the rights-of-way, a primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is their frequent excavation by
persons whose equipment is located therein.



      5.   Right-of-way obstructions disrupt the flow of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic and are a source of frustration for merchants,
business owners, and the general population who either incur travel delays
due to such obstructions or who must change travel plans to avoid such
obstructions.  Persons whose equipment is located within the right-of-way
are a primary cause of these frequent obstructions.



      6.   The City recognizes that it holds the rights-of-way
within its geographical boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens. 
The City and other public entities have invested millions of dollars in
public funds to acquire, build, and maintain the right-of-way.  It also
recognizes that some persons, by placing their equipment in the right-of-way
and charging the citizens of the City for goods and services delivered
thereby, are using for private gain this property held by the City for the
public good.  Although such services are often necessary or convenient for
the citizens, such persons receive revenue and/or profit through their use of
public property.



      7.   The City Council finds that it is in the public interest
to provide for the payment of right-of-way permit fees by all persons using
and occupying the right-of-way for the purpose of operating their
businesses.  This provides equity by requiring all non-City users of the
right-of-way to pay compensation to the City so that it may recoup the costs
imposed on the City attributable to such use.



141.02    DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      1.   “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to
excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.



      2.   “Building Inspector” means the City Building
Inspector.



      3.   “City cost” or “City cost component” means the
direct and indirect costs borne by the City for administration of public
rights-of-way, including (but not limited to) cost recovery, recovery of
revenue lost due to street occupancy, infrastructure oversight, budget
analysis, recordkeeping, legal assistance, systems analysis, application
processing and checking, issuing permits, inspecting job sites, creating and
updating mapping systems, and other costs the City may incur in managing and
in performing all of the tasks required by this chapter.



      4.   “Communications system” means any telephone or
telegraph system or any other system of cables, wires, fibers, or conduits
and any related equipment, facilities, manholes or overhead poles operated
and maintained for communications purposes, or operated for the purpose of
transmitting data.



      5.   “Customer” means any person who purchases any utility
services provided by a utility or any other person occupying or using the
right-of-way.



      6.   “Department” means the City Inspection Department.



      7.   “Department Inspector” means any person authorized by
the City Building Inspector to carry out inspections related to this chapter.



      8.   “Disruptive cost” or “disruptive cost component”
means the cost the City will incur in managing the vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic which will be disrupted by excavation and/or obstruction
activities in the right-of-way, and may also include compensation to the City
for loss of revenues, including (but not limited to) the loss of parking
revenues due to loss of access to parking spaces or facilities.



      9.   “Emergency” means a condition that poses a clear and
immediate danger to life or health or of a significant loss of property or
which prevents the performance of or threatens to cause a delay in the
performance of vital City operations or activities.



      10.   “Equipment” means any tangible thing located in any
right-of-way, including underground and in-ground irrigation facilities and
site plan approved tree wells, but excluding street trees required pursuant
to City subdivision regulations and other ornamental plantings.



      11.   “Excavate” means to dig into or in any way remove or
physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



      12.   “Excavation permit” means the permit which must be
obtained before a person may excavate a right-of-way.



      13.   “Excavation permit fee” means money paid to the City
by an applicant for an excavation permit to cover the costs as provided in
Section 141.25 of this chapter.



      14.   “Franchisee” means any person who has been granted a
franchise by the City for the use or occupancy of the right-of-way or who is
granted a franchise for the use or occupancy of the right-of-way.



      15.   “High-intensity corridor” means a corridor where the
Building Inspector has determined that no new utilities can be installed in
the right-of-way until such time as a public common corridor can be developed.



      16.   “In,” when used in conjunction with a right-of-way,
means over, above, in, within, on, or under a right-of-way.



      17.   “Lessee” means any person to whom the City has
granted a lease to use or occupy the right-of-way or to whom the City grants
a lease to use or occupy the right-of-way.



      18.   “Licensee” means any person to whom the City has
issued a license to use or occupy a right-of-way or to whom the City issues a
license to use or occupy a right-of-way.



      19.   “Local exchange area” means an area, as established
under regulations of the State, in which intra-area communications service is
provided by an incumbent local exchange carrier and/or a competitive local
exchange service provider or carrier, as such entities are defined and
regulated pursuant to State or Federal law and regulation.



      20.   “Local representative” means the person or designee
of such person authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



      21.   “Obstruct” means to impede the free and unrestricted
use of the right-of-way by others or to place any tangible object upon the
surface of a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or
any part of the right-of-way, or so as to effectively impede the free and
unrestricted use of the right-of-way by others.



      22.   “Obstruction permit” means the permit which must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way.



      23.   “Obstruction permit fee” means money paid to the
City by an applicant for an obstruction permit to cover the costs as provided
in Section 141.25 of this chapter.



      24.   “Outlay and expense” or “all outlay and expense”
means the full and actual costs and expenses incurred by the City, including
interest, benefits, and overhead where applicable, and including (but not
limited to) all contract or employee expense, all equipment usage or rental,
materials, testing, outside experts, attorneys’ fees (including overhead
expenses of the City’s staff attorneys), and all costs and expenses of
litigation as they are incurred by the City.



      25.   “Permit” or “right-of-way permit” means a permit
to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way issued by the City pursuant to this
chapter or a permit to excavate a right-of-way issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, as those provisions existed prior to April 24,
2009.



      26.   “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to
excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been issued by the City pursuant to
this chapter or any person to whom a permit to excavate a right-of-way has
been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, as those provisions
existed prior to April 24, 2009.



      27.   “Person” means any natural or corporate person,
business association, or other business entity, including (but not limited
to) a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public
or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the
foregoing, or any other legal entity.



      28.   “Probation” means the status of a person that has
not complied with the conditions of this chapter.



      29.   “Probationary period” means the one-year period
which commences on the date that a person has been notified in writing that
he or she has been put on probation.



      30.   “Registrant” means any person who has registered as
required under this chapter due to the fact that the person:



         A.   Has or seeks to have its equipment located in any
right-of-way; or



         B.   In any way occupies or uses or seeks to occupy or
use the right-of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way.



   For purposes of the regulatory provisions of this chapter, as set forth
in Section 141.05, “registrant” includes any person who uses or occupies
the right-of-way, regardless of whether the City has implemented the
registration provisions of this chapter, and regardless of whether such
person has registered with the City as required by this chapter.



      31.   “Restoration” means the process by which an
excavated or obstructed right-of-way is returned to its proper and required
condition pursuant to the City’s utility accommodation and street
restoration specifications.



      32.   “Restoration fee” means an amount of money paid to
the City by a permittee to cover the cost of restoration as provided and
required in Section 141.30 of this chapter.



      33.   “Right-of-way” means the surface of and space above
and below any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley,
court, sidewalk, parkway, tunnel, viaduct, or bridge which has been
officially dedicated for public travel and which has traditionally been used
for the provision of utility services to the public, in which the City has an
interest in law or in equity, whether held in fee or other estate or
interest, or as a trustee for the public; provided, however, skywalks,
sidewalks within public cemeteries, and sidewalks and trails within public
parks and on river levees shall not be considered right-of-way available for
private or commercial use under this chapter.



      34.   “Right-of-way permit fee” means either the
excavation permit fee or the obstruction permit fee or both, depending on the
content, required by this chapter.



      35.   “Right-of-way user” means any person who has
equipment located in any right-of-way, or who occupies or uses the
right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way, and includes registrants,
franchisees, licensees, lessees, and unregistered users as herein defined.



      36.   “Service” or “utility service” means and
includes:



         A.   The services provided by a corporation organized
for the purposes set forth in Code of Iowa § 476.1 et seq., or provided by a
public utility as therein defined; and



         B.   Those services for which cities have been granted
franchising authority pursuant to Code of Iowa § 364.2, including electric
light and power, heating, telegraph, cable television, district telegraph and
alarm, motorbus, trolley bus, street railway or other public transit,
waterworks, sanitary sewer, or gasworks services provided to customers within
the City.



      37.   “Supplementary application” means an application
made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in (or to
extend the duration of) a permit that has already been issued.



      38.   “System management costs” mean those costs which the
City incurs in planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining a
high-intensity corridor.



      39.   “System” or “utility system” means all equipment
which a person has that is located in public right-of-way and that is used to
provide a service either to the person or to others as part of the person’s
business.



      40.   “Transfer” means the sale, assignment, or
conveyance, in whole or in part, of a registrant’s, franchisee’s, or
licensee’s equipment in the right-of-way to another person; the sale,
assignment, or conveyance, in whole or in part, of a registrant’s,
franchisee’s, or licensee’s business, whether pursuant to sale, merger,
or reorganization, to another person; or the sale, assignment, or conveyance,
in whole or in part, of a franchisee’s franchise or a licensee’s license
to another person.



      41.   “Transferee” means the person to whom a
registrant’s, franchisee’s, or licensee’s equipment in the right-of-way
is sold, assigned, or conveyed, in whole or in part; to whom a
registrant’s, franchisee’s, or licensee’s business is sold, assigned,
or conveyed, in whole or in part; or to whom a franchisee’s franchise or a
licensee’s license is sold, assigned, or conveyed, in whole or in part.



      42.   “Unregistered right-of-way user” or “unregistered
user” means any person who has equipment located in any right-of-way, or
who occupies or uses the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way,
but who is not registered as required by Section 141.05 of this chapter.



      43.   “Unused equipment” means equipment located in the
right-of-way, which has remained unused for six months or more and for which
the registrant is unable to provide proof that it has either a plan to begin
using that equipment within the next 12 months or a potential purchaser or
user of that equipment for the same purpose.  Unused equipment shall not be
deemed to include equipment which is installed as backup equipment to be used
in the event of damage to or outage of equipment which is being used or which
is installed to provide capacity to meet future service needs.



      44.   “Utility accommodation and street restoration
specifications” means the utility accommodation and street restoration
specifications approved by the City Council.



141.03    ADMINISTRATION.



   The Building Inspector shall be the principal City official responsible
for the administration of the rights-of-way; of registration by users of the
rights-of-way; of right-of-way permits; of the franchising, licensing, and
leasing of the use of rights-of-way; and of all sections of this chapter and
City ordinances relating thereto.  The Building Inspector may delegate any
or all of his or her duties under this chapter.



141.04    PERSONS SUBJECT TO REGISTRATION, PERMIT, AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



      1.   Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use
the right-of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way or who has or
seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way shall register with the
City.  All such registrations shall be filed with the City on or before the
registration deadline established by the City Council by resolution, notice
of which deadline shall be published in advance thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation in Crawford County.  No person may, after the
registration deadline, construct, install, repair, remove, or relocate
equipment located in any right-of-way or perform any other work on or use any
equipment or any part thereof located in any right-of-way, without first
being registered with the City.  No person shall obstruct or excavate in any
street right-of-way without obtaining appropriate permits as required by this
chapter.



      2.   No person shall construct an irrigation system in any
right-of-way unless a permit for such has been obtained pursuant to this
chapter.



      3.   No person shall plant a street tree or any ornamental
plantings in the right-of-way unless a permit for such has been obtained
pursuant to this chapter.  Persons planting or maintaining street trees or
ornamental plantings in the right-of-way shall not be deemed to use or occupy
the right-of-way for purposes of this chapter and shall not be required to
register such use.



      4.   City utilities and enterprises which occupy and use
rights-of-way for the provision of municipal utility and enterprise services,
including sanitary sewer, water service, electric, gas, and communications
services are required to register as provided in this chapter.  City work
crews, City utility work crews, and City contractors performing work in the
right-of-way on behalf of the City directed at the construction, maintenance,
or repair of traffic control signs and signals, storm drainage sewers, street
and sidewalk surfaces, and other street appurtenances are exempt from the
permit requirements of this chapter.  Utility company work crews and
contractors performing work in the right-of-way directed at the construction,
maintenance, or repair of streetlights are exempt from the permit
requirements of this chapter.



      5.   Governmental entities or agencies of the Federal
government, the State, or the County which occupy and use rights-of-way for
the provision of communications or utility services for governmental purposes
shall be required to comply with the registration requirements of this
chapter, except the insurance and bonding requirements associated
therewith.  Such governmental entities and agencies shall be required to
obtain right-of-way permits and pay right-of-way permit fees to excavate in
or obstruct the right-of-way as provided in this chapter.



141.05    REGISTRATION.



      1.   For the purposes of this chapter, registration will
consist of completing a registration form and providing registration
information to and as required by the Building Inspector, and providing
evidence of insurance.



      2.   The information provided to the department at the time of
registration shall include but not be limited to the following:



         A.   Each registrant’s name, registration certificate
number, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers.



         B.   The name, address, and e-mail address, if
applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a representative.  The
representative shall be available at all times.  Current information
regarding how to contact the representative in an emergency shall be provided
at the time of registration.



         C.   If the registrant is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under Chapter 490 of the Code of Iowa, as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.



   The registrant shall keep all of the information listed in this
subsection current at all times by immediately providing to the City
information of proposed or approved changes therein.



      3.   Each registrant shall be required to provide a
certificate of insurance to the department at the time of registration and to
complete that part of the registration form pertaining to insurance and
liability.  The certificate of insurance shall:



         A.   Verify that an insurance policy has been issued to
the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State;



         B.   Verify that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the following:



            (1)   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and



            (2)   Construction, reconstruction, repair,
maintenance, replacement, monitoring, locating, and use of equipment in the
right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, including (but not limited to) protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground equipment, and
collapse of property.



         C.   Name the City as an additional insured as to whom
the coverages required in this subsection are in force and applicable and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages and include a non
waiver of governmental immunity clause;



         D.   Require that the City Manager be notified 30 days
in advance of cancellation of the policy; and



         E.   Indicate comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage and umbrella coverage.



   The amount of insurance to be required in each instance shall be
reasonably determined by the City Manager by reference to a schedule of
insurance coverages required for registered equipment, which shall be
developed and periodically updated and approved by the City Council by
resolution.



141.06    UNREGISTERED USERS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The regulatory provisions of this chapter shall apply to users and
occupants of the right-of-way who fail to register as herein provided and
required, and the Building Inspector shall enforce the regulatory provisions
of this chapter as to such unregistered users and occupants; provided, the
Building Inspector may, in his or her discretion, after the required date of
registration for any user or occupant of the right-of-way, refuse to issue
right-of-way permits to such unregistered user or occupant, and may refuse to
recognize the status of such person as a user or occupant of the right-of-way.



141.07    MAPPING DATA REQUIRED OF REGISTRANTS.



      1.   Each registrant shall provide to the department
information indicating the horizontal and vertical locations, relative to the
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which
it has control and which is located in any right-of-way.  The registrant may
satisfy this requirement by providing copies of maps showing equipment
locations which were developed and kept by the registrant in the ordinary
course of business as of April 24, 2009.  Providing GIS Arcview® data shall
be deemed to satisfy this requirement.



      2.   Within six months after the acquisition, installation, or
construction of additional equipment or any relocation, abandonment, or
disuse of existing equipment, each registrant shall supplement the mapping
information required in this section.



      3.   Mapping data provided to the City by registrants shall be
for the exclusive use of the City in administering the use and occupancy of
the public right-of-way within the City and shall not be provided to or
relied on by any person or the City for any other purpose.  Persons working
in the right-of-way shall be required to make use of the State One Call
notification system for utility location, and shall not be entitled to rely
on City mapping data for that purpose.  At the request of any registrant,
any information requested from the department with respect to the location or
type of equipment which that registrant maintains or plans to install in the
right-of-way, which qualifies as trade-secret information under Code of Iowa
§ 550.1 et seq., shall be treated as trade-secret information in accordance
with Code of Iowa § 22.1 et seq., pertaining to examination of public
records.



      4.   A registrant’s provision of mapping data to the City as
required in this section shall not relieve the registrant of its obligation
to provide utility accommodation information to the City upon request or
direction of the Building Inspector.  Utility accommodation information is
such information which is not required to be filed with the City, but may be
necessary from time to time for the City to carry out its duties, including
(but not limited to) information regarding the depth and location of a
registrant’s equipment in the right-of-way with respect to known monuments
or other utility equipment; information regarding the type of equipment in
place in the right-of-way, the general type of service it provides, and a
general description of the customers it serves; and information with respect
to the age and service life of equipment in place in the right-of-way.



141.08    LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.



      1.   Underground.  Within the underground district, all
cables, wires, fibers, pipes, and conduits in connection with any utility
system shall be placed underground, except where aboveground connection to
buildings or other locations aboveground is reasonably necessary.  Such
aboveground connection shall be by means of poles located, as far as
reasonably practicable, within alleys.



      2.   Aboveground.  Outside the underground district, cables,
wires, fibers, pipes and conduits in connection with any utility system may
be placed either underground or on poles aboveground, except when
undergrounding is required pursuant to the City’s subdivision or site plan
requirements as expressed in this Code of Ordinances.  No such poles shall
be installed or erected and no license or permit for such shall be issued
until the Building Inspector has approved the proposed location of such poles.



      3.   High-Intensity Corridors.  The Building Inspector shall
assign specific corridors within the right-of-way or any particular segment
thereof as may be necessary for each type of equipment that is within the
right-of-way pursuant to current technology, or which the Building Inspector
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  Registrants shall,
when installing or replacing equipment in the right-of-way, place and locate
such equipment in the appropriate corridor, either as provided in the
City’s utility accommodation and street restoration specifications or as
ordered by the Building Inspector.  Excavation and obstruction permits
issued by the department, involving the installation or replacement of
equipment in the right-of-way, may designate the proper corridor for the
equipment, and permittees shall be required to install or place such
equipment in the location therein specified.



      4.   Nuisance.  Any equipment found in a right-of-way which
has not been registered, or which is found:  (i) in a location other than
the location specified therefor in the City’s utility accommodation and
street restoration specifications; or (ii) in a location other than the
location specified therefor by the Building Inspector; or (iii) in a location
other than the location shown on the maps filed in the office of the Building
Inspector by the person owning or operating that equipment, shall be deemed
to be a nuisance, and the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including (but not limited to) bringing an action for
nuisance abatement in which the City may seek the abatement of the nuisance
or authority to take possession of the equipment.



      5.   Limitation of Space.  The Building Inspector shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional equipment
within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of
the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. 
In making such decisions, the Building Inspector shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way,
but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public’s need for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing equipment in the right-of-way, and future City plans
for public improvements and developmental projects which have been determined
to be in the public interest.



141.09    RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT.



      1.   The Building Inspector shall order the removal or
relocation of equipment, as he or she deems appropriate, if the Building
Inspector determines at any time that:



         A.   A registrant’s or permittee’s continued use of
the public right-of-way will unduly burden the City or the public in its use
of that property.



         B.   The public right-of-way which the registrant or
permittee is using or occupying will be required for municipal purposes.



         C.   The registrant’s or permittee’s equipment at a
particular location will interfere with:



            (1)   A present or future City use of the
right-of-way;



            (2)   A public improvement undertaken or to be
undertaken by the City other than construction by the City of a competing
cable or telecommunications utility;



            (3)   An economic development project in which the
City has an interest or investment other than construction by the City of a
competing cable or telecommunications utility; or



            (4)   The public’s safety or convenience in
using the right-of-way for ordinary travel.



         D.   The public health, safety, and welfare require it.



      2.   Registrants and permittees whose equipment is located in
the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established in
the City’s utility accommodation and street restoration specifications, or
at variance with the location specified therefor by the Building Inspector,
or aboveground in an area which the City Council has designated as part of
the underground district pursuant to amendment of the definition thereof,
shall, no later than at the time of next reconstruction or excavation by the
department of the area where its equipment is located (or sooner if ordered
by the City), move that equipment to its assigned location within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the City.



      3.   Registrants and permittees shall promptly and at their
own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently
remove their equipment or relocate their equipment within the right-of-way,
whenever the Building Inspector, pursuant to a determination made in
accordance with subsection 1 above, orders such removal or relocation, and
shall at their sole expense restore the right-of-way to its proper and
required condition pursuant to the City’s utility accommodation and street
restoration specifications.



      4.   If a City work crew or a City contractor encounters
equipment in the right-of-way (i) in a location other than the location
specified therefor in the City’s utility accommodation and street
restoration specifications, or (ii) in a location other than the location
specified therefor by the Building Inspector, or (iii) in a location other
than the location shown on the maps filed in the office of the Building
Inspector by the person owning or operating that equipment, and if such
improper location of equipment prevents the performance of City operations or
activities or prevents or delays the performance of work under contract, the
registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee, or lessee whose improperly
placed equipment occasioned such delay in performance or nonperformance shall
be required to reimburse the City for all outlay and expense thereby incurred
by the City.



      5.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
prevent the City Council from exercising the right of the City to change the
boundaries to increase or decrease the size of the underground district.



141.10    PRE-EXCAVATION EQUIPMENT LOCATION.



      1.   In addition to complying with the requirements of Code of
Iowa § 480.1 et seq., pertaining to One Call excavation notice system before
the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant, permittee,
franchisee, licensee, or lessee who has equipment located in the area to be
excavated shall be responsible to mark the horizontal and approximate
vertical placement of all such equipment.  All equipment installed
underground shall be constructed in such a manner that it is able to be
located.



      2.   Any registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee, or
lessee whose equipment is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt
surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an
effort to establish the exact location of its equipment and the best
procedure for excavation.



141.11    DAMAGE TO OTHER EQUIPMENT.



      1.   When any City department performs work in the
right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
registrant’s, permittee’s, franchisee’s, licensee’s, or lessee’s
equipment in order to protect it, the costs associated therewith will be
billed to that person and must be paid within 30 days from the date of
billing.  In such event, the Building Inspector or City department
performing such work shall notify the affected registrant, permittee,
franchisee, licensee, or lessee, informing such person of the action it
intends to take with respect to such equipment and affording such person the
opportunity to review and comment on the action proposed to be taken.  If
circumstances permit it, the Building Inspector or City department performing
the work may allow the affected registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee,
or lessee to take the action necessary to maintain, support, or move its
equipment.



      2.   Each registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee, or
lessee shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any equipment in the
right-of-way which it or its equipment damages.  Each registrant, permittee,
franchisee, licensee, or lessee shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the equipment of another registrant, permittee,
franchisee, licensee, or lessee occurring during the City’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s equipment.



141.12    RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the City vacates a right-of-way wherein a franchisee’s equipment
is located, the City may in its discretion reserve, to and for itself and all
franchisees having equipment in the vacated right-of-way, the right to
install, maintain, and operate any equipment in the vacated right-of-way and
to enter upon such right-of-way at any time for the purpose of
reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the equipment.  If the
vacation requires the relocation of the equipment of a registrant or a
permittee, costs of relocation are paid as follows:



      1.   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by that
registrant or permittee, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation
costs; or



      2.   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City or
by another governmental entity, the registrant or permittee must pay the
relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City or such other
governmental entity.



141.13    INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



      1.   The City does not, because of the acceptance of a
registration required by this chapter or the grant of a right-of-way permit,
assume any liability for:



         A.   Bodily or other injuries to any individual or
person, for damage to property, including loss of use thereof, or for loss of
service claims;



         B.   Claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants
or activities of registrants; or



         C.   Damage to the registrant’s or permittee’s
equipment, or for damage to the equipment of another registrant or permittee.



      2.   A registrant, by registering with the department, and a
permittee, by accepting a permit under this chapter, shall be required, and
shall be deemed to have agreed, to release the City from all claims and to
defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless from all outlay and expense and
from claims and suits for damages of any kind, arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its
equipment in the right-of-way or out of any activity undertaken by it in or
near a right-of-way, whether or not any act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a right-of-way permit.  Each
registrant or permittee shall further be required to agree and shall be
deemed to have agreed that it will not bring or cause to be brought any
action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages or seeking any other relief
against the City on any claim, nor shall it bring or cause to be brought any
action, suit or other proceeding for any award arising out of the presence,
installation, maintenance or operation of its equipment or any activity
undertaken by it in or near a right-of-way, whether or not the act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way
permit.  This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense
or immunity otherwise available to a registrant, to a permittee, or to the
City; and the registrant or permittee, in defending any action on behalf of
the City, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity
that the City could assert in its own behalf.



141.14    NO SPECIAL DUTY CREATED.



   This chapter is enacted to protect the general health, welfare, and
safety of the public at large; and no special duty is created as to any
registrant, permittee, franchisee, licensee, or lessee by the enactment of
this chapter or by acceptance of registration, by issuance of a permit or
license, or by grant of a franchise or lease.



141.15    ABANDONED AND UNUSED EQUIPMENT.



      1.   A registrant, franchisee, or licensee who has determined
to discontinue its operations in the City, in whole or in part, or who has
discontinued use of part or all of its equipment in the right-of-way, must
either:



         A.   Provide information satisfactory to the Building
Inspector that its obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under
this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant, franchisee, or
licensee; or



         B.   Submit to the Building Inspector a proposal and
instruments for transferring ownership of its equipment to the City.  If a
registrant, franchisee, or licensee proceeds under this subsection, the City
may, at its option:



            (1)   Assume ownership of and responsibility for
the equipment; or



            (2)   Refuse transfer of ownership to the City and
require the registrant to maintain the ability to locate the equipment in a
timely manner or require the registrant to provide GPS coordinates for the
end points of the abandoned lines using the local coordinate system as
established by the City Engineer.



      2.   A registrant, franchisee, or licensee who fails to comply
with subsection 1 of this section and whose equipment remains unused for a
period of two years shall be deemed to have abandoned such equipment. 
Equipment of a registrant, franchisee, or licensee which fails to comply with
subsection 1 of this section and which remains unused for two years shall be
deemed to be abandoned.  Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. 
The City may, with respect to abandoned equipment which is deemed a nuisance,
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not
limited to:



         A.   Bringing an action for nuisance abatement in which
the City may seek the abatement of the nuisance and/or authority to take
possession of the equipment; or



         B.   Requiring removal of the equipment by the
registrant, franchisee, or licensee.



   Any registrant, franchisee, or licensee who has unused equipment in any
right-of-way shall remove it from the right-of-way during the next scheduled
excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the Building Inspector.



      3.   A registrant, franchisee, or licensee who abandons or
ceases use of its equipment as provided in this section and whose proposal to
transfer such equipment to the City is accepted by the City shall,
nonetheless, be allowed to remove wires or cables from underground conduits
and to remove movable equipment from underground vaults or handholes if the
Building Inspector determines that such removal can be accomplished without
damaging such conduits or vaults, and provided such removal can be
accomplished without extensive excavation or long-term obstruction of the
right-of-way.  Such removal shall be accomplished pursuant to appropriate
right-of-way permits, which may include conditions regarding the manner of
removal and schedule for removal.



141.16    SALE, ASSIGNMENT OR CHANGE IN USE OF REGISTRANT’S EQUIPMENT OR
BUSINESS.



      1.   Except as provided in Code of Iowa § 477A.3(4), for
entities transferring a State-issued certificate of franchise authority or
when prohibited by law; under this chapter, a registrant shall not transfer
its equipment located in the right-of-way or its business to any other person
without giving the Building Inspector 60 days’ prior written notice of such
proposed transfer and without obtaining the prior consent of the City to such
transfer.  In such notice, the registrant shall clearly identify the
proposed transferee, giving the name and address of a representative of the
transferee who is authorized to discuss and provide information to the City
regarding the transfer.  As a condition of such consent, the proposed
transferee shall be required to register and to indicate its proposed use of
public right-of-way as provided in Section 141.04 of this chapter.  The City
may refuse consent to a proposed transfer if it determines that the proposed
transferee lacks the expertise, experience, financial resources or sufficient
personnel required to maintain the registered equipment and/or the
right-of-way associated therewith or if the proposed transferee’s right to
use or occupy the City right-of-way has previously been revoked, cancelled,
or terminated or if such right is then under suspension or if the proposed
transferee is then in default of any of its obligations under this chapter. 
The transferee of a registrant’s equipment or business or license shall not
be entitled to enter upon public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating
or maintaining the equipment registered under this chapter unless and until
it completes the formal transfer of such equipment or business, and obtains
the City’s consent to such transfer.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
transfer of a registrant’s business shall be deemed to have occurred for
purposes of this subsection when a registrant is a publicly held entity whose
stock is traded on recognized stock exchanges, and where transfer of
ownership of the business has effectively occurred due to stock sales or
trading in the open market.  However, if a merger, consolidation, transfer,
or disposal of substantially all of such a registrant’s assets occurs, the
City shall, upon written notice to the registrant, have the right, in its
sole discretion and without cause or further showing, to order the registrant
to cease its use and occupancy of the right-of-way.  Upon notice to the City
by such a registrant of such merger, consolidation, transfer, or disposal of
assets, the City shall have six months within which to order the registrant
to cease its use and occupancy of the right-of-way.



      2.   A registrant shall not change the use of its equipment in
a manner which would alter or impact the right-of-way or the equipment of
other registrants in the right-of-way without giving the City 90 days’
prior written notice of such proposed change in use and without obtaining the
prior written consent of the Building Inspector to such change in use.  In
such notice, the registrant shall clearly and completely set forth the
proposed change in use of equipment, how it would be accomplished, including
any excavations required to accomplish such change, and projections as to the
future maintenance implications of such change in use.  In such notice, the
registrant shall also provide the name and address of a representative of the
registrant who is authorized to discuss and provide information to the City
regarding such change in use of equipment.  The Building Inspector’s
consent to such change in use may be withheld if he or she determines that
the proposed use of the equipment at that location would be incompatible with
or would likely damage or endanger other uses of the right-of-way, would
involve a higher level of maintenance activities than the present use, would
involve more street excavation or greater traffic disruption than the present
use, or would be otherwise inappropriate.



141.17    RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



      1.   The City, by registering a person under Section 141.04 of
this chapter or by issuing a right-of-way permit under this chapter does not
surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers
and rights which it has or which may be vested in the City under the state
constitution, state law, and the City ordinance to regulate the use of the
right-of-way by such persons.  All such persons, by registration or by
acceptance of a right-of-way permit, franchise, license, or lease are deemed
and shall be held to agree that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory
power, or police power, or otherwise as are or may be from time to time
vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and
subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time.  All such persons
are further deemed to acknowledge that their rights are subject to the
regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and are deemed
to have agreed to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the City pursuant to such powers.



      2.   Any conflict between the provisions of a registration or
of a right-of-way permit, franchise, license, or lease and any other lawful
exercise of the City’s regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in
favor of the City’s exercise of its lawful powers.



141.18    SEVERABILITY AND EFFECT OF DECLARATION OF INVALIDITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.  If a regulatory
body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final,
non-appealable order that any registration or permit issued under this
chapter or any portions thereof is illegal or unenforceable, any such
registration or permit granted or deemed to exist under this chapter shall be
considered as a revocable registration or permit, terminable by either party
without cause upon giving 60 days’ written notice to the other party.  The
requirements and conditions of such a revocable registration or permit shall
be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the registration or
permit, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the
permit and the right of termination.  If a registration or permit shall be
considered revocable as provided in this chapter, the registrant or permittee
must acknowledge the authority of the City Council to issue such revocable
registration or permit and the power to revoke it.



141.19    EXISTING FRANCHISES.



   If a conflict of language occurs between the provisions of this chapter
and a franchise existing on April 24, 2009, or between the provisions of this
chapter and a lease of vacated right-of-way existing on April 24, 2009, the
conflict shall be resolved by honoring the terms of the franchise or lease
until it expires.



141.20    CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an acquiescence in or
ratification of the occupancy or use of any public right-of-way in the City
by any person occupying the right-of-way without legal right, nor shall this
chapter be construed as conferring the right to occupy or use any public
right-of-way within the City upon any such person illegally or without
authority occupying the right-of-way.



141.21    INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   When working in public rights-of-way, permittees under this chapter
shall not unreasonably interfere with the safety, health, and convenience of
the public in the public’s use thereof for ordinary travel, nor shall they
interfere with public safety or public health services provided by the City
to its residents by means of the public rights-of-way.



141.22    PERMITS REQUIRED.



      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person
shall excavate or obstruct any right-of-way without first obtaining an
excavation permit, obstruction permit, tree well permit, or irrigation system
permit, as described in this subsection and issued pursuant to this chapter,
from the Building Inspector.



         A.   Excavation Permit.  An excavation permit is a
permit which allows the holder to excavate in a specified City right-of-way
and to hinder free and open passage over and use of the specific portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



         B.   Obstruction Permit.  An obstruction permit is a
permit which allows the holder to hinder free and open passage over and use
of the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing equipment described
therein on the right-of-way for the duration specified therein.



      2.   No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date specified in the permit unless such person:



         A.   Makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



         B.   A new permit or permit extension is issued.



      3.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person
shall occupy any portion of the right-of-way for the purpose of providing
ongoing utility services on other than a temporary basis as provided in an
obstruction permit or excavation permit, without first obtaining a franchise,
license, written permission or lease from the City, or a franchise from the
Iowa Utilities Board under Code of Iowa § 477A.3.



141.23    PERMIT APPLICATION.



      1.   Before any permit required by this chapter is issued, an
application shall be made to the Building Inspector.  A permit application
will be accepted only if all of the following conditions have been met and
the permit applicant has:



         A.   If required, registered with the Building Inspector
pursuant to Section 141.04 of this chapter.



         B.   Fulfilled all obligations related to prior permits,
including but not limited to the restoration of the right-of-way, and payment
to the City of all money due for the following:



            (1)   Prior obstruction or excavation permits;



            (2)   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
City as a result of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of
the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City in connection
therewith;



            (3)   Restoration of the right-of-way by the City
or the City’s contractor;



            (4)   System management fees; and



            (5)   Fines assessed to the applicant pursuant to
Section 141.41 of this chapter.



         C.   Submitted a completed permit application form,
which includes (i) all required attachments, and (ii) scaled drawings showing
the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all
existing and proposed equipment, and which states or identifies the following:



            (1)   The place, extent, and purpose of the
contemplated work including the identity of and location in the right-of-way
at which any excavation is to be made.



            (2)   The time when the work is to be commenced
and the time it is to be completed.



            (3)   For whom and in connection with what
abutting property, if any, the work is to be performed.



            (4)   To what street main, if any, the sewer,
water, or gas connection is to be made or to what electric or telephone line,
if any, the electric or telephone connection is to be made.



            (5)   The name of the person or contractor who
will do the work, the person who will be in charge thereof, and the public
registration number issued by the State Labor Commissioner pursuant to
Chapter 91C of the Code of Iowa for all contractors to be involved in the
work for which the permit is sought.



            (6)   If the equipment is to be attached to
equipment owned by another entity, the permit application shall be
accompanied by written permission to attach the equipment from that entity.



         D.   Provided as-built maps or GIS mapping data for all
equipment which it has placed in the right-of-way in the past.  Maps
complying with Section 141.07 of this chapter shall be deemed to satisfy this
requirement.



         E.   Corrected deficiencies, if any, in prior
restoration work performed by it.



      2.   Plans and specifications shall be filed with an
application for a permit to make an excavation involving the construction or
installation of equipment within the right-of-way.  Plans and specifications
shall be in sufficient detail to identify the exact type of equipment to be
constructed or installed in the right-of-way, and the horizontal and vertical
location of such equipment within the right-of-way, with respect to
right-of-way/property lines and established monuments, which location shall
be established on such plans according to available existing records. 
Detailed plans and specifications shall not be required for individual
excavations, such as individual water, sewer, gas, electric, or telephone
connections to a building.  Unless a regulation approved and issued by the
Building Inspector provides otherwise, a simple sketch on the application
form provided by the City, including the dimensions of the proposed
excavation in reference to permanent landmarks, shall be provided for
individual excavations.



      3.   If an applicant for an excavation permit is not qualified
to perform right-of-way restoration work as provided in Section 141.30 of
this chapter, the application shall contain a stipulation that the applicant
shall immediately notify the Building Inspector upon completion of the work
done in connection with the excavation as is required in this chapter and
that the applicant shall pay the costs the City incurs in the refilling,
replacement of pavement, and restoration and maintenance of the right-of-way
by the City work crews or contractor working on behalf of the City, which
costs shall be based upon the square footage of the improved street which is
disturbed by such excavation, the type or amount of materials required to
restore the street surface, and the future maintenance cost for the affected
right-of-way due to degradation associated with the excavation thereof.  The
restoration costs to be paid in each instance shall be determined by the
Building Inspector by reference to a restoration cost schedule, which shall
be developed and updated as needed prior to each construction season and
approved by the City Council by resolution.



      4.   Applications for excavation permits shall be accompanied
by an insurance certificate as required by Section 141.24 of this chapter and
by a performance and maintenance bond or other form or security as required
by Section 141.29 of this chapter, unless such certificate and bond have been
previously filed with the department and are still in effect.



      5.   Except as otherwise provided in Section 141.37 of this
chapter, all applications for a permit under this chapter shall contain a
stipulation that the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the City
from any and all costs, expenses or liability for damages or injuries to
persons or property or liability of any kind whatsoever arising from or
growing out of any excavation or trench or surface restoration for which the
permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.



      6.   Permits for the construction or installation of equipment
in the right-of-way, which is to be owned or operated by a franchised or
licensed utility, shall be issued in the name of the franchisee or
licensee.  Permits for the construction or installation of equipment in the
right-of-way, which is to be owned by the City waterworks, may be issued
either in the name of the waterworks or in the name of its contractor. 
Permits for the construction or installation of equipment in the
right-of-way, which is to be owned by a City utility or enterprise, may be
issued either in the name of the municipal utility or enterprise or in the
name of its contractor.  Permits for the construction or installation of
equipment in the right-of-way, which is to be owned or operated by an
abutting property owner, may in the Building Inspector’s discretion, be
issued either in the name of the abutting property owner or the abutting
property owner’s contractor.  Permits for construction in the right-of-way
of underground sewer, water, gas, electric, or telephone connections to an
abutting property shall be issued in the name of the abutting property
owner’s contractor.



141.24    LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Before any permit required by this chapter is issued, there shall be
placed on file in the office of the Building Inspector a certificate of
insurance evidencing the existence of insurance deemed adequate by the City
to cover the risk presented by the work being undertaken in the
right-of-way.  The amount and type of insurance to be required in each
instance shall be reasonably determined by the Building Inspector by
reference to a schedule of insurance coverage required for permitted
activities, which shall be developed and periodically updated and approved by
the City Council by resolution.  The insurance certificate maintained and
filed by a registrant pursuant to Section 141.05(3) of this chapter shall be
deemed to satisfy this requirement unless the permitted work would materially
change the City’s risk.  The insurance shall include the City as an
additional insured and shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State.  When the applicant is required by the terms of the
permit and this chapter to fill and restore the excavation or trench, the
insurance shall remain in effect until the maintenance period provided for in
this chapter has expired.  It shall provide that the insurance during such
period may not be canceled or terminated except after the Building Inspector
has received 30 days’ written notice of the cancellation or termination or
until the work under the permit has been completed.



141.25    PERMIT FEES; MANAGEMENT FEES.



      1.   Excavation Permit Fee.  An excavation permit fee shall
be charged to every person who makes application to excavate in the
right-of-way.  The excavation permit fee shall be determined by the Building
Inspector and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



         A.   The City cost component, the disruptive cost
component, and the inspection cost component; and



         B.   The mapping cost component, which is the cost of
creating and maintaining information on a mapping system.



   Such fee shall, in part, be based on the size of the area to be
excavated or impacted by the excavation; the duration that the area will be
unavailable for public use; the amount of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian
traffic that is disrupted thereby; and such other factors as the Building
Inspector shall deem appropriate.



      2.   Obstruction Permit Fee.  An obstruction permit fee shall
be charged to every person who makes application to undertake activities in
the right-of-way which will result in the obstruction of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.  The obstruction permit fee shall be determined by the
Building Inspector and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
following costs:



         A.   The City cost component, the disruptive cost
component, and the inspection cost component; and



         B.   The mapping cost component, which is the cost of
creating and maintaining information on a mapping system.



   Such fee shall, in part, be based on the size of the area to be
obstructed or impacted by the obstruction; the duration that the area will be
unavailable for public use; the amount of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian
traffic that is disrupted thereby; and such other factors as the Building
Inspector shall deem appropriate.



      3.   Computation of Inspection Cost Component.  A schedule of
fees for inspection services shall be developed by the Building Inspector to
recover the costs incurred by the department in having its inspectors conduct
inspections of street restoration work undertaken in connection with
excavation permits issued to permittees.  The base fee for an inspection
shall be expressed in such schedule as a per-square-foot fee for the area to
be excavated or obstructed or impacted by excavation or obstruction.  The
fee for a follow-up inspection, conducted to obtain or confirm compliance
with a specification, regulation, permit condition or Building Inspector’s
order, after a permittee is informed of a violation thereof, shall be
expressed in such schedule as hourly rates which are to be based on the
salary, benefit, and overhead costs to the City of the inspectors providing
follow-up inspection services.  Follow-up inspection services shall be
charged to permittees on the basis of the number of hours of inspector time
spent providing follow-up inspection services with respect to work performed
in connection with each permit, multiplied by the applicable hourly rates in
the schedule.



      4.   Payment of Permit Fees.  Permit fees, computed as
provided in this section by the Building Inspector, shall be paid by the
permittee prior to issuance of the excavation or obstruction permit, unless
in the discretion of the Building Inspector permission is given to pay such
fee within 30 days after billing therefor by the City.



      5.   Plan Review Fee.  A plan review fee shall be charged to
any person or permit applicant who submits plans and specifications for
review by the City as required by Section 141.23 of this chapter.  The plan
review fee is intended to recover the salary, benefit, and overhead costs to
the City of the City employees reviewing such plans and specifications, and
shall be based on the size of the area proposed to be excavated.  The plan
review fee shall be in the amount set in the schedule of fees adopted by the
City Council by resolution.



      6.   Payment of Plan Review Fee.  If the plans and
specifications are submitted for review and approval prior to application for
an excavation permit, the plan review fee shall be paid prior to the Building
Inspector’s approval of such plans and specifications or prior to the
City’s acceptance of the permit application.  If the plans and
specifications are submitted for review as part of an application for an
excavation permit, the plan review fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the
permit.



      7.   Schedule of Fees.  The permit fees to be paid in each
instance shall be determined by the Building Inspector by reference to a
schedule of permit fees, which shall be developed in conformance with the
requirements of Chapter 480A of the Code of Iowa and shall be updated as
needed prior to each construction season.  The fees required by this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the City Council and are listed in the Schedule
of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.



      8.   Franchise Fees.  In accordance with Section 480A.6 and
Chapter 477A, Code of Iowa; if the City collects a City franchise fee from an
entity under an existing or future franchise, it shall not also collect any
permit fee under this chapter.



141.26    ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, when the
application made in accordance with Sections 141.23 and 141.24 of this
chapter shall be approved, and the certificate of insurance and the street
excavation bond, or receipt of deposit in lieu of bond by the City Treasurer
as provided for in this chapter shall be approved and placed on file in the
office of the Building Inspector, the excavation permit or obstruction
permit, as the case may be, shall be issued to the applicant to allow for the
particular work specified in the application to commence.  The Building
Inspector may impose conditions, restrictions, or requirements upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to ensure the
structural integrity of the right-of-way; to maximize efficient use of the
right-of-way; to protect the property and safety of other users of the
right-of-way; and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the
traveling public, which conditions, restrictions, or requirements shall be
stated on the face of the permit or communicated to the permittee in writing
by the Building Inspector.  The permit shall specifically state that it is
issued subject to all stipulations of the applicant made in applying for the
permit and that the work shall be done in accordance with the detailed plans
and specifications approved in connection with the application and in
accordance with any and all further conditions, restrictions, or requirements
stated on the permit.



      2.   Immediate notice shall be given to the Building Inspector
whenever emergency work must be commenced prior to application for a permit
under this chapter.  Such notice shall be given no later than upon the first
business day after commencement of such emergency work, and application for
an excavation permit shall be made within three business days of the
commencement of the work.



      3.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a permit
shall not be issued to excavate in a permanently improved street. 
Applicants shall determine and submit for approval of the Building Inspector
alternative methods of making the utility service connections under such
streets; provided, however, the Building Inspector may give written
permission for a street excavation permit to be issued in such instances upon
determining that one or more of the following conditions exist:



         A.   An emergency endangering life or property exists,
which warrants allowing the requested excavation;



         B.   An interruption of essential utility service is
threatened unless the requested excavation is allowed;



         C.   The public work for which the excavation is
requested is mandated by City, State or Federal legislation;



         D.   There is no other reasonable means of providing
utility service to a property except by allowing the requested excavation; or



         E.   The requested excavation is in the best interest of
the general public in light of the facts and circumstances of the particular
request.



141.27    REFUSAL TO ISSUE PERMIT.



   The Building Inspector may refuse to issue the permits provided for in
this chapter to any former permit holder who has intentionally violated the
sections of this chapter relating to excavations in or obstruction of any
public right-of-way or who has failed to conform to the requirements of any
previously issued permit or who has violated the orders or instructions of
City officials issued pursuant to this chapter.



141.28    RECORDS.



   The Building Inspector shall keep a duplicate copy of each permit
issued as provided in this chapter corresponding to each original permit
issued and shall provide a copy of each such permit to the City permit and
development center for filing with the detailed plans and specifications as
approved by City staff.  Permits shall be regularly numbered in the order
issued.  Each permit shall contain the name of the person to whom it is
issued, the location of the premises, the purpose of any excavation and the
time at which work under it shall be commenced and completed.  The permit
shall not take effect until the time stated therein, nor shall any work be
done under it until such time.  The permit shall expire at the time stated
thereon for completion unless an extension is granted in writing by the
Building Inspector; provided, however, the obligation to restore the
right-of-way and the obligation to provide and maintain insurance and bonds
to the City in connection with such work shall remain in effect until
restoration of the right-of-way is completed.



141.29    RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTORATION.



      1.   Restoration Required.  The work to be done under an
excavation permit issued pursuant to this chapter and the restoration of the
right-of-way as required in this chapter must be completed within the dates
specified in the permit.  In addition to its own work, the permittee must
restore or pay for the restoration of the general area of the work, and the
surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to its proper
and required condition in accordance with the City’s utility accommodation
and street restoration specifications, unless the Building Inspector deems
other or additional specifications must be utilized in order to secure proper
restoration.  Further, the permittee shall inspect the area of the work and
use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 24 months thereafter.



      2.   Performance and Maintenance Bond.  An applicant for an
excavation permit shall at the time of application for an excavation permit
post a performance bond in an amount reasonably determined by the Building
Inspector to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to
its proper and required condition pursuant to the City’s utility
accommodation and street restoration specifications and in accordance with
the current restoration cost schedule established by resolution of the City
Council.  If at the conclusion of the 24-month period after completion of
the restoration of the right-of-way, the department determines that the
right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance bond
shall be released.



      3.   Bond Condition.  The bond shall be conditioned upon:



         A.   The faithful performance of the right-of-way
restoration work required under this chapter, or payment of the restoration
costs incurred by the City; and



         B.   The faithful performance of the terms of the
permit, the provisions of this chapter, and any other requirements provided
by law.



   If the applicant fails or neglects to properly restore the right-of-way
to its proper condition within the time for completion set forth in the
permit, or within a reasonable time after notice by the Building Inspector of
such failure or neglect, or fails to pay the restoration costs incurred by
the City or fails or neglects to properly maintain the right-of-way to its
proper condition within a reasonable time after notice by the Building
Inspector of such failure or neglect, or fails to pay the maintenance costs
incurred by the City, the right-of-way shall be restored or maintained by the
City and the costs thereof, as certified by the Building Inspector, shall be
promptly paid by the applicant or bonding company as the case may be.



      4.   Alternate Forms of Security.  In lieu of filing a
performance bond in connection with each excavation permit application, an
applicant may, in the discretion of the Building Inspector, be allowed to
post with the City Treasurer an alternate form of security in the form of an
annual performance bond, letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or
certified check in an amount deemed sufficient by the Building Inspector, but
in no event less than $25,000.00, to secure the applicant’s performance of
all restoration work which the applicant will become responsible for during
the next 12-month period in accordance with the current restoration cost
schedule established by resolution of the City Council upon the
recommendation of the Building Inspector.  Such alternate form of security
shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s performance as provided in
subsection 3 of this section.  If the costs as certified by the Building
Inspector during such year are less than such letter of credit, certificate
or deposit, or certified check, or if the maintenance period provided for in
the permit has expired with the applicant having satisfied all of its
restoration and maintenance responsibilities, the balance thereof shall upon
request be returned to the applicant.  If it appears to the Building
Inspector at any time after issuance of a permit that the security so
provided by letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or certified check is
inadequate to secure the performance of all such restoration work, the
Building Inspector may require the permittee to increase such security.  If
the costs during such year exceed the amount of such additional security
provided by letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or certified check, the
applicant shall be required to pay such difference to the City.  Such excess
costs shall be paid before any subsequent application by the applicant for a
permit under this chapter may be processed by the department.  If the City
incurs any outlay and expense in collecting its costs from the applicant,
such outlay and expense shall be paid by the applicant or bonding company in
addition to other amounts due.



      5.   Bond for Licensed Plumbing Contractors.  A licensed
plumbing contractor may satisfy the requirements of subsections 1 through 4
of this section by maintaining on file with the City a performance and
maintenance bond in the amount of $5,000.00 for the period running
concurrently with the plumbing contractor’s license, so long as such bond
specifically provides coverage for any and all street excavations undertaken
pursuant to this chapter during such period, unless the Building Inspector
determines such bond amount is insufficient to cover the anticipated cost of
restoration of the right-of-way for which the permit is sought.



      6.   Restoration by City or City Contractor.  If an applicant
for an excavation permit has not qualified to perform right-of-way
restoration work as provided in this section or if a qualified applicant
chooses to have the City or the City’s contractor restore the right-of-way,
it shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing.  If, during the 48
months following such restoration, the pavement settles due to the
permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the City,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing the pavement.



      7.   Restoration by Permittee.  An applicant for an
excavation permit who has been determined qualified to perform right-of-way
restoration work as provided in this section and who intends to itself
restore the right-of-way shall so indicate in its application for an
excavation permit.  The permittee shall perform the work in accordance with
the City’s utility accommodation and street restoration specifications,
unless the Building Inspector deems other or additional specifications must
be utilized in order to secure proper restoration.  The Building Inspector
shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the
restoration and may do so in written procedures of general application or on
a case-by-case basis.  The Building Inspector, in exercising this authority,
shall be guided by the following standards and considerations:  the number,
size, depth, and duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage to the
right-of-way; the pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining
life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation; whether the
relative cost of the method of restoration to the permittee is in reasonable
balance with the prevention of the accelerated depreciation of the
right-of-way that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or
damage to the right-of-way; and the likelihood that the particular method of
restoration would be effective in slowing the degradation of the right-of-way
that would otherwise take place.  Methods of restoration may include but are
not limited to patching, replacement of the right-of-way base, and milling
and overlay of the entire area of the right-of-way affected by the work.  By
choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its
work and shall maintain it for 24 months following its completion.  During
this 24-month period, the permittee shall, upon notification from the
department, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the
method required by the department.  Such work shall be completed within the
period of time allotted therefor as set forth in the notice from the
department.  If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the
manner and to the condition required by the department or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the department,
the City, at its option and after proper notice, may do such work or cause
its contractor to do such work.  In that event, the permittee shall pay to
the City, within 30 days of billing, all costs incurred by the City in
restoring the right-of-way.



141.30    QUALIFICATION TO PERFORM RESTORATION WORK.



      1.   Upon application by any person owning or operating a
utility service, or by any person licensed as a plumber or plumbing
contractor by the City, or by any contractor seeking to become qualified to
perform right-of-way restoration work under City contract, the Building
Inspector shall determine the qualifications of such applicant to perform
right-of-way restoration work.  In determining if an applicant is qualified
to perform right-of-way restoration work, the Building Inspector may consider
any of the following factors, which the applicant shall be obligated to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector:



         A.   The financial responsibility of the applicant.



         B.   The City’s past record of transactions and
experience with the applicant, including the quality of workmanship on past
right-of-way restoration projects; the number of liens, claims, or complaints
filed regarding such past projects; and the number of repairs made on prior
right-of-way restoration projects involving that applicant.



         C.   The adequacy of the applicant’s equipment and
materials.



         D.   The competency and experience of the applicant’s
managerial and supervisory personnel in performing right-of-way restoration
work.



         E.   The applicant’s demonstrated ability to complete
performance of right-of-way restoration work or work of a similar nature.



      2.   The Building Inspector may decline to qualify an
applicant for the performance of right-of-way restoration work if the
Building Inspector reasonably determines that the applicant has not
demonstrated satisfactory compliance with the criteria in subsection 1 of
this section or if the Building Inspector determines that the applicant has:



         A.   Without good cause therefor failed to carry on or
complete prior right-of-way restoration work or work of a similar nature in
an acceptable manner or refused to comply with a written order of the
engineer with regard thereto within a reasonable time;



         B.   Failed to perform prior right-of-way restoration
work or work of a similar nature in reasonably close conformity with the
plans and specifications therefor, or in reasonably close conformity with the
City’s design standards or the City’s utility accommodation and street
restoration specifications;



         C.   Failed or refused to remove and replace materials
or work found by the Building Inspector not to be in reasonably close
conformity with the plans and specifications or City’s utility
accommodation and street restoration specifications, as applicable, or failed
to correct such material or work so as to cause such materials or finished
product to be reasonably acceptable work; or



         D.   Offered or given gifts or gratuities to City
employees in violation of state law or has had as its employee a person who
was at the time also a City employee.



      3.   If the Building Inspector determines not to qualify an
applicant to perform right-of-way restoration work, the Building Inspector
shall so notify the affected applicant.  The notice shall set forth the
reasons supporting the Building Inspector’s determination not to qualify
the applicant and shall indicate that the Building Inspector’s
determination shall be considered final unless the applicant files a written
request for review with the City Manager within 30 days of the applicant’s
receipt of notice thereof.  The notice shall be sent to the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested.



      4.   Upon written request of the applicant received within 30
days of mailing of the notice provided in subsection 3 of this section, the
City Manager shall schedule and hold a hearing thereon, as provided in
Section 141.42 of this chapter.  At such hearing, the applicant may present
evidence or argument why it should be qualified to perform right-of-way
restoration work.



141.31    DISQUALIFICATION OF PERSON PREVIOUSLY QUALIFIED TO PERFORM
RESTORATION WORK.



      1.   Upon a determination by the Building Inspector that a
person previously qualified to perform right-of-way restoration work has
failed to meet any of the criteria set forth in Section 141.30(1) of this
chapter or has failed to perform as provided in Section 141.30(2) of this
chapter, the Building Inspector may disqualify such person from the further
performance of such work, as provided in this section.  Upon making such
determination, the Building Inspector shall give notice to the affected party
of his or her determination and shall therein set forth the reasons
supporting disqualification and the proposed period for disqualification and
shall indicate that the Building Inspector’s determination shall be
considered final unless the applicant files a written request for review with
the City Manager within 30 days of the applicant’s receipt of notice
thereof.



      2.   Upon written request of the affected party received
within 30 days after the affected party’s receipt of the notice provided in
subsection 1 of this section, the City Manager shall schedule and hold a
hearing thereon, as provided in Section 141.42 of this chapter.  At such
hearing, the affected party may present evidence or argument why it should
not be disqualified from performance of right-of-way restoration work.



141.32    INSPECTION.



      1.   When the work under any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter is completed, the permittee shall notify the Building Inspector.



      2.   The permittee shall make the work site available to the
Building Inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at
all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the work.



      3.   At the time of inspection, the Building Inspector may
order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the
life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      4.   The Building Inspector may issue an order to the
registrant for any work which does not conform to the applicable standards,
conditions, or codes.  The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.  Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the Building
Inspector that the violation has been corrected.  If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the Building Inspector may revoke the
permit pursuant to Section 141.35 of this chapter.



141.33    WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT.



      1.   Emergency Situations.  Each registrant under this
chapter shall immediately notify the Building Inspector of any event
regarding its equipment which it considers to be an emergency.  The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to
respond to the emergency.  Within two business days after the occurrence of
the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary right-of-way
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.  If a storm, flood, or
other Citywide emergency event causes system-wide damages to the equipment of
a utility service company, requiring emergency repairs without obtaining the
necessary right-of-way permits, the City Council may, upon request by the
company sustaining such damage, waive or modify the requirement that permits
be obtained after the making of emergency repairs in response to such
event.  If the Building Inspector becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant’s equipment, the Building Inspector may attempt to contact the
local representative of each registrant affected or potentially affected by
the emergency.  In any event, the Building Inspector may take whatever
action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the registrant whose equipment occasioned the
emergency.



      2.   Non-Emergency Situations.  Except in an emergency, any
person who obstructs or excavates a right-of-way without a permit must
subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for such permit, pay
double all the other fees required by this chapter, deposit with the Building
Inspector the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.  In lieu of requiring
such person to pay double the fees as provided in this subsection, the City
Manager may assess an administrative penalty against such person as provided
in Section 141.41.



141.34    SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION BY PERMITTEE.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Building Inspector of the accurate information as soon as this information is
known.  If the obstruction of a right-of-way is of a shorter duration than
that estimated on the permit application, the Building Inspector will, upon
request, refund or credit to the permittee a proportionate amount from that
part of the permit fee which was based on the duration of the obstruction.



141.35    REVOCATION.



      1.   Permittees hold right-of-way permits as a privilege and
not as a right.  The City reserves the right, as provided in this section
and upon proper notice, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without fee
refund, for a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule, or regulation or any condition of the permit.  A
substantial breach by the permittee shall include but shall not be limited to
the following:



         A.   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



         B.   An evasion or attempt to evade any material
provision of the right-of-way permit or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens;



         C.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



         D.   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or
insurance;



         E.   The failure to complete the work in a timely
manner; or



         F.   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an
order issued pursuant to Section 141.32 of this chapter.



      2.   If the Building Inspector determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term of condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the Building
Inspector shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such
violation.  The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause
for revocation of the permit.  Further, a substantial breach, as stated in
this subsection, will allow the Building Inspector, at his or her discretion,
to place additional or revised conditions on the permit.



      3.   Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach,
the permittee shall contact the Building Inspector with a plan, acceptable to
the Building Inspector, for its correction.  The permittee’s failure to so
contact the Building Inspector or the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 
Further, the permittee’s failure to so contact the Building Inspector or
the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan or permittee’s
failure to implement the approved plan shall automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year.  From time to time, the Building
Inspector may establish a list of permit conditions which, if breached, will
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as
(but not limited to) working out of the allotted time period or working on
right-of-way grossly outside of the permit.



      4.   If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as
outlined in this section, the permittee’s permit will automatically be
revoked, and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full
year, except for emergency repairs.



      5.   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also
reimburse the City for the City’s reasonable costs, including restoration
costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees, incurred
in connection with such revocation.



141.36    CITY’S REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided in this chapter and in other chapters of this
Code are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the City
may have at law or in equity.  The City is authorized to seek legal and
equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the public rights-of-way,
including damages to the rights-of-way, whether or not caused by a violation
of any of the sections of this chapter or other sections of this Code.



141.37    DUTY TO DEFEND, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS.



   Every applicant for a right-of-way permit shall execute, as part of its
permit application, an agreement to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
City from any and all costs, expenses, or liability for damages or injuries
to persons or property or liability of any kind whatsoever arising from or
growing out of any obstruction, excavation, or restoration work within the
rights-of-way by the applicant for which a permit is required pursuant to
this chapter.



141.38    SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS.



   All excavations for sewer and water connections shall be left unfilled
and the connections left exposed until inspected by the Building Inspector. 
Any person making any excavation for such connections shall notify the
Building Inspector at the time the connection is completed in order that it
may be properly inspected before the work of refilling is commenced.



141.39    BORING.



   No person shall bore under the surface of any right-of-way in the City
for the purpose of making any gas, sewer, water, steam heating pipe,
underground electric, telecommunications, telephone, or cable television
connection without special permission from the Building Inspector.



141.40    TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, LIGHTING, AND PLATING.



      1.   The public shall be protected at all excavations or
trenches or open vaults in the right-of-way by the placement of proper
traffic control devices, lighting, and plating as specified in the state
manual on uniform traffic control devices and applicable provisions of the
City’s utility accommodation and street restoration specifications.



      2.   Every person making such an excavation or trench shall
maintain any and all protection required under subsection 1 of this section
until the trench or excavation has been refilled and the street, pavement,
sidewalk, or curb has been restored to its proper condition as provided in
the City’s utility accommodation and street restoration specifications.



141.41    ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



      1.   The City Manager is authorized to impose administrative
penalties upon persons who commit the following violations of this chapter
upon proper notice and the right by such persons to petition under Section
141.42 of this chapter:



         A.   Failure to obtain a permit;



         B.   Failure to provide required notification of
emergency trenching or excavations;



         C.   Failure to provide required traffic control devices;



         D.   Failure to restore as required;



         E.   Failure to properly secure steel plates;



         F.   Failure to provide required notification for
inspection by plumbing inspector;



         G.   Failure of restoration within the maintenance
period; and



         H.   Failure to restore street cuts within the period
provided in the permit.



   The administrative penalty for each violation shall be as provided in
the schedule of administrative penalties adopted by the City Council by
resolution.  Notice of violation, with the applicable penalty for such
violation noted thereon, shall be issued by the City Manager to the
violator.  Penalties shall be paid in full within 30 days of the issuance of
the notice at City Hall.



      2.   The administrative penalties set out in the schedule of
administrative penalties shall be charged unless the violator refuses to
correct the violation and pay the scheduled administrative penalty, or the
City Manager determines that immediate enforcement action by misdemeanor or
municipal infraction prosecution is, in view of the particular circumstances
of the case, necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.  The City Manager shall maintain a record of all violations,
administrative penalties charged or other enforcement actions taken and shall
make available such performance record to the Building Inspector when refusal
to issue a permit pursuant to Section 141.27 of this chapter is being
contemplated.  The applicant shall be liable for any and all costs incurred
by the City because of such violations.



141.42    APPEALS.



      1.   Appeal to City Manager.



         A.   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision or action
of the Building Inspector with respect to any other matter covered or
regulated by this chapter may request in writing that such decision or action
be reviewed by the City Manager.  Upon receipt of such request, the City
Manager may undertake to make a determination of the appeal or may assign the
appeal to an administrative hearing officer for determination.



         B.   Such person shall file his or her written request
for review with the City Manager’s office within 30 days after the
occurrence or action complained of and shall set forth therein the factual
and legal basis for his or her objection to the decision made or action taken
by the Building Inspector or City Engineer.  The City Manager shall render a
decision in writing on such request for review within 60 days after the
timely filing of the request for review as provided in this subsection. 
Such written decision shall be mailed to the party requesting review or
participating in the hearing.



         C.   If the City Manager or hearing officer affirms the
decision or action complained of and if the appealing person is still
aggrieved by such decision or action, the appealing person may make further
appeal to the City Council as provided in subsection 2 herein.



      2.   Appeal to City Council.



         A.   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the
City Manager with respect to the denial of registration required by this
chapter or with respect to the denial or revocation of a right-of-way permit
or who believes that the fees imposed on such person pursuant to this chapter
do not conform to the requirements of Code of Iowa § 480A.1 et seq., may
request in writing that such denial, revocation, or fee imposition be
reviewed by the City Council.



         B.   Such person shall file his or her written request
for review with the City Clerk within 30 days after the occurrence complained
of and shall set forth therein the factual and legal basis for his or her
objection to the action taken by the City Manager.  The City Council shall
render its decision in writing on such request for review within 60 days
after the timely filing of the request for review as provided in this
subsection.  Such written decision shall be mailed to the party requesting
review.



BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



 

145.01  Purpose and Scope
 
145.06  Appeal


145.02  Definitions
 
145.07  Procedure for Conduct of Hearing Appeals


145.03  Enforcement
 
145.08  Enforcement of Order


145.04  Notices and Orders of Building Inspector
 
145.09  Performance of Work of Repair or Demolition


145.05  Repair, Vacation, and Demolition
 
145.10  Recovery of Cost of Repair or Demolition



 



145.01    PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



      1.   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just,
equitable and practicable method to be cumulative with and in addition to any
other remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise
available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the
general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or
demolished.



      2.   The provisions of this chapter apply to all dangerous
buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter become dangerous in the City.



      3.   All buildings or structures which are required to be
repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of the Building Code.



145.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter or as
specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code.  Where terms are not
defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context
in which they are used.



      1.   "Building Code" is the International Building Code and
International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted in Chapter 155 of
this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



      2.   “Building Inspector” is the code enforcement officer.



      3.   “Dangerous building,” for the purpose of this
chapter, means any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or
defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the
public or of such building’s occupants are endangered:



         A.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or
other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged
as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.



         B.   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle,
passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is warped, worn, loose, torn, or
otherwise unsafe and does not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case
of fire or panic.



         C.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or
portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and
one-half (1½) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Building
Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.



         D.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, or flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent
that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it
was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.



         E.   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse
and thereby injure persons or damage property.



         F.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place
so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that
specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the
Building Code for such buildings.



         G.   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction.



         H.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty
construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of
the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.



         I.   Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used.



         J.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one
third of the base.



         K.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of
the foundation, shows thirty-three percent (33%) or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%)
damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosings or outside
walls or coverings.



         L.   Whenever the building or structure has been so
damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive nuisance to children; (ii a
harbor for vagrants or criminals, or as to (iii) enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.



         M.   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
building regulations of the City, as specified in the Building Code or
Housing Code, or of any law or ordinance of the State or City relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings.



         N.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether
or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in
any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66% of the (i) strength, (ii)
fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly
constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.



         O.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the
Building Inspector to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.



         P.   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections, or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal to be a fire hazard.



         Q.   Whenever any building or structure is in such
condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in
equity jurisprudence.



         R.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof
an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



      4.   “Fire Marshal” is the Fire Chief in the Fire
Department.



      5.   “Housing Code” is the Uniform Housing Code, 1997
Edition, as adopted in Chapter 161 of this Code of Ordinances.



145.03    ENFORCEMENT.



      1.   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.



      2.   The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector are hereby
authorized to make such inspections and to take such actions as may be
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



      3.   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Building Inspector has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Inspector may enter
such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon the Building Inspector by this chapter,
provided that if such building or premises is occupied, the Building
Inspector shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if
such building or premises is unoccupied, the Building Inspector shall first
make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry.  If such entry is
refused, the Building Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided
by law to secure entry. 



      4.   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the Building Inspector to be dangerous as defined in this
chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in this chapter.



      5.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip,
use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same
to be done in violation of this chapter.



      6.   All buildings or structures within the scope of this
chapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector in accordance with and in the
manner provided by this chapter and the Building Code.



145.04    NOTICES AND ORDERS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



      1.   Whenever the Building Inspector has inspected or caused
to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building
is a dangerous building, the Building Inspector shall commence proceedings to
cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.



      2.   The Building Inspector shall issue a notice and order
directed to the record owner of the building.  The notice and order shall
contain:



         A.   The street address and a legal description
sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is
located.



         B.   A statement that the Building Inspector has found
the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the
conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of
this chapter.



         C.   A statement of the action required to be taken as
determined by the Building Inspector:



            (1)   If the Building Inspector has determined
that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that
all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced
within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and
completed within such time as the Building Inspector shall determine is
reasonable under all of the circumstances.



            (2)   If the Building Inspector has determined
that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that
the building or structures shall be vacated within a time certain from the
date of the order as determined by the Building Inspector to be reasonable.



            (3)   If the Building Inspector has determined
that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require
that the building be vacated within such time as the Building Inspector shall
determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order),
that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of
the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the
Building Inspector shall determine is reasonable.



         D.   Statements advising that if any required repair or
demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced
within the time specified, the Building Inspector:  (i) will order the
building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is
completed, and (ii) may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the
costs thereof against the property or its owner.



         E.   Statements advising:  (i) that any person having
any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice
and order or any action of the Building Inspector to the appeal board,
provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed
with the Building Inspector within 30 days from the date of service of such
notice and order; and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of
all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.



      3.   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental
notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the
property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if
known to the Building Inspector or disclosed from official public records: 
the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of
record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any
other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on
which it is located.  The failure of the Building Inspector to serve any
person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings
hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from
any duty or obligation imposed on such person by the provisions of this
section.



      4.   Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to each such person at such person’s last known address.  If no
address of any such person is known to the Building Inspector, then a copy of
the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the
address of the building involved in the proceedings and a summary of the
notice and order shall be published in a newspaper as defined in Section
618.3 of the Iowa Code published in and having general circulation in the
City.  The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section.  Service by
certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date
of mailing.



      5.   Proof of service of the notice and order shall be
certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of
perjury executed by the persons affecting service, declaring the time, date,
and manner in which service was made.  The declaration, together with any
receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, or
affidavit of publication, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and
order retained by the Building Inspector.



145.05    REPAIR, VACATION, AND DEMOLITION.



   The following standards shall be followed by the Building Inspector
(and by the appeal board if an appeal is taken) in ordering the repair,
vacation, or demolition of any dangerous building or structure:



      1.   Any building declared a dangerous building under this
chapter shall either be repaired in accordance with the current Building Code
or demolished at the option of the building owner.



      2.   If the building or structure is in such condition as to
make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the
public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.



      3.   Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to personal
service or mail service, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and
shall be in substantially the following form:



   DO NOT ENTER - UNSAFE TO OCCUPY



   It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this
notice.



_________________________________



   Building Inspector



      4.   Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Inspector
shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued by the
Building Inspector reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which
necessitate the posting.  No person shall remain in or enter any building
which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish,
or remove such building under permit.  No person shall remove or deface any
such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or
removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to
the provisions of the Building Code.



145.06    APPEAL.



      1.   In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter, any person entitled to service of a notice and
order under this chapter may appeal from any notice and order or any action
of the Building Inspector under this chapter by filing at the office of the
Building Inspector a written appeal to the appeal board containing:



         A.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest
of the appellant in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.



         B.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language
of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts
claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.



         C.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language
of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or
action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.



         D.   The signature of all parties named as appellants
and their official mailing addresses.



         E.   The verification of the appellant as to the truth
of the matters stated in the appeal.



      2.   The appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the
date of service of such order or action of the Building Inspector.



      3.   Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this
section, the Building Inspector shall present it at the next regular or
special meeting of the appeal board.



      4.   As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal, the appeals board shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of
the appeal by the board.  Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days or
more than thirty (30) days from the date the appeal was filed with the
Building Inspector.  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be given at least then (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to
each appellant by the secretary of the board either by causing a copy of such
notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy of
such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the appellant at the appellant’s address shown on the appeal.



      5.   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance
with this section shall constitute a waiver of such person’s right to an
administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any
portion thereof.



      6.   Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the
appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.



      7.   Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and
order of the Building Inspector issued under this chapter shall be stayed
during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.



145.07    PROCEDURE FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS.



   The conduct of hearing appeals filed with the appeal board shall be
governed by Section 171.15 of this Code of Ordinances.



145.08    ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER.



      1.   After any order of the Building Inspector or the appeal
board made pursuant to this chapter shall have become final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any
such order.



      2.   If, after any order of the Building Inspector or appeal
board made pursuant to this chapter has become final, the person to whom such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the
Building Inspector may institute any appropriate action to abate such
building as a public nuisance or cause such person to be prosecuted as
provided by law.



      3.   Whenever the required repair or demolition is not
commenced within thirty (30) days after any final notice and order issued
under this chapter becomes effective:



         A.   The Building Inspector shall cause the building
described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance
thereto a notice reading:



   DANGEROUS BUILDING – DO NOT OCCUPY



   It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this
notice.



_________________________________



   Building Inspector



         B.   No person shall occupy any building which has been
posted as specified in this subsection.  No person shall remove or deface
any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by
the Building Inspector have been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.



         C.   The Building Inspector may, in addition to any
other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent
necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as
set forth in the notice and order; or if the notice and order required
demolition, to cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble
and debris therefrom, removed and the lot cleaned.  Any such repair or
demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter.  Any surplus realized
from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of
cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully
entitled thereto.



      4.   Upon receipt of an application from the person required
to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that said person will
comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Building Inspector may,
in his or her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an
additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or
demolition, if the Building Inspector determines that such an extension of
time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life
or property.  The Building Inspector’s authority to extend time is limited
to physical repair, rehabilitation, or demolition of the premises and will
not in any way affect the time to appeal the Building Inspector’s notice
and order.



      5.   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this
jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in
any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the
provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or
estate in such building or structure, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to
such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.



145.09    PERFORMANCE OF WORK OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.



   When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to Section
145.08, the work shall be accomplished by City personnel or by private
contract under the direction of the Building Inspector.  Plans and
specifications therefor may be prepared by the Building Inspector or the
Building Inspector may employ such architectural and engineering assistance
on a contract basis as deemed reasonably necessary.  If any part of the work
is to be accomplished by private contract, standard public works contractual
procedures shall be followed.  The cost of such work shall be made a special
assessment against the property involved. 



145.10    RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.



   The Building Inspector shall keep an itemized account of the expense
incurred in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.  Upon completion of the work of repair or
demolition, the Building Inspector shall prepare and certify the actual cost
to the City Clerk who, in turn, shall certify such cost to the County
Treasurer, and it shall then constitute a lien against said property and be
collected with an in the same manner as general property taxes on said
property.



CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES



 

146.01  Definitions
 
146.03  Foundation Requirements


146.02  Conversion to Real Property
 
 



 



146.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)



      1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure,
built under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



      2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot,
field or tract of land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied
manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure or enclosure used or intended
for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home community.



      3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power
used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed
or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human
habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with
motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.  A mobile home means
any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a
mandatory building code and which contains no State or Federal seals.



      4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or
tract of land upon which three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured
homes, or a combination of any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces
and operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and
electrical services available. 



   The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is
not to be construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents
or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational
institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively to house
their own labor or students.  The manufactured home community or mobile home
park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.



146.02    CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.



   A mobile home or manufactured home which is located outside a
manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real
estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for
real estate taxes except in the following cases:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)



      1.   Retailer’s Stock.  Mobile homes or manufactured homes
on private property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not
used as a place for human habitation.



      2.   Existing Homes.  A taxable mobile home or manufactured
home which is located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home
park as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but
is exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the
home is relocated.



146.03    FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.



   A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured
home community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system which meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code.  The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation
systems of surrounding residential structures.  Any such home shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)



CHAPTER 147
RENTAL HOUSING REGULATORY AND
INSPECTION PROGRAM



 



147.01  Purpose and Intent
 
147.12  Unrecorded Land Contracts or Purchase


147.02  Definitions
 
Agreements


147.03  Terms Defined in Other Codes
 
147.13  Chapter Does Not Impair Authority to Act on


147.04  Terms Not Defined
 
Nuisances


147.05  Inspections by City Manager
 
147.14  Chapter Does Not Abrogate Provisions of Other


147.06  Landlord and Operators to Register with City
 
Codes and Ordinances


147.07  Fees
 
147.15  Effect of Partial Invalidity


147.08  Program For Rental Inspection
 
147.16  Adoption of Rules and Regulations by the


147.09  Complaints
 
City Manager


147.10  Right of Entry
 
147.17  Liability of Landlord or Non-Occupying Property


147.11  Access by Owner or Operator
 
Owner




 



147.01    PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum quality standards
for all residential rental dwellings, rental dwelling units, rooming houses
and rooming units; to provide for the enforcement of such standards; to
establish a program of regular rental inspections; and to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City.  In order to meet
the purpose of this chapter, the City intends:



      1.   To establish standards for basic equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation and thermal conditions; for safety from fire or
accident; for an adequate level of maintenance; and for the use, location and
amount of space for human occupancy;



      2.   To define the responsibility of owners, operators and
occupants of dwellings in securing City-wide compliance with minimum physical
standards for rental property;



      3.   To contain and eliminate urban blight and deterioration
of rental property and neighborhoods;



      4.   To prevent the unintentional development of conditions
that are hazardous to the public health and safety;



      5.   To assure that dangerous conditions be prevented or
abated;



      6.   To establish the authority, responsibility and
administrative mechanism to inspect rental dwelling places through a
systematic, area-by-area procedure;



      7.   To establish the authority, responsibility and
administrative mechanism to treat specific problems on a complaint basis; and



      8.   To establish a baseline for minimum design and
installation standards for dwelling units that may have been constructed
without benefit of codes.



   It is not the intent of this chapter to protect the individual, but
rather to protect the public as a whole.



147.02    DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter,
the following definitions shall apply:



      1.   “Dwelling” means any building or structure, except
temporary housing, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living or sleeping by human occupants, but does not include dormitories,
hotels, or motels.  Whenever the word “dwelling” is used in this
chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the words “or
any part thereof.”



      2.   “Dwelling unit” means any habitable room or group of
adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit
with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating of meals.  Whenever the term “dwelling unit” is used
in this chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the
words “or any part thereof.”



      3.   “Non-dwelling structure” means any structure, except
a dwelling or rooming house, used or intended to be used for the shelter or
enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind used in conjunction
with a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit.



      4.   “Occupancy” means the act or acts of living, sleeping
or cooking in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



      5.   “Occupant” means any person more than one year of
age, including an owner or operator, living, sleeping or cooking in, or
having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.



      6.   “Operator” means any person who has charge, care or
control of a building, or any part thereof, in which any dwelling units or
rooming units are let, either as owner or agent of the owner.



      7.   “Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or
severally with others:



         A.   Has legal title or equitable title to any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit;



         B.   Has charge, care, or control of any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit, as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate or as the
owner.



      8.   “Rental property” means any dwelling for which a
stated return or payment is made for the temporary possession or use thereof.



      9.   “Roomer” means an occupant of a rooming house who is
charged rent and is not a member of the rooming house owner’s or
operator’s family.



      10.   “Rooming house” means any dwelling or that part of
any dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by
the owner or operator to one or more roomers. 



      11.   “Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms
forming a single habitable unit in a rooming house used or intended to be
used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating of meals.



147.03    TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES.



   Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the
Building, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes, they shall have the same
meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.



147.04    TERMS NOT DEFINED.



   Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this chapter or
under the provisions of the Building, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical
Codes, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as a context herein may imply.



147.05    INSPECTIONS BY CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed to
enter and make such inspections as are necessary to determine the condition
of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises
thereof including but not limited to any non-dwelling structures used by
tenants within the City limits in order to perform his or her duty of
safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and of the
general public.



147.06    LANDLORD AND OPERATORS TO REGISTER WITH CITY.



      1.   All landlords and operators of rental property shall
register their rental properties with the City.  Each unit will be required
to be registered annually.  The registration shall be due January 1, and
there will be no penalty so long as all rental properties are registered
prior to March 1.



      2.   The City will provide an application form which must be
completed and updated upon request.  The following information shall be
provided to the City:



         A.   The street address of the dwelling or rooming house;



         B.   The number of rental units contained in the
dwelling or rooming house; and



         C.   The name, address, and telephone number of the
owner and any agent of the owner of the dwelling or rooming house.



      3.   Upon receipt of the application and fee, the City shall
provide to the applicant a sticker evidencing the fact that the unit has been
registered and the landlord/operator shall cause said sticker to be posted on
the rental property in a location approved by the City.



      4.   If a rental property is not registered by March 1 of each
year, an administrative fee shall be added to the registration fee. 



      5.   No person shall rent to another or offer to rent to
another any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit unless the owner or
operator of the same has registered the rental property with the City and
posted the sticker evidencing said registration on the subject property.



      6.   The registration and administrative fees outlined in this
section shall be set by resolution of the Council and are listed in the
Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix to this Code of
Ordinances.



147.07    FEES.



      1.   Any person who fails to pay any fee required by this
chapter is guilty of a municipal infraction.



      2.   For newly constructed rental housing, the administrative
fee will commence thirty (30) calendar days after the certificate of
occupancy has been issued.



      3.   For rental housing that transfers ownership, the
administrative fee will commence thirty (30) calendar days after the final
transfer and/or the recording of such.



      4.   The administrative fee for a rooming house will commence
fourteen (14) calendar days after the license (not the registration) expires.



147.08    PROGRAM FOR RENTAL INSPECTION.



      1.   Self-Inspections.  At the time of registration the City
shall provide to the applicant a checklist and guidelines to assist with a
self-inspection of each rental unit.  The checklist will identify all items
that are to be inspected and provide a space for the landlord to indicate
compliance with the applicable standard.  The self-inspection will be
completed, and the certification form provided by the City shall be due at
the time the registration fee is paid, but no later than March 1 of each year.



      2.   Spot Inspections.  A spot inspection is an inspection
conducted by City officials and which is conducted in one of two ways: 
either upon the observation by City officials of units which are obviously
and substantially out of compliance, or by lot.  These inspections will be
scheduled with the owner and/or operator of the units. 



      3.   Requested Inspections.  Upon the request of the owner or
operator of a rental unit, the City shall inspect said rental unit to
determine compliance with the Housing Code.  Upon a successful completion of
such inspection, the unit will be exempt from spot inspections determined by
lot for a period of three years.



      4.   Section 8 Inspections.  Units which have been inspected
for and passed Section 8 rental requirements shall be deemed to have been
spot inspected, and exempt from spot inspections determined by lot for a
period of three years.  It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of
such rental units to provide proof of a Section 8 inspection to the City.



      5.   Failed Inspections.  A rating system developed by the
City shall establish three classifications:  substantially in compliance;
out of compliance; and substantially out of compliance.  If after City
inspection, a rental unit is deemed to be substantially in compliance, a list
of needed repairs will be provided to the owner and/or operator with a stated
time in which to make the repairs.  There will be duty on the owner and/or
operator to notify the City once the identified repairs have been completed.



         A.   If after an inspection a rental unit is deemed to
be out of compliance, a list of needed repairs will be provided to the owner
and/or operator with a stated time in which to make the repairs.  Upon
completion of the repairs, the owner and/or operator shall schedule a
reinspection of the property to confirm compliance.  The owner and/or
operator shall pay the reinspection fee set out in the current schedule of
fees adopted by the Council upon completion of said inspection. 



         B.   If after City inspection a rental unit is deemed to
be substantially out of compliance, a list of needed repairs will be provided
to the owner and/or operator with a stated time in which to make the
repairs.  The owner and/or operator shall schedule a reinspection of the
property to confirm compliance.  The owner and/or operator shall pay the
reinspection fee set out in the current schedule of fees adopted by the
Council upon the completion of said inspection.  The City may also schedule
inspection of all units owned by said owner/operator upon a finding that one
of the owner/operator’s rental properties is substantially out of
compliance.



147.09    COMPLAINTS.



   All persons making complaints concerning the compliance with the
provisions of this chapter of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit shall do so in the following manner:



      1.   The complaints shall be signed and in writing upon a form
to be provided by the City.



      2.   Such complaints shall state the address of the premises,
the name of the owner, landlord, or operator, and shall state the nature of
the alleged violation with specificity.



      3.   In the case of tenants making complaints concerning the
dwelling or dwelling unit in which they reside, such tenant shall attach a
dated copy of the notice in which they requested the owner or operator to
correct the alleged violation, unless complaint pertains to an emergency
situation as determined by the administration.



      4.   It is a violation of the provisions of this chapter for
an owner or operator to take reprisals against any tenant making a complaint
under the provisions of this chapter.  Any such reprisals shall constitute a
municipal infraction.



147.10    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



      1.   The Building Inspector is authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of the City Housing and Building Codes, and to
perform the duties of safeguarding the health, safety, and welfare of the
occupants of all rental dwellings and the general public.



      2.   The Building Inspector is authorized to enter and make
inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the
Building Inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises located within the City any condition or code
violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or
hazardous.



      3.   The Building Inspector may enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the Building Inspector by this chapter, provided that if such
building or premises is occupied, said official shall first present proper
credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is
unoccupied, such official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises
and request entry.



      4.   The Building Inspector may make inspections of all rental
premises pursuant to the City’s regular inspection program as frequently as
may be necessary, and may make an inspection at any reasonable time based
upon the need for code enforcement determined by the age of the area, the
nature of the building and premises, or the condition of the entire area.



      5.   If such entry is refused for regular request or complaint
inspections, the Building Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry.  When the Building Inspector shall have
first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to
secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care
or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect to promptly
permit entry therein by the Building Inspector for the purpose of inspection
and examination pursuant to this chapter.



147.11    ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR.



   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give
the owner or operator or his or her agent or employee access to any part of
such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purposes of making such
inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply
with the provisions of this chapter; provided, the occupant shall be given
twenty-four (24) hours’ written notice prior to any inspection, except in
case of emergency, when immediate access shall be granted.



147.12    UNRECORDED LAND CONTRACTS OR PURCHASE AGREEMENTS.



   For purposes of this chapter, any residential property which is the
subject of an unrecorded land contract or purchase agreement shall be treated
the same as rental property.  The contract seller shall have the duties and
responsibilities and shall be subject to the same penalties as the owner of
rental property.



147.13    CHAPTER DOES NOT IMPAIR AUTHORITY TO ACT ON NUISANCES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to impair or
limit in any way the authority of the City to define and declare nuisances or
of the City Manager, the Police Chief, or other City officials to cause the
removal or abatement of nuisances by summary proceedings or other appropriate
proceedings.



147.14    CHAPTER DOES NOT ABROGATE PROVISIONS OF OTHER CODES AND
ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not abrogate the responsibility of
any person to comply with any provision of the Plumbing, Electrical,
Building, Fire Prevention, and Zoning Codes or other ordinances of the City.



147.15    EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.



   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire safety or health
ordinance or code of the City existing on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.  In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the City existing
on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to
prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are declared to be repealed to
the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter.



147.16    ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY THE CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager is authorized and empowered to make and adopt written
rules and regulations necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter.



147.17    LIABILITY OF LANDLORD OR NON-OCCUPYING PROPERTY OWNER.



      1.   Any non-occupying property owner or landlord with actual
knowledge of a nuisance on such person’s real property or after being
served with written notice of a nuisance condition on such real property
shall abate such nuisance within ten (10) calendar days after having actual
notice or receiving written notice.  Written notice shall be personally
served on the non-occupying property owner, landlord, or managing or leasing
agent thereof, or shall be mailed to the person by certified mail, return
receipt requested.  If the certified mail notice is returned to the person
issuing the notice, then notice may be posted on the subject real property. 
If any other section of this chapter specifically provides for a different
method of notice and/or a different time frame for notice, then the
provisions of the other section may be followed instead of the provisions of
this section.  If the non-occupying owner or landlord fails to abate the
nuisance condition as required, such non-occupying owner or landlord, or
agent thereof, shall be guilty of violating Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.  It shall be an affirmative defense for a non-occupying owner or
landlord to show that said person is either:  (i) evicting or permanently
removing the tenant from all premises owned or managed by such person; or
(ii) acting diligently in terminating the nuisance.  If specific sections of
this chapter provide for liability to landlords or owners with less notice,
then the specific sections will apply.



      2.   For the purpose of this section, the term “landlord”
includes property manager, resident manager, rental agent, or any person
responsible for showing the property to prospects, renting to tenants,
collecting rent or lease payments, evicting tenants or maintaining the
property.  If the non-occupying owner or landlord is an entity other than
human being, then the term “landlord” includes the officers, partners,
executives, owners, or other humans responsible for managing the entity.



CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING



 

150.01  Definitions
 
150.03  Building Numbering Plan


150.02  Owner Requirements
 



 



150.01    DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



      1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building. 



      2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any
lot or subdivision thereof.



150.02    OWNER REQUIREMENTS.



   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:



      1.   Obtain Building Number.  The owner shall obtain the
assigned number to the principal building from the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



      2.   Display Building Number.  The owner shall place or cause
to be installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number
in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than four (4) inches
in height and of a contrasting color with their background.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



      3.   Failure to Comply.  If an owner refuses to number a
building as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30)
days after being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may
proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the
costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property
tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



150.03    BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.



   Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building
numbering plan on file in the office of the Clerk.



CHAPTER 151
TREES



 

151.01  Purpose
 
151.07  Duty to Trim Trees


151.02  Definitions
 
151.08  Trimming Trees Without Approval


151.03  Street Tree Planting Standards
 
151.09  Disease Control


151.04  Acceptable Street Trees
 
151.10  Inspection and Removal


151.05  Non-Acceptable Street Trees
 
151.11  Tree Topping Prohibited


151.06  Questions
 
 



 



151.01    PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to acknowledge the importance of trees
as a means to promote the City’s public image; to promote continued
financial support from the City to manage its public tree resources through
planting, maintenance, removal, and replacement of trees; to regulate the
placement and removal of trees; to safeguard public health and public safety;
to develop and protect forested public property; to promote methods for
disease control and insect control; and to promote public education efforts
regarding trees.



151.02    DEFINITIONS. 



   For use in this chapter, the following definitions are given.



      1.   “Parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line
and the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by motor vehicles.



      2.   “Park trees” are trees, shrubs, and all other woody
vegetation in public parks and all other areas owned by the City to which the
public has free access to.



      3.   “Street trees” are trees, shrubs, and all other woody
vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, avenues, or ways within the City.



151.03    STREET TREE PLANTING STANDARDS. 



   The following standards shall guide the planting of street trees and
other landscaping materials.



      1.   No landscaping material may be planted which would cause
a public danger or nuisance.  No tree shall be planted within four feet of
the sidewalk line or other impervious surface such as the curb and gutter
line of the street.



      2.   A minimum of seven feet diameter without impervious
surface must exist in the parking area, between the curb and sidewalk, to
provide adequate growing conditions.



      3.   No street tree or shrub that will grow above 30 inches in
height shall be planted on a corner lot where two streets intersect for a
distance of 25 feet in any direction from the point of intersection at the
curb line.



      4.   No street tree shall be planted within 15 lateral feet of
an overhead utility line, five lateral feet from water or sanitary sewer
lines, ten feet from a fire hydrant, five feet from a driveway, or 25 feet
from a traffic control sign or signal.



151.04    ACCEPTABLE STREET TREES.



   The following are acceptable for street trees:



 

Hard Maple Varieties
 
Linden Varieties


Hackberry
 
Kentucky Coffee Tree


Gingko (male only)
 
Crabapple (columnar)


Oak Varieties
 
Freeman Maple


Thornless Honey Locust Varieties
 



 



151.05    NON-ACCEPTABLE STREET TREES.



   The following trees are not acceptable for street trees.  These
species are unsuitable for their shape, durability, hardiness to climate, or
root characteristics and shall not be planted in the City right-of-way:



 

Cottonwood
 
Domestic Fruit Trees – Walnut, Mulberry


Box Elder
 
Black Locust


Silver Maple
 
Tree of Heaven


Willow, all varieties
 
Buckthorn


Poplar-Varieties
 
Siberian Elm-CA


Gingko (female)
 
Russian Olive


Evergreens
 
American Plum



 



151.06    QUESTIONS. 



   Questions concerning the planting of trees not included in the
acceptable list should be directed to the Superintendent of Streets.



151.07    DUTY TO TRIM TREES. 



   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep all trees in the
City right-of-way trimmed so that all branches overhanging a sidewalk are at
least eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk.  If the abutting
property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the
abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days.  If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform
the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])



151.08    TRIMMING TREES WITHOUT APPROVAL. 



   Expect as permitted in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
trim or cut any tree in a street or public place without first obtaining
prior approval from the City.



151.09    DISEASE CONTROL. 



   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious
insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



151.10    INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. 



   The Street Superintendent shall inspect or cause to be inspected any
trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased, or
damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:



      1.   City Property.  If it is determined that any such
condition exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb
and the lot line of private property, the Council may cause such condition to
be corrected by treatment or removal.  The Council may also order the
removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the
making of improvements or with travel thereon.



      2.   Private Property.  If it is determined with reasonable
certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that danger
to other trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians
is imminent, the Council shall notify, by certified mail, the owner,
occupant, or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by
treatment or removal within 14 days of said notification.  If such owner,
occupant, or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days
of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and
the cost assessed against the property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])



151.11    TREE TOPPING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or City department
to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.  Topping
is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the
tree.  An exception to this prohibition may be made by the Street
Superintendent when a tree is severely damage by a storm or other causes, or
when trees are located under utility wires or other obstructions where
appropriate pruning practices are impractical.



CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE



 

155.01  Short Title
 
155.08  Annual Permits


155.02  Purpose and Scope
 
155.09  Registration of Building Contractor


155.03  Adoption Of Building Code
 
155.10  Revocation of Registration


155.04  Permit
 
155.11  Use of Contractor’s Name by Another


155.05  Application For Permit
 
155.12  Right of Entry


155.06  Plans And Specifications
 
155.13  Board of Appeals


155.07  Administration and Enforcement
 
155.14  Amendments



 



155.01    SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Denison, Iowa, Building
Code,” and may be cited as such.  This chapter is referred to herein as
the “Building Code.”



155.02    PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within
the City, and certain equipment specifically regulated herein; to provide for
the issuance of permits, inspection of buildings, the registration of
building contractors and the collection of fees.



155.03    ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.



   The International Building Code and International Residential Code,
2009 Edition, and all provisions of U.B.C. Standards, referred to therein,
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted
by reference in full except for such portions as hereinafter may be deleted,
modified, or amended.  From the effective date of this chapter, all
installation, repairs and alterations of buildings shall be performed in
accordance with its provisions.  An official copy of the 2009 International
Building Code and International Residential Code, as adopted, and a certified
copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter are on file in the office of
the City Clerk for public inspection, and may be purchased therefrom for the
actual cost thereof.




(Ord. 1397 – Mar. 11 Supp.)




155.04    PERMIT.



   A permit required by Section 105 of the International Building Code
shall be issued only to a registered building contractor; however, any permit
required by this chapter may be issued to the owner of a building to do any
work regulated by this chapter in that building, including the usual
accessory buildings; provided, the owner shall personally purchase all
material and perform all labor in connection with the work.  All work done
in accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of this
chapter and shall be inspected.  Permits shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is
commenced.  In addition, all work authorized by such permit must be
completed within two years for commercial properties or one year for
residential properties.



155.05    APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for permit shall be made to the Building Inspector pursuant
to rules provided therefor and on forms provided by the Inspection
Department.  The application shall be accompanied by fees set by resolution
of the Council.  Said fees are listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and
Fees in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.



155.06    PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary
detail shall be submitted when requested by the Building Inspector.  If a
permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications
without payment of any additional fee.  If, in the course of the work, it is
found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which
a permit was issued, amended plans and specifications, and fees in the amount
of half the fees originally required shall be submitted.  A supplementary
permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to the original application
for a permit, shall be issued to cover the change.



155.07    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   It is the duty of the Building Inspector to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to make any required inspections or tests; and
to establish departmental rules subject to Council approval for the effective
and efficient administration and enforcement hereof.



155.08    ANNUAL PERMITS.



   In lieu of individual permits provided for in Section 155.04, an annual
permit shall be issued after application to any registered building
contractor or building owner entitled to secure permits for the repair,
maintenance or remodeling in or on a building or premises for any repair,
maintenance or remodeling of a value less than five hundred dollars
($500.00).  An application for a permit shall be in writing and shall
contain a description of the premises on which the work is to be done.  The
annual permit fee, which is set by resolution of the City council and listed
in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances, shall accompany the application.  The permit holder shall keep a
record of all work done under the permit.  This record shall be accessible
to the Building Inspector at all reasonable times and shall be delivered to
the Building Inspector’s office monthly by the registered building
contractor.  All work done under such permits shall be performed in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and be subject to inspection.



155.09    REGISTRATION OF BUILDING CONTRACTOR.



      1.   A “building contractor” is any person doing any
building work for hire for which a permit is required pursuant to Section 105
of the International Building Code other than a building owner performing his
or her own work.



      2.   All building contractors shall be registered with the
Building Inspector of the City.



      3.   Any person desiring to be registered as a building
contractor shall annually apply to the City Clerk on a form to be supplied by
the Clerk.  The application must be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Council and a certificate of insurance for general
liability insurance with limits of $100,000.00, completed operations product
insurance with limits of $100,000.00, business automobile insurance with
limits of $100,000.00, and statutory worker’s compensation insurance.  The
contractor registration fee is listed in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and
Fees in the Appendix to this Code of Ordinances.



155.10    REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.



   The Building Inspector may revoke any registration if it is obtained
through willful nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation of a
material fact, or if a material provision of the Building Code has been
violated.  Before a registration may be revoked, the contractor shall be
given notice in writing, either personally or as required by the applicable
Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure, enumerating the charges against such
contractor.  The contractor shall be entitled to a fair hearing before the
Building Inspector not less than five days or later than thirty days after
receipt of the notice.  The decision of the Building Inspector may be
appealed to the Council at its next regular meeting.  The Council may
affirm, amend, remand or reverse the Inspector’s decision.  A person whose
registration has been revoked shall not be permitted to apply for another
registration within one year from the date of revocation.



155.11    USE OF CONTRACTOR’S NAME BY ANOTHER.



   No contractor shall allow his or her name to be used by another person
either for the purpose of doing business or work under said contractor’s
registration.  Every registered contractor shall notify the Inspector of the
address of said contractor’s place of business, if any, and the name under
which such business is carried on and shall give immediate notice to the
Inspector of any change in either.  No registration issued under this
chapter shall be transferable.



155.12    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Building Inspector may enter any premises on proof of authority for
the purpose of inspecting any building work, at such times as may be
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



155.13    BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector pursuant
to this chapter, except the registration provisions thereof, may appeal to
the Board of Appeals, pursuant to and in the manner provided for in Section
171.15 of this Code of Ordinances.



155.14    AMENDMENTS.



      1.   Section R907.3, Recovering versus Replacement, of the
International Residential Code is hereby amended by deleting Subsection 4
which prohibited applying a second layer of shingles in an area subject to
moderate or severe hail exposure.




(Ord. 1397 – Mar. 11 Supp.)




      2.   Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, of the
International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety.




(Ord. 1402 – Mar. 11 Supp.)




      3.   Section 905.10.3 of the International Residential Code is
repealed and the following is adopted in lieu thereof:



         Section 905.10.3 Material Standards.  The following
standards shall be used for the review, approval, and then construction in
all residential zones.



         a.   Roof Type and Pitch.  The type of roof and its
pitch of the majority of the structure shall be consistent with other
dwellings in the immediate neighborhood.



         b.   Materials.



            1.   The exterior building and roof materials
shall be consistent with the material types of other dwelling units within a
300-foot radius in all directions.  Materials on the dwelling unit shall
have a uniform color.



            2.   Exterior materials shall be non-reflective
and shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable to existing
residential structures in the immediate area.  Permanent siding shall be -
or simulate - wood, wood shingles, brick, masonry, or tile, and shall be
engineered to last a minimum of 25 years.  Wood-based sheet siding is
prohibited.



(Ord. 1497 - May 19 Supp.)



         c.   Flat Roof Systems.  Any material that is permitted
by the International Residential Code is allowed on flat roof systems. 
Green roof systems are permitted and encouraged.



         d.   Roofing Materials for Pitched Roof Systems. 
Roofing materials used on pitched roof systems shall be proven, high quality,
durable materials, including:



            1.   Architectural shingles;



            2.   Concrete tile;



            3.   Slate;



            4.   Architectural standing seam metal;



            5.   Building integrated solar arrays (solar
panels that double as roofing material; and



            6.   Green roof systems.



         e.   Prohibited Roofing Materials.  Corrugated or
ribbed metal and other roofing materials that are not listed in subsection
d., above, are prohibited.



         f.   All repairs or replacement of existing metal roofs
must comply with these requirements.



         g.   Exceptions.  These standards do not apply to
auxiliary structures, such as storage buildings, with pre-built flooring that
are not attached to foundations.




(Ord. 1459 - Aug. 16 Supp.)




CHAPTER 156
FIRE CODE



 

156.01  Short Title
 
156.06  Smoke Detectors


156.02  Adoption of Fire Code
 
156.07  New Materials, Processes, or Occupancies Which May Require Permits


156.03  Amendments, Modifications, Additions, and Deletions
 
156.08  Liability For Damages


156.04  Application For Permit
 
156.09  Administration and Enforcement


156.05  Plans And Specifications
 
156.10  Right of Entry



 



156.01    SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Denison, Iowa, Fire
Code,” and may be cited as such.  This chapter is referred to herein as
the “Fire Code.”



156.02    ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.



   The International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in full except for such portions
as may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended.  An official copy of
the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, as adopted, and a certified copy
of the ordinance codified in this chapter are on file in the office of the
Clerk for public inspection, and may be purchased therefrom for the actual
cost thereof. 



(Ord. 1398 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



156.03    AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.



      1.   Section 101.1 is hereby deleted and there is enacted in
lieu thereof the following section:



         Section 101.1  TITLE.  These regulations shall be known
as the Fire Code of the City of Denison, Iowa, hereinafter known as “this
code.”



      2.   Section 101.2.1 is deleted and replaced as follows:



         Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I are specifically
adopted by the City of Denison.



      3.   The following section is added:



         Section 104.12  STOPPING USES, EVACUATION.  The code
official is authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the evacuation
of any premises, building or vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a
fire or life safety hazard.



      4.   Section 105.1.2 is hereby amended by adding the following
paragraphs to said section:



         Section 105.1.2  OTHER PERMITS.  Building, Mechanical,
Electrical and Plumbing permits issued pursuant to provisions of their
respective codes may be assumed to comply with section 2, Construction Permit.



      5.   Section 105 of the 2009 International Fire Code requires
that a permit be obtained to engage in many activities, operations,
practices, or functions.  The ONLY permits that are required by this Fire
Code are listed below:



         105.6.2   Amusement Buildings



         105.6.4   Carnivals and Fairs



         105.6.9   Covered Mall Buildings



         105.6.13   Exhibits and Trade Shows



         105.6.14   Explosives



         105.6.20   Hazardous Materials



         105.6.30   Open Burning



         105.6.34   Places of Assembly



         105.6.36   Pyrotechnical Special Effects Material



         105.7   Required Construction Permits.  The following
permits are required and shall be issued by the Denison Building Inspection
Services Department as set forth in the sections noted below.  Permit fees
for construction permits shall be as established under the Building Code.



            105.7.1      Automatic Fire-Extinguishing
Systems



            105.7.3      Compressed Gases



            105.7.5      Fire Alarm and Detection Systems
and Related Equipment



            105.7.6      Fire Pumps and Related Equipment



            105.7.7      Flammable and Combustible Liquids



            105.7.8      Hazardous Materials



            105.7.12   Spraying or Dipping



            105.7.13   Standpipe Systems



            105.7.14   Temporary Membrane Structures, Tents
and Canopies



      6.   Section 109.3 shall be deleted and replaced as follows:



         Section 109.3  VIOLATION; PENALTIES.  Any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this code hereby adopted or shall fail
to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order
made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued hereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who
shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by any court of
competent jurisdiction, with the time fixed herein, shall severally for each
and every such violation be guilty of a municipal infraction.  The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not permit it to continue
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time; and when not specified, each day that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



      7.   Section 111.4 shall be deleted and replaced as follows:



         111.4  FAILURE TO COMPLY.  Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable as noted in section 109.3.



      8.   Section 111.5 shall be added, as follows:



         Section 111.5 CITATION.  Persons operating or maintaining
an occupancy, premises, or vehicle subject to the requirements of this Code
who allow a hazard to exist, or who fail to take immediate action to abate a
hazard in regard to such occupancy, premises, or vehicle, when ordered or
notified to do so by the code official, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Code officials, or designees, are hereby authorized to issue and deliver
citations on forms prepared and approved by the City Attorney’s office to
persons accused of violating any of the provisions of this Code.



      9.   Section 114 shall be added, as follows:



         Section 114  CHANGES IN USE OR OCCUPANCY.



         Section 114.1 GENERAL.  No change shall be made in the
character of occupancy or use of any building which would place the building
in a different division of the same group of occupancy or in a different
group of occupancies as defined in chapter 3 of the 2009 International
Building Code or sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10 inclusive unless such
building is made to comply with the requirements of this section of the Code
for new buildings.  Exception:  The character of the occupancy of existing
buildings may be changed subject to the approval of the Code Official and the
building may be occupied for purposes in other Groups without conforming to
the requirements of this section of the Code for those Groups, provided the
new or proposed use is equal to or less hazardous, based on life and fire
risk, than the existing use.



      10.   Section 115 shall be added, as follows:



         Section 115  OTHER FEES.  The City Council of the City of
Denison, Iowa, may by resolution prescribe the occasions when fees for Fire
Department response or services are required.



      11.   Section 202 is hereby amended by modifying Section 202
General Definitions and adding or replacing the following definitions:



         CHARCOAL GRILL.



         An outdoor cooking device using solid fuels as a heat
source for cooking food.  Examples not limited to: charcoal, wood, wood
chips, coal or coke.



         CODE OFFICIAL.



         The Chief Officer of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal,
or the Chief’s authorized representative.



         MINI STORAGE WAREHOUSE.



         A storage/garage building that is divided into individual
storage/garage units for rent or use by tenants or the general public.



         MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEX.



         A residential occupancy such as: apartment building or
condominium, or townhouse, or similar buildings with similar use.



      12.   Section 305 Ignition Sources is hereby amended by adding
the following:



         Section 305.5  Reckless Use of Fire.  No person shall so
use fire or any incendiary device or material as to recklessly endanger any
property or safety of another.



      13.   Section 307.2 shall be deleted and replaced as follows:



         Section 307.2  PERMIT REQUIRED.  Open burning shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 307 and its subsections and with Chapter
107 of this Code of Ordinances.  Open burning shall also be conducted as
required by other government agencies regulating emissions.  Application for
such approval shall only be presented by and issued to the owner of the land
upon which the fire is to be kindled.



      14.   Section 308.1 OPEN FLAME and 308.1.4 OPEN-FLAME COOKING
DEVICES shall be deleted.



      15.   Section 405.2 FREQUENCY shall be amended by deletion of
the Group E requirements in Table 405.2 and addition of the following:



   Fire drills and tornado drills in Group E Occupancies shall be
conducted in accordance with the State Code of Iowa.  The building fire
alarm system shall be used for fire drills; however, prior to the drill, the
fire alarm monitoring company must be contacted and advised that a drill will
be occurring.  Fire drills shall include the complete evacuation of all
persons from the building or portion thereof used for educational purposes. 
Exception:  The staff member responsible for notifying the Fire Department
and handling emergency communications.



      16.   Section 408.3.1 FIRST EMERGENCY EVACUATION DRILL and
408.3.2 EMERGENCY EVACUATION DRILL DEFERRAL shall be deleted.



      17.   Section 502.1 DEFINITIONS shall be amended by deleting
the definition for “fire apparatus road” and replacing it with the
following:



   Fire Apparatus Access Road.  A road that provides fire apparatus
access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof.  This
is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, private
street, parking lot lane and access roadway, but excluding public streets. 
Public streets shall meet the requirements of the City’s Code of Ordinances.



      18.   Section 503.2.4 shall be deleted and replaced as follows:



         Section 503.2.4  TURNING RADIUS.  The turning radii of a
fire apparatus access road must be at least twenty-five (25) feet inside and
forty-five (45) feet outside.



      19.   A new Section 504.4 shall be added as follows:



         Section 504.4 IDENTIFICATION OF INTERIOR DOORS.  The Chief
may require that certain interior doors be identified.  The Chief shall
approve the type, size, and location of the sign.



      20.   Section 507.1 REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY shall be amended by
adding the following:



         The location, number and type of fire hydrants connected to
a water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided
on the public street or on site of the premises as required in Appendices B &
C of this Code and as required below or as approved by the Chief or the
Chief’s designee.  Fire hydrants shall be accessible to the Fire
Department apparatus by roads meeting the requirements of Section 503 and
appendix C of this Code.



      21.   Section 507.5.7 shall be added as follows:



         Section 507.5.7  INSTALLATION.



         507.5.7.1  Fire hydrant height: Fire hydrants shall be
installed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the nominal ground level to
the center of the lower water outlet.



         507.5.7.2  Fire hydrant outlet direction:  All fire
hydrants shall be positioned so that the 4½-inch connection is facing the
street or driveway accessible to Fire Department apparatus.



         507.5.7.3  Fire hydrant threads:  All fire hydrants
within the limits of the City of Denison shall have National Standard Threads
(NST).



         507.5.7.4  Flow:  The minimum flow requirements for a
water main serving a fire hydrant is the rate of water flow, at a residual
pressure of twenty pounds per square inch (20 psi) and for a specified
duration, as specified in Appendix B of this Code.



         507.5.7.5  Size of main:  No fire hydrant shall be
installed on a water main less than six (6) inches in diameter.  Water mains
shall be appropriately sized and installed to provide the required water flow.



         Table C105.1 in Appendix C shall be amended by changing the
average spacing between hydrants to 400 feet for required fire flows of 2,500
gallons or less per minute.



      22.   Section 907.1 is hereby amended by adding Section
907.1.4 as follows:



         Section 907.1.4 MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOXES.  Where in the
opinion of the code official manual fire alarm boxes may be used to cause
false alarms, the code official is authorized to modify the requirements for
manual fire alarm boxes.



      23.   Section 907.1 is hereby amended by adding Section
907.1.5 as follows:



         Section 907.1.5 FIRE ALARM OPERATION.  For all automatic
fire detection systems, trained on-site staff may silence an alarm, but may
not reset an alarm.  Resetting must be done by Fire Department personnel or
by approval of Fire Department personnel.  All fire alarms must be reported
to the Fire Department.



      24.   Section 1004.10 is added, as follows:



         Section 1004.10 OVERCROWDING IN PLACES OF ASSEMBLY. 
Overcrowding and admittance of persons beyond the approved capacity in a
place of assembly are prohibited.  The code official, with assistance from
the police department, upon finding overcrowding conditions or obstruction in
aisles, passageways, or other means of egress, or upon finding a condition
which constitutes a serious menace to life, is authorized to cause the
performance, presentation, spectacle, or entertainment to be stopped until
such condition or obstruction is corrected.



      25.   Section 1008.1 DOORS is hereby amended by adding a new
section as follows:



         Section 1008.1.6.1 FROST PROTECTION.  Exterior landings at
emergency exit doors shall be provided with frost protection.



      26.   Add a new exception to Section 1008.1.9 PANIC AND FIRE
EXIT HARDWARE, as follows:



         Exception:  In Group A, Division 3 Occupancies and in all
churches, panic hardware may be omitted from the main exit when the main exit
consists of a single door or pair of doors.  A locking device may be used in
place of the panic hardware, provided the locking device can be unlocked from
the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge.  Flush, edge
or surface bolts or any type of device that may be used to close or restrain
the door other than by operation of the locking device are prohibited.  The
unlatching of any leaf shall not require more than one operation.  The use
of this exception may be revoked by the Building or Fire Official for due
cause.



      27.   Section 1025.5 WINDOW WELLS is hereby amended by adding
a new section as follows:



         Section 1025.5.2 WINDOW WELL DRAINAGE.  All window wells
shall be provided with approved drainage.



      28.   Delete the third paragraph in Section 2210.2.2 and
replace it with the following:



         Lubricating oil which has been drained from motor vehicles
shall be stored and handled as required for Class III-A liquids in accordance
with Chapter 34.



      29.   Delete Section 2403.2 and replace it with the following:



         Section 2403.2 APPROVAL REQUIRED.  Tents and membrane
structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet and canopies in excess
of 1,000 square feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any
purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the code
official.  Exception:  Tents used exclusively for recreational camping
purposes.



      30.   Add a new exception to Section 2404.3 LABEL as follows:



         Exception: In lieu of a permanently affixed label on a
temporary membrane structure, tent or canopy, flame-resistance or fire
retardant shall be documented and certified by the manufacturer in an
approved manner.



      31.   Add a new exception to Section 2403.12.6.1 EXIT SIGN
ILLUMINATION as follows:



         Exception.  Internally or externally illuminated exit
signs are NOT required in tents when all of the following conditions are
met:  (1) The tent is not occupied after sunset; (2) The tent is not
provided with any artificial lighting; (3) The tent has a minimum of 5 foot
candles of natural external lighting for non-lit exit signs during the hours
the tent is open to the public.



      32.   Section 2403.12.7 MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION is hereby
amended by adding Exception 1 as follows:



         Exception 1.  Means of egress is not required to be
artificially illuminated when all of the following conditions are met:  (1)
The tent is not occupied after sunset; (2) The tent is not provided with any
artificial lighting; (3) The tent has a minimum of 1 foot candle of natural
external lighting for the means of egress during the hours the tent is open
to the public.



      33.   Section 2703.5 HAZARD IDENTIFICATION SIGNS is hereby
amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the paragraph:



         Signs shall also comply with the Iowa Right to Know Law.



      34.   Section 2703.13 TIER II REPORTING is hereby amended by
adding the following:



         Facilities reporting hazardous chemical inventories in
excess of their Threshold Planning Quantities pursuant to Section 312 of the
Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act shall use an approved
electronic “Emergency and Hazardous Chemical Inventory” form or show
reason to use paper forms and submit the electronic or paper form prior to
March 1 of each year.



      35.   Section 3301.1.3.1 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS is hereby
amended by adding the following:



         Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for
any person to offer for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks
except as permitted by section 40.15 of this Code of Ordinances.  Law
Enforcement, Fire or Code officials shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be
removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or
exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this Code of Ordinances or
the Code of Iowa.




(Ord. 1441 - Aug. 14 Supp.)




      36.   Section 3301.2.5 PERMIT SUBMITTAL is hereby amended by
adding the following:



         Application for a permit shall be submitted with all
required information not less than 14 days before a proposed event requiring
a permit by Chapter 33 of this Code, or as approved by the code official.



      37.   Add to Section 3402 DEFINITIONS FOR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
the following:



         Note: Used crankcase oils shall be considered a III-A
combustible liquid.



      38.   Delete Section 3404.1 and replace it with the following:



         Section 3404.1 GENERAL.  Storage of flammable and
combustible liquids in containers, cylinders, and tanks shall be in
accordance with this section, applicable sections of Chapter 27 and rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 1398 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



156.04    APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Reserved.



156.05    PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary
detail shall be submitted when requested by the Code Administrator.  If a
permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications
without payment of any additional fee.  If, in the course of work, it is
found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which
a permit was issued, amended plans and specifications, and fees in the amount
of half the fees originally required shall be submitted.  A supplementary
permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to the original application
for a permit, shall be issued to cover the change.



156.06    SMOKE DETECTORS.



   Whenever there is a mixed use of residential and commercial, the
residential portions of the property shall have functioning smoke detectors
installed therein.



156.07    NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE
PERMITS.



   The Building Inspector and the Code Official of the Fire Department
shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected
persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now
enumerated in said Code.  The Code Official shall post such list in a
conspicuous place at the administrative offices of the Fire Department and
distribute copies thereof to interested persons.



156.08    LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals
the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members
of the public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from
harm.  The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representation or
warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed
under this Code, but said inspections are made solely to assist the owner of
the building, structure, equipment and premises to meet certain minimum
requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to meet the
minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of
persons and property.  Nothing herein contained in this Code shall alleviate
the owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to make an
independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of this Code, nor
shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure, equipment or
premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused
by defects or Code violations.  The City, its officers, employees, or agents
shall not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or
property by reason of any inspections authorized by this Code or
investigations, or any approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to
act in the enforcement of this Fire Code.



156.09    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   It is the duty of the Fire Chief to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to make required inspections or tests and to
establish departmental rules subject to Council approval for the effective
and efficient administration and enforcement hereof.



156.10    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Fire Chief may enter any premises on proof of authority for the
purpose of inspecting any building work, at such times as may be reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



CHAPTER 157
MECHANICAL CODE



 

157.01  Definition
 
157.07  Applications for Permits


157.02  Adoption of Mechanical Code
 
157.08  Issuance of Permits


157.03  Higher Standards
 
157.09  Permit and Inspection Fees


157.04  Compliance with Code and Chapter
 
157.10  Inspection


157.05  Permits Required
 
157.11  License Required


157.06  Exceptions
 
157.12  Appeals



 



157.01    DEFINITION.



   As used in this chapter, “mechanical contractor” means a person who
is engaged in the business of contracting to make mechanical installations,
repairs, and alterations.



157.02    ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.



   The 2009 Edition of the International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted
and shall be in force and effect in the City, except to the extent that
higher standards are provided for in this chapter.  An official copy of the
2009 International Mechanical Code, as adopted, is on file in the office of
the Clerk and is available for public inspection.



(Ord. 1396 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



157.03    HIGHER STANDARDS.



   The Council finds that to the extent that the mechanical regulations
provided for in this chapter conflict with the minimum requirements contained
in the International Mechanical Code, said regulations constitute higher
standards and that the adoption of said higher standards is permitted by the
International Mechanical Code.



157.04    COMPLIANCE WITH CODE AND CHAPTER.



   All mechanical installations, repairs and alterations in the City shall
be made in compliance with the requirements of the International Mechanical
Code, except to the extent that higher standards are provided for in this
chapter.  To the extent that this chapter provides for higher standards than
the minimum requirements contained in the International Mechanical Code, all
such mechanical installations, repairs and alterations shall be made in
compliance with this chapter.



157.05    PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Permits are required as set forth in the International Mechanical Code,
2009 Edition, Section 106.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



157.06    EXCEPTIONS.



   Exemptions are listed in the International Mechanical Code, 2009
Edition, Section 106.2.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



157.07    APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.



   Any person desiring to make any mechanical installation, repair, or
alteration shall file an application for a mechanical permit with the
Building Inspector on a form provided by the City.  The application shall be
accompanied by the fee as provided in this chapter.  If requested by the
Building Inspector, the applicant shall also submit plans and specifications
showing the proposed work in such detail as is necessary to determine whether
the proposed work complies with the International Mechanical Code.



157.08    ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   If the Building Inspector determines that the mechanical installation,
repair, or alteration as proposed in an application complies with the
International Mechanical Code and with all other applicable statutes and
regulations, said official shall issue to the applicant a written mechanical
permit authorizing the proposed work.  A mechanical permit shall state the
name of the person to whom it is issued, the location of the premises where
the proposed work is authorized, the name of the owner of said premises and a
general description of the mechanical installation, repair or alteration
which is authorized and it shall be signed by the Building Inspector. 
Permits shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such
permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period
of 180 days after the time the work is commenced.  In addition, all work
authorized by such permit must be completed within two years for commercial
properties or one year for residential properties.



157.09    PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   Before issuing a mechanical permit the Building Inspector shall receive
from the applicant a fee for issuing the permit and inspecting the work. 
The fee shall be set by resolution of the Council and is listed in the
Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances.



157.10    INSPECTION.



      1.   All mechanical installations, repairs, or alterations
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector.  The Building
Inspector shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of
making such inspection.



      2.   The person to whom a mechanical permit has been issued
shall give the Building Inspector notice that the work authorized by the
permit is ready for inspection.  Such notice shall be given not less than
twenty-four hours before the work is to be inspected.



      3.   If the Building Inspector finds that a mechanical
installation, repair, or alteration does not comply with the International
Mechanical Code and with all other applicable statutes and regulations, said
official shall deliver to the person to whom the mechanical permit was issued
a written statement of the changes necessary to comply with said code,
statutes, and regulations.  The person to whom the mechanical permit was
issued shall make the necessary changes within fifteen days after the written
statement is delivered.



      4.   Any building supplied by L.P. Gas shall be equipped with
an approved gas detector mounted twelve (12) inches above the floor in an
approved location.



157.11    LICENSE REQUIRED.



      1.   All persons wishing to make any mechanical installation,
repair, or alteration shall comply with State of Iowa licensing requirements.



      2.   Any person doing work as a mechanical contractor shall
provide a certificate of insurance for general liability insurance with
limits of $100,000.00, completed operations product insurance with limits of
$100,000.00, business automobile insurance with limits of $100,000.00, and
statutory worker’s compensation insurance.



157.12    APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector pursuant
to this chapter may appeal to the Board of Appeals, pursuant to and in the
manner provided for in Section 171.15 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 158
PLUMBING CODE



 



158.01  Definitions
 
158.09  Applications for Permits


158.02  Adoption of Plumbing Code
 
158.10  Issuance of Permits


158.03  Higher Standards
 
158.11  Permit and Inspection Fees


158.04  Bituminized Fiber Sewer Pipe
 
158.12  Inspection


158.05  Water Distribution Pipe
 
158.13  Plumber’s Licenses Required


158.06  Compliance with Code and Chapter
 
158.14  Work Done by Owner


158.07  Permits Required
 
158.15  Sump Pumps


158.08  Exceptions
 
158.16  Appeal




 



158.01    DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



      1.   “Apprentice plumber” means a person who labors at the
trade of plumbing as an employee of a plumbing contractor under the direct
supervision and in the immediate presence of a plumbing contractor or
journeyman plumber.



      2.   “Journeyman plumber” means a person who labors at the
trade of plumbing as an officer, partner, or employee of a plumbing
contractor.



      3.   “Master plumber” means a person who labors at the
trade of plumbing and works in the planning or superintending of the design,
installation, or repair of plumbing, HVAC, refrigeration, or hydronic
systems, and who is familiar with the laws and rules governing the same.



      4.   “Plumbing contractor” means a person who is engaged
in the business of contracting to make plumbing installations, repairs, and
alterations.



158.02    ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.



   The 2009 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be in force and
effect in the City, except to the extent that higher standards are provided
for in this chapter.



(Ord. 1399 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



158.03    HIGHER STANDARDS.



   The Council finds that to the extent that the plumbing regulations
provided for in this chapter conflict with the minimum requirements contained
in the Uniform Plumbing Code, said regulations constitute higher standards
and that the adoption of said higher standards is permitted by the Uniform
Plumbing Code.



158.04    BITUMINIZED FIBER SEWER PIPE.



   Bituminized fiber sewer pipe shall not be used in any plumbing
installation, repair, or alteration in the City of Denison, Iowa.



158.05    WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPE.



   All installations, repairs, and alterations of water distribution pipe
in the City shall be made in compliance with this section.  Plastic pipe and
fittings marked to show approval by the National Sanitation Foundation
Testing Laboratory may be used as a water service pipe when installed in
accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer.  Service lines shall
be constructed of the following materials and in accordance with these rules
and regulations and/or the Uniform Plumbing Code:  brass, bronze, and Type K
copper pipe and approved fittings.  Service polyethylene piping with
approved fittings of such strength and thickness as to safely withstand a
pressure of two hundred (200) pounds per square inch.  Poly piping must be
installed with a locate wire for future locating use.  Solvent weld plastic
pipe shall not be permitted.  Plastic pipe shall not be installed in any
chase or tunnel that is heated or which contains hot water, hot air, or steam
piping.  It shall terminate at a point not more than twelve inches inside
the building wall, floor, or footing or through a floor; the pipe shall be
installed within a sleeve two pipe diameters in size.  Provisions shall be
made to accommodate the rate of expansion and contraction in plastic pipe
being approximately ten times greater than that found in ferrous pipe and
five times greater than that found in copper pipe.  Flexible plastic pipe
shall be laid in snake fashion to provide a uniform slack of at least two
inches per one hundred feet.  Plastic pipe shall not be jacked or pulled. 
PEX tubing may be installed in the interior of a building for hot or cold
potable water distribution, provided all outside hose bibs have metal
continuity with the water service.  All non-metallic water underground pipe
shall have a minimum of eighteen gauge tracer wire run to all points
accessible for tracing.  The service line between the water main and curb
box shall be and remain the property of Denison Municipal Utilities.  The
service line and appurtenances from the curb box to the meter shall be and
remain the property of the property owner.



(Ord. 1389 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



158.06    COMPLIANCE WITH CODE AND CHAPTER.



   All plumbing installations, repairs, and alterations in the City shall
be made in compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code,
except to the extent that higher standards are provided for in this
chapter.  To the extent that this chapter provides for higher standards than
the minimum requirements contained in the Uniform Plumbing Code, all such
plumbing installations, repairs and alterations shall be made in compliance
with this chapter.



158.07    PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Permits are required as set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009
Edition, Section 103.1.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



158.08    EXCEPTIONS.



   In addition to exemptions listed in the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009
Edition, Section 103.1.2, plumbing work that involves only the working parts
of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppages, the repairing of leaks, the
replacement of defective faucets or valves, clothes washer or dishwasher may
be done without a plumbing permit.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



158.09    APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.



   Except as provided by Section 158.08 of this chapter and Section 101.5
of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, any person desiring to make any
plumbing installation, repair or alteration shall file an application for a
plumbing permit with the Building Inspector on a form provided by the City. 
The application shall be accompanied by the fee provided by this chapter. 
If requested by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall also submit plans
and specifications showing the proposed work in such detail as is necessary
to determine whether the proposed work complies with the Uniform Plumbing
Code.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



158.10    ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   Except as provided by Section 158.14 of this chapter, a plumbing permit
shall be issued only to a licensed plumbing contractor.  If the Building
Inspector determines that the plumbing installation, repair, or alteration as
proposed in an application complies with the Uniform Plumbing Code and with
all other applicable statutes and regulations, said officer shall issue to
the applicant a written plumbing permit authorizing the proposed work.  A
plumbing permit shall state the name of the person to whom it is issued, the
location of the premises where the proposed work is authorized, the name of
the owner of said premises and a general description of the plumbing
installation, repair or alteration which is authorized and it shall be signed
by the Building Inspector.  Permits shall become invalid unless the work on
the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. 
In addition, all work authorized by such permit must be completed within two
years for commercial structures and one year for residential structures.



158.11    PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   Before issuing a plumbing permit, the Building Inspector shall receive
from the applicant a fee for issuing the permit and inspecting the work. 
The fee shall be set by resolution of the Council and is listed in the
Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances.



158.12    INSPECTION.



      1.   All plumbing installations, repairs, and alterations
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector.  The Building
Inspector shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of
making such inspection.



      2.   The person to whom a plumbing permit has been issued
shall give the Building Inspector notice that the work authorized by the
permit is ready for inspection.  Such notice shall be given not less than
twenty-four hours before the work is to be inspected.



      3.   If the Building Inspector finds that a plumbing
installation, repair, or alteration does not comply with the Uniform Plumbing
Code and with all other applicable statutes and regulations, said official
shall deliver to the person to whom the plumbing permit was issued a written
statement of the changes necessary to comply with said code, statutes, and
regulations.  The person to whom the plumbing permit was issued shall make
the necessary changes within fifteen days after the written statement is
delivered.



158.13    PLUMBER’S LICENSES REQUIRED.



      1.   Except as provided by Section 158.14 of this chapter, no
person shall make any plumbing installation, repair, or alteration unless
such person has complied with State of Iowa licensing requirements.



      2.   Any person doing work as a plumber shall provide a
certificate of insurance for general liability insurance with limits of
$100,000.00, completed operations product insurance with limits of
$100,000.00, business automobile insurance with limits of $100,000.00, and
statutory worker’s compensation insurance.



158.14    WORK DONE BY OWNER.



   The owner of a single-family dwelling may make plumbing installations,
repairs and alterations in that dwelling and accessory buildings if: (i) the
dwelling is used solely as the personal residence of the owner and owner's
family and continues to be used solely as such personal residence for a
period of six months after the work is completed; and (ii) all material is
purchased and all labor is performed by the owner or by a member of the
owner's family residing in the dwelling.  All provisions of this chapter
shall apply to plumbing work done by the owner of a dwelling pursuant to this
section, except that such owner shall not be required to have a plumbing
contractor's license.  Permits are necessary as required by the Uniform
Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition.



(Ord. 1446 - Nov. 14 Supp.)



158.15    SUMP PUMPS.



   Discharge from sump pumps shall not enter the sanitary sewer system and
must be taken to the outside and away from the structure so as not to cause
damage to any property.



158.16    APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector pursuant
to this chapter may appeal to the Board of Appeals, pursuant to and in the
manner provided for in Section 171.15 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 159
EXISTING BUILDING CODE



159.01    ADOPTION OF CODE.



   The 2009 International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted as the
Existing Building Code of the City of Denison, Iowa, except to the extent
that higher standards are provided in this chapter.  An official copy of the
2009 International Existing Building Code, as adopted, and a certified copy
of the ordinance codified in this chapter are on file in the office of the
Clerk for public inspection, and may be purchased therefrom for the actual
cost thereof.



(Ord. 1400 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 160
ELECTRICAL CODE



 



160.01  Adoption of Electrical Code
 
160.13  Exceptions


160.02  Compliance with Electrical Code and Chapter
 
160.14  Application for Permits


160.03  Conductors
 
160.15  Issuance of Permits


160.04  Electrical Equipment
 
160.16  Permit and Inspection Fees


160.05  Exit Lights
 
160.17  Inspection of Electrical Work


160.06  Conduit Work
 
160.18  License Required


160.07  Grounding
 
160.19  Inspection of Existing Electrical Work


160.08  Service Entrances
 
160.20  Damage to Public Property


160.09  Workmanship
 
160.21  Damage to Private Property


160.10  Special Service Connections
 
160.22  Cutting Off Electric Current


160.11  Tapping of Line
 
160.23  Appeal


160.12  Permits Required
 




 



160.01    ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The 2008 Edition of the National Electrical Code adopted by the
National Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted as the electrical code
of the City of Denison, Iowa.



160.02    COMPLIANCE WITH ELECTRICAL CODE AND CHAPTER.



   All electrical installations, alterations, and repairs shall be made in
compliance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.  In the event of conflict
between the requirements of said electrical code and the requirements of this
chapter, electrical installations, alterations, and repairs shall be made in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



160.03    CONDUCTORS.



   All conductors, however well insulated, shall always be treated as bare
so that under no conditions existing or likely to exist can any short circuit
occur and so that all leakage from any conductor or between any conductor and
ground shall be reduced to a minimum.



160.04    ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.



   In laying out an installation, except for constant current systems,
every reasonable effort shall be made to secure distribution centers located
in easily accessible places at which points cutouts and switches controlling
the various circuits shall be grouped for convenience and safety of
operation.  The load shall be divided as evenly as possible between branches
and all complicated and unnecessary wiring shall be avoided.



160.05    EXIT LIGHTS.



   In all public halls and places where exit lights are required, they
shall be on separate circuits from those used for general lighting.



160.06    CONDUIT WORK.



      1.   Except as provided by subsections 2 and 3 of this
section, all electrical wires conducting electrical energy in excess of 32
volts in or upon the following specified buildings and structures shall be
enclosed in metal conduit or metal raceway.



         A.   All buildings and structures within the fire limits
of the City of Denison, Iowa.



         B.   All schools, hospitals, churches, and institutions
of every kind for the care or treatment of persons.



         C.   All club houses and social or community center
buildings.



         D.   All public and utility buildings.



         E.   All garages with floor space for three or more cars.



         F.   All gasoline service stations.



      2.   Flexible metal conduit or any conduit acceptable under
the National Electrical Code may be used in lieu of rigid metal conduit under
the following conditions:



         A.   In the remodeling or repair of existing buildings
and structures where existing wiring is to be extended or relocated in
concealed locations and the use of metal conduit is impractical.  In exposed
locations in such buildings and structures non-flexible metal raceway may be
used.



         B.   For connections to motors, removable reflectors and
similar installations requiring frequent removal or adjustment for a distance
not in excess of six feet or for any distance acceptable under the Electrical
Code.



      3.   In the remodeling or repair of existing one- and
two-family dwellings within the fire limits of the City, where existing
wiring is to be extended or relocated in concealed locations, Romex cable may
be used.



160.07    GROUNDING.



   Grounding must be done in accordance with Article 250 of the National
Electrical Code, 2008 Edition.



160.08    SERVICE ENTRANCES.



      1.   In all cases where possible and practical, electric
meters shall be installed on the outside of the building to be served, at a
place easily accessible and where the service entrance can be most easily
connected to the utilities secondary system.  Whenever there is a question
as to the proper location for a meter and service entrance, the location
shall be determined by the Superintendent of the Denison Municipal Utilities.



      2.   Service entrances when in an exposed location and subject
to mechanical injury and on all masonry buildings shall be in conduit.



      3.   Underground service wires shall be run in conduit from
the secondary rack on the service post to at least two feet below the surface
of the ground and from the electric meter box to at least two feet below the
surface of the ground.



160.09    WORKMANSHIP.



   In all installation, alteration and repair of electrical wiring special
attention shall be paid to the mechanical execution of the work and care
shall be taken in neatly running connections, soldering, taping conductors or
any approved mechanical or pressure connectors and in securing and attaching
fittings.  If the Building Inspector finds that the work is not so executed,
said official shall give notice of the necessary changes pursuant to
Subsection 160.17(4) of this chapter.



160.10    SPECIAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make any service connection to any electrical wiring of
the City on the line side of the meter or before an electric meter has been
installed by the City unless a special service connection permit has been
issued by the Denison Municipal Utilities for such connection.



160.11    TAPPING OF LINE.



   Service or distribution lines shall be tapped only at the poles
supporting the same and as near thereto as possible.  No such tapping shall
be done by any person other than an authorized employee of the Denison
Municipal Utilities.



160.12    PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Except as provided by Section 160.13 of this chapter, no person shall
cause to be made any installation or alteration of any wiring system through
or by which electrical current is to be conveyed or of any device to be used
for the generation, transmission, conduction, absorption, transformation,
reduction or consumption of electrical current in any building or structure
unless an electrical permit authorizing such installation or alteration has
first been issued as provided by this chapter.



160.13    EXCEPTIONS.



   No electrical permit shall be required for making repairs or
maintenance replacements to any wiring system.  No electrical permit shall
be required for the installation or alteration of wires to operate an
electrical bell, gas lighting apparatus, call bell, burglar alarm, telephone,
telegraph, direct messenger, fire alarm or other similar installation or
alteration when a transformer is not required and when the voltage used is
not over twenty-four volts.  No permit shall be required for the
installation or alteration of any electrical system used in connection with
electric light, heat, or power in any industrial plant, central station,
substation, or public utility building if an expert electrician is regularly
employed and has charge of electrical work in such plant, station, or
building.



160.14    APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   Except as provided by Section 160.13 of this chapter, any person
desiring to make any electrical installation or alteration shall file an
application for an electrical permit with the Building Inspector on a form
provided by the City.  The application shall state the location of the
premises where the proposed work is to be done, the name of the owner of said
premises, the name of the person to do the work and the amount and nature of
the work.  The application shall also state the proposed work will be done
in compliance with this chapter and all other applicable statutes and
regulations.  The application shall be accompanied by the fee provided by
this chapter.  If requested by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall
also submit plans and specifications showing the proposed work in such detail
as necessary to determine whether the proposed work complies with this
chapter and all other applicable statutes and regulations.



160.15    ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   If the Building Inspector determines that an electrical installation or
alteration as proposed in an application complies with this chapter and all
other applicable statutes and regulations, said official shall issue to the
applicant a written electrical permit authorizing the proposed work. 
Permits shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such
permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period
of 180 days after the time the work is commenced.  In addition, all work
authorized by such permit must be completed within two years.



160.16    PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   Before issuing an electrical permit, the Building Inspector shall
receive from the applicant a fee for issuing the permit and inspecting the
work.  The fee shall be set by resolution of the Council and is listed in
the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of
Ordinances.



160.17    INSPECTION OF ELECTRICAL WORK.



      1.   All electrical installations and alterations shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector.  The Building Inspector
shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making
such inspection.



      2.   The person to whom an electrical permit has been issued
shall give the Building Inspector notice that the work authorized by the
permit is ready for inspection.  Such notice shall be given not less than 24
hours before the work is to be inspected.



      3.   No person shall cause any electrical installation or
alteration to be covered or concealed before the work has been inspected and
approved by the Building Inspector.



      4.   If the Building Inspector finds that an electrical
installation or alteration does not comply with this chapter and all other
applicable statutes and regulations, said official shall deliver to the
person to whom the electrical permit was issued a written statement of the
changes necessary to comply with said chapter, statutes, and regulations. 
The person to whom the electrical permit was issued shall make the necessary
changes within fifteen days after the written statement is delivered.



160.18    LICENSE REQUIRED.



      1.   No person shall make any electrical installation repair
or alteration unless such person is licensed as an electrical contractor or
such person is working under the supervision of a licensed electrical
contractor.  All electrical workers must comply with State of Iowa licensing
requirements.



      2.   Any person doing work as an electrician shall provide a
certificate of insurance for general liability insurance with limits of
$100,000.00, completed operations product insurance with limits of
$100,000.00, business automobile insurance with limits of $100,000.00, and
statutory worker’s compensation insurance.



160.19    INSPECTION OF EXISTING ELECTRICAL WORK.



      1.   The Building Inspector shall have the right to inspect
any existing electrical work if said official has reason to believe that such
electrical work is defective.  After giving reasonable notice the Building
Inspector shall have the right to enter any building or structure at
reasonable times to make such inspection.



      2.   If the Building Inspector finds that any electrical work
is so defective as to render it dangerous to person or property, said
official shall cause written notice of the defect to be delivered to the
owner or the person in charge of the property.  The notice shall state the
nature of the defect and that the defect shall be corrected within a
reasonable time to be stated in the notice.  The owner or person in charge
of the property shall cause the defect to be corrected within the time stated
in the notice. All alterations and repairs to such electrical work shall be
made in compliance with this chapter and all other applicable statutes and
regulations.  The work shall then be subject to re-inspection as provided by
Section 160.17 of this chapter.



160.20    DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for any person to break, injure, mar, deface, interfere
with, or destroy any building, machinery, apparatus, fixtures, or other
property of the Denison Municipal Utilities or to commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the intended use of such property if such act is not duly
authorized by the Denison Municipal Utilities.



160.21    DAMAGE TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for any person to break, insure, mar, deface, interfere
with or destroy any electric wire, fuse box, meter, pole, insulator or other
electrical work or to commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the
intended use of such property without the consent of the owner of the
property.



160.22    CUTTING OFF ELECTRIC CURRENT.



   Upon the occurrence of any violation of this chapter, in addition to
all other remedies for such violation, the Denison Municipal Utilities may
cut off the electric current to the building or structure affected by the
violation until the violation has been corrected.



160.23    APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector pursuant
to this chapter may appeal to the Board of Appeals, pursuant to and in the
manner provided for in Section 171.15 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 161
HOUSING CODE



 

161.01  Housing Code Adoption
 
161.02  Amendments, Modifications, Additions, and Deletions


 



 



161.01    HOUSING CODE ADOPTION.



   There is hereby adopted by the City of Denison, Iowa, for the purpose
of providing minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property
and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures within
this jurisdiction, the Uniform Housing Code published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, 1997 Edition, save and except such portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.  The Uniform Housing Code,
1997 Edition, is incorporated herein as though fully set out at length herein.



161.02    AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.



      1.   Section 201(a) is hereby amended to read as follows:



         Section 201.(1). Authority.  The Building Inspector is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this code.  For
such purposes, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.



      2.   Section 203 is hereby amended to read as follows:



         In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of this code, to mitigate specific provisions of this code which
create practical difficulties in their enforcement and to hear appeals
provided hereunder, there is hereby established a Housing Advisory and
Appeals Board consisting of the five members of the Board of Adjustment
created by Section 174.07 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denison,
Iowa.  The Building Inspector shall be an ex-officio member of and shall act
as secretary to said board.  The board shall be appointed by the governing
body and shall hold office at its pleasure.  The board shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the Building Inspector. 
Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions
contained in Sec. 1201 of this code.  Copies of all rules of procedure
adopted by the board shall be delivered to the Building Inspector who shall
make them accessible to the public.



(Ord. 1506 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



      3.   Section 501 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:



         All buildings shall be located with respect to property
lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by Section 504.



      4.   Section 503.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:



         Sec. 503.2 Floor Area.  Dwelling units and congregate
residences shall have at least one room that shall have not less than 150
square feet of floor area.  Other habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall
have an area of not less than 75 square feet.  Where more than two persons
occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be
increased at the rate of 100 square feet for each occupant in excess of two.



         EXCEPTION:  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use
of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following
requirements:



         A.   The unit shall have a living room of not less than
220 square feet of superficial floor area.  An additional 100 square feet of
superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in
excess of two.



         B.   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.



         C.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink,
cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working
space of not less than 30 inches in front.  Light and ventilation conforming
to this code shall be provided.



         D.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom
containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.



CHAPTER 162
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



162.01    ADOPTION OF CODE.



   The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Denison, Iowa, except to the
extent that higher standards are provided in this chapter.  An official copy
of the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted, and a
certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter are on file in the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection, and may be purchased
therefrom for the actual cost thereof.



(Ord. 1401 – Mar. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 163
CONSTRUCTION SITE SOIL EROSION
AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



 



163.01  Land Disturbance Permit
 
163.17  Notification Requirements of Permittee


163.02  Minimum Parcel Size Requiring Permit
 
163.18  City Inspections


163.03  Restrictions if No Permit Required
 
163.19  Noncompliance


163.04  Permittee
 
163.20  Violations


163.05  Exceptions to Permit Requirements
 
163.21  Limitation of City Responsibility Due to Undetected Conditions


163.06  Land Disturbance Permit Application
 
163.22  Notification Required Upon Completion


163.07  Security Requirements for Permit
 
163.23  Limitation of City Responsibility Due to Noncompliant Conditions


163.08  Land Disturbance Permit Application Fees
 
163.24  Monitoring Procedures for City Land Disturbance Permits


163.09  Other Permit Requirements
 
163.25  Third Party Reporting


163.10  SWPPP Requirements
 
163.26  Inspection and Report of Noncompliance


163.11  Statewide Urban Design Standards (SUDAS)
 
163.27  Inspections at Will


163.12  Time of Application for LDP Permit
 
163.28  Enforcement


163.13  Information Required for Permit
 
163.29  Municipal Infraction


163.14  Transfer of Permit
 
163.30  Issuance of Stop Order


163.15  Requirements of City
 
 


163.16  Inspection Procedures for City Land Disturbance Permits
 
 




 



163.01    LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.



   Any person, entity, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
state agency or political subdivision (“applicant” or “person”)
required by law or administrative rule to obtain coverage under the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit No. 2 (General Permit #2) shall
also be required to obtain from the City a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) in
addition to and not in lieu of the State authorization for coverage under the
IDNR General Permit #2.



163.02    MINIMUM PARCEL SIZE REQUIRING PERMIT.



   DNR authorization for coverage under General Permit No. 2 and a LDP
permit are required prior to construction activity that disturbs one or more
acres or which is part of a larger project that disturbs one acre or more in
total.



163.03    RESTRICTIONS IF NO PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Persons applying for a building permit, but not required to obtain
coverage under General Permit #2 or an LDP permit, will be required to
provide information regarding how they will comply with this chapter.  Forms
to provide this information will be available with the City building permit
applications.



163.04    PERMITTEE.



   The person holding the permit (“permittee”) shall have primary
responsibility to comply with the IDNR General Permit #2 and the City LDP
Permit/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.



163.05    EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Activities that have exemption from the requirements of this chapter
are:



      1.   Land disturbance activities under one acre in total.



      2.   Agricultural activities.



      3.   Silvicultural activities.



      4.   Single-family home activities such as landscaping,
gardening or other minor land disturbance activities not otherwise prohibited.



163.06    LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Applications for LDP permits shall be made on forms approved by the
City which may be obtained at the Building Inspections Office.



163.07    SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT.



   An applicant may be required to post security for compliance in
accordance with the Municipal Code. The application form signed by the
applicant for a City LDP permit shall include the following commitment by the
applicant “In addition to the performance security posted with this
application, the undersigned applicant hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and
hold the City harmless from any and all claims, damages or suits arising
directly or indirectly out of any act of commission or omission by the
applicant, or any employee, agent, assign or contractor or subcontractor of
the applicant, in connection with applicant’s coverage under General Permit
#2 and/or City LDP Permit.



163.08    LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT APPLICATION FEES.



   An applicant for an LDP permit shall pay fees as follows:  An
application/permit fee shall be paid at the time of application, the amount
of which is described in the City Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees, and
is required for all construction sites including over 1 acre of land
disturbance.



163.09    OTHER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   An applicant who has applied for coverage under IDNR’s NPDES General
Permit #2 shall submit with their application full copies of the materials
described below as a basis for the City to issue an LDP Permit.



      1.   Notice of intent and supporting materials submitted to
the IDNR in support of applicant’s application for coverage under the NPDES
General Permit #2.



      2.   Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan or Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).



      3.   Evidence of IDNR authorization for coverage received
after application for an LDP permit shall be submitted when it is received by
the applicant.



163.10    SWPPP REQUIREMENTS.



   Every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for an
LDP Permit:



      1.   Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory
requirements for SWPPPs promulgated by the IDNR in connection with General
Permit #2.



      2.   Shall, if the applicant is required by law to file a
Joint Application Form, PROTECTING IOWA WATERS, IOWA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES AND U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS, comply with all mandatory minimum
requirements pertaining to such applications.



      3.   Shall include evidence of permit approval for all
applicable state or federal permits in existence at the time of application.



      4.   Shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or
landscape architect or a certified professional in erosion and sediment
control (CPESC) or a representative of the local Soil and Water Conservation
District, credentialed in a manner acceptable to the City.



      5.   Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated
certification by the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with
all requirements of this chapter.



163.11    STATEWIDE URBAN DESIGN STANDARDS (SUDAS). 



   In addition to the SWPPP requirements stated in Section 163.10
immediately above which constitute minimum mandatory requirements imposed by
the program, every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application
for an LDP Permit shall comply with the Statewide Urban Design Standards
(SUDAS), including but not limited to design, location, and phased
implementation of effective, practicable storm water pollution prevention
measures.



163.12    TIME OF APPLICATION FOR LDP PERMIT.



   When an LDP Permit is required, it shall be obtained prior to or at the
same time as issuance of a building permit, plat approval by City Council or
site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



162.13    INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.



   For so long as a construction site is subject to a General Permit #2 or
an LDP Permit, the applicant shall provide the City with current information
as follows:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person on
site designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion
and sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the General Permit
#2 and the City LDP Permit.



      2.   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
contractors and/or subcontractor(s) that will implement each erosion and
sediment control measure identified in the SWPPP.



      3.   Applicant’s failure to provide current information
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



163.14    TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   Property owners can transfer coverage of the General Permit #2 and the
LDP Permit responsibility with the sale of property to homebuilders or new
lot owners.  Contractors and subcontractors can accept transfer of
responsibility as co-permittees. Transferees must agree to the transfer in
writing and must agree to fulfill all obligations of the SWPPP, the General
Permit #2 and the LDP Permit. Absent such written confirmation of transfer of
obligations received by the City, the permitted property owner remains
responsible for compliance on any lot that has been sold. A permittee shall
notify the City of any transfers or any Notice of Discontinuation sent to the
IDNR for release of any property from a General Permit #2 pursuant to 567 IAC
64.6(6) or any similar successor provision.



163.15    REQUIREMENTS OF CITY.



   Upon receipt of an application for an LDP Permit, the City shall either
find that the application complies with this chapter and issue an LDP Permit
in accordance with this chapter, or that the application fails to comply with
this chapter, in which case the City shall provide a report identifying
non-compliant elements of the application.



163.16    INSPECTION PROCEDURES FOR CITY LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS.



   Compliance inspections shall be conducted by the Storm Water
Coordinator, or other representative of the City, hereinafter referred to as
the “enforcement officer”. Inspections by the enforcement officer may be
scheduled or unannounced.



163.17    NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS OF PERMITTEE.



   Permittee shall notify the City at each phase of construction when all
measures required by the applicant’s SWPPP have been accomplished on site.
Phases include, but are not limited to, grading, underground utilities,
paving and/or fine grading, building construction and final stabilization. 
Other phases may be as identified in the SWPPP.



163.18    CITY INSPECTIONS.



   The City shall conduct regular inspections for the purpose of
determining compliance with this chapter, and shall within a reasonable time
thereafter report to the permittee either that compliance appears to have
been achieved, or that compliance has not been achieved.  At the time of
reporting to the permittee, any conditions of non-compliance shall be
identified. The permittee shall immediately commence corrective action.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



163.19    NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Construction shall not occur on site from the time the City identifies
conditions of noncompliance until resolution of such conditions.



163.20    VIOLATIONS.



   Construction activities undertaken by a permittee prior to resolution
of conditions of noncompliance shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



163.21    LIMITATION OF CITY RESPONSIBILITY DUE TO UNDETECTED CONDITIONS.



   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the permittee or to third parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by inspection.



163.22    NOTIFICATION REQUIRED UPON COMPLETION.



   Permittee shall notify the City in writing when the site is permanently
stabilized.



163.23    LIMITATION OF CITY RESPONSIBILITY DUE TO NONCOMPLIANT CONDITIONS.



   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the applicant, permittee, or to third parities for
noncompliant conditions.



163.24    MONITORING PROCEDURES FOR CITY LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS.



   Upon issuance of an LDP Permit, a permittee has an absolute duty to
monitor site conditions and to report to the enforcement officer any storm
water discharge that is a violation of the water quality standards, or in a
manner inconsistent with the permittee’s SWPPP, General Permit #2 and/or
LDP Permit.



      1.   Such report shall be made by the permittee to the
enforcement officer immediately but in any event within one (1) business day
of the discharge.



      2.   Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



163.25    THIRD PARTY REPORTING.



   Any third party may also report to the City site conditions which the
third party reasonably believes pose a risk of storm water discharge in a
manner inconsistent with the applicant's SWPPP, General Permit #2 and/or LDP
Permit.



163.26    INSPECTION AND REPORT OF NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous sections, the
enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as
reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide the permittee with a notice
identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The permittee shall immediately
commence corrective action. Failure to take corrective action in a timely
manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter, whereupon the
enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified
below.



163.27    INSPECTIONS AT WILL.



   The enforcement officer may, from time to time and without warning,
conduct inspections without notice or in conjunction with other unrelated
inspections procedures to confirm the permittee is in compliance with the
rules and regulations contained within this chapter and consistent with the
NPDES General Permit #2, concerning the use of construction site Best
Management Practices (BMP’s).



163.28    ENFORCEMENT.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its
attorney fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.



163.29    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of § 364.22, pursuant to the
City’s municipal infraction chapter.  Enforcement pursuant to this section
shall be undertaken by the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of
the City Attorney.



163.30    ISSUANCE OF STOP ORDER.



   If the enforcement officer finds any work regulated by this chapter
being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or dangerous or unsafe, the enforcement officer is authorized to issue a stop
work order. The stop work order shall be in writing, shall be posted on the
construction site in question, and shall be given to the owner of the
property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the
work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work on site unrelated to that
work which is designed to remove the violation or unsafe condition in
question shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason
for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume. Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
penalties as stated in this chapter.



(Ch. 163 - Ord. 1371 – Jan. 10 Supp.)


Denison, IA Code of Ordinances


ZONING AND SUBDIVISION



CHAPTER 165
ZONING AND PROPERTY
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS



 

165.01  Title
 
165.07  Severability of Provision


165.02  Jurisdiction
 
165.08  Publication


165.03  Purpose
 
165.09  General Construction and Definitions


165.04  Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan
 
165.10  General Construction of Language


165.05  Conflicting Provisions
 
165.11  Definitions


165.06  Relief from Other Provisions
 



 



165.01    TITLE.



   Chapters 165 through 174 of this Code of Ordinance shall be known as
the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Denison.”



165.02    JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable to all property
within the corporate limits of the City of Denison, with the exception of
those properties owned or acquired by municipal, county, or state government
for the advancement of government projects or purposes.



165.03    PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Denison are to:



      1.   Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the City and its jurisdiction.



      2.   Classify property in a manner that reflects its
suitability for specific uses.



      3.   Provide for sound, attractive development within the City
and its jurisdiction.



      4.   Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses.



      5.   Protect environmentally sensitive areas.



      6.   Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Development
Plan of the City of Denison.



165.04    CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The City of Denison intends that this Zoning Ordinance and any
amendments to it shall be consistent with the City’s Comprehensive
Development Plan.  It is the City’s intent to amend this ordinance
whenever such action is deemed necessary to keep regulatory provisions in
conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan.



165.05    CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   The Zoning Ordinance shall be held to provide the minimum requirements
necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.  If
any provision of the Zoning Ordinance conflicts with any other provision of
the Zoning Ordinance, any other ordinance of the City of Denison, or any
applicable State or Federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply.



165.06    RELIEF FROM OTHER PROVISIONS.



   Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user
from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous
approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit
issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute.



165.07    SEVERABILITY OF PROVISION.



   If any chapter, section, clause, or phrase of this Zoning Ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.



165.08    PUBLICATION.



   This ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form and shall,
together with the maps being a part hereof, shall be filed with the City
Clerk of the City of Denison, Iowa.



165.09    GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.



   The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision
in the interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance.  The meaning and construction
of words as set forth shall apply throughout the Zoning Ordinance, unless
where modified in a specific section or where the context of such words or
phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.



165.10    GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   The following general rules of construction apply to the text of the
Zoning Ordinance.



      1.   Headings.  Section and subsection headings contained
herein are provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be deemed to
limit, govern, modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent of
any provision of the Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   Illustration.  In the case of any real or apparent
conflict between the text of the Ordinance and any illustration explaining
the text, the text shall apply.



      3.   Shall, Must, and May.  “Shall” and “must” are
always mandatory.  “May” is discretionary.



      4.   Tenses and Numbers.  Words used in the present tense
include the future tense.  Words used in the singular include the plural,
and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.



      5.   Conjunctions.  Unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:



         A.   “And” indicates that all connected items or
provisions apply.



         B.   “Or” indicates that the connected items or
provisions may apply singly or in any combination.



         C.   “Either ... or” indicates that the connected
items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.



      6.   Referenced Agencies.  Unless otherwise indicated, all
public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this Ordinance are
those of the City of Denison.



165.11    DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms and words are
hereby defined.  Certain sections contain definitions that are additional to
those listed here.  Where terms are not specifically defined, their
ordinarily accepted meaning or meanings implied by their context shall apply.



      1.   Abutting:  Having lot lines or district boundaries in
common.  Use interchangeably with adjacent.



      2.   Accessory Structure:  A structure that is incidental to
and customarily associated with a specific principal use or building on the
same site.



      3.   Accessory Use:  A use that is incidental to and
customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site.



      4.   Addition:  Any construction that increases the size of a
building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or
gross floor area.



      5.   ADT or Average Daily Traffic:  The average number of
motor vehicles per day that pass over a given point or segment of street.



      6.   Agent of Owner:  Any person showing written verification
that he/she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property
owner.



      7.   Alley:  A public right of way, other than a street and
twenty feet or less in width which is used as a secondary means of access to
abutting property.



      8.   Alteration:  Any construction or physical change in the
internal arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the positioning on a
site, or the appearance of a building or structure.



      9.   Apartment:  A housing unit within a building designed
for and suitable for occupancy by only one family.  Apartments are generally
located within multi-family residential buildings.



      10.   Approving Authority:  The City Council of the City of
Denison or its designee.



      11.   ASCE:  The American Society of Civil Engineers.



      12.   Attached:  Having one or more walls in common with a
principal building or connected to a principal building by an integral
architectural element, such as a covered passageway; facade wall extension;
or archway.



      13.   Base Zoning District:  A district established by this
Ordinance that prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site
development standards.  No more than one Base Zoning District shall apply to
any individually platted lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is part of a
Planned Unit Development.



      14.   Basement:  A level of a building below street level
that has at least one-half of its height below the surface of adjacent
ground.  A basement used for independent dwelling or business purposes shall
be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement.



      15.   Beginning of Construction:  The initial incorporation
of labor and materials within the foundation of a building or structure.



      16.   Bicycle Lane and Path:  A designated lane on a roadway
or an exclusive path separated from a roadway, designed specifically to
accommodate the physical requirements of bicycling.  Bicycle paths are
ordinarily designed to accommodate other forms of non-motorized
transportation or recreational movement, but will also accommodate motorized
vehicles, such as motorized wheelchairs, designed specifically to provide
access to people with disabilities.



      17.   Block:  An area of land within a subdivision that is
entirely bounded by streets and/or the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, or by a combination of the above with a watercourse, lake,
railroad, or other significant natural or man-made barrier, and which has
been designated as such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of a
property.



      18.   Block Face:  The property abutting one side of a street
and lying between the two nearest intersection streets, or between the one
nearest intersecting street and a major physical barrier, including, but not
limited to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of Denison.



      19.   Board of Adjustment:  A body, established by the City
expressly for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and
to hear appeals as provided by this Ordinance.



      20.   Boulevard: A public street generally characterized by a
wider than normal right-of-way and extensive green space in relation to
pavement surface.  Boulevards may either include dual street channels
separated by a landscaped median; or by a single street channel with wider
than normal greenway setbacks behind the curb.



      21.   Bufferyard:  A landscaped area around the perimeter of
a tract of land, usually intended to separate and partially obstruct the view
of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.



      22.   Building:  A structure entirely separated from any
other structure by space or by walls and having a roof and built to provide
shelter, support, or enclosure for persons or property.



      23.   Building Coverage:  The at-grade area of a site covered
by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies,
and similar features, also referred to as the building footprint.



      24.   Building Elevation:  An exterior wall of a building
exposed to public view.



      25.   Building Envelope:  The three-dimensional space within
which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and
other applicable municipal requirements have been met.



      26.   Building Height:  The vertical distance from the
established grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and the ridge
for gable, hip, shed, or gambrel roofs.  For other cases, height shall be
measured as the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest
point of a structure as herein defined.  Where a building or structure is
located on a slope, height shall be measured from the average grade level
adjacent to the building or structure.









 



      27.   Building Line:  The outer boundary of a building
established by the location of its exterior walls.



      28.   Building Official:  The city official, designated by
the City Council, who is responsible for the enforcement of the applicable
building code and conditional uses.



      29.   Building Permit: A document that must be issued by the
Building Official prior to erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering,
moving, improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any building or
structure on a platted lot/s or a parcel exceeding ten (10) acres in size as
regulated by this Ordinance or by the applicable building codes of the City
of Denison.  Issuance of a building permit follows review of plans by the
Building Official to determine that the proposed use of building or land
complies with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



      30.   Business:  Activities that include the exchange or
manufacture of goods or services on a site.



      31.   Business Center:  A building containing more than one
commercial business, or any group of non-residential buildings within a
common development, characterized by shared parking and access.



      32.   Cartway (or Road or Street Channel):  The actual
surface area of a road used to accommodate motor vehicles, including moving
traffic lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and parking lanes.  On a
street with curbs, the cartway is measured from back to back of curbs.  On
streets without curbs, the cartway is measured between the outer edges of the
pavement.



      33.   Centerline Offset:  The distance between the centerline
of roads intersecting a common road from the same or opposite sides.



      34.   Certificate of Occupancy:  An official certificate
issued by the Building Official prior to occupancy of a completed building or
structure, upon finding of conformance with the applicable building code and
this Zoning Ordinance.



      35.   Change of Use:  The replacement of an existing use type
by a new use type.



      36.   Channel:  The bed or banks of a natural stream or
drainageway that convey the constant or intermittent flow of water, including
storm run-off.



      37.   City:  The City of Denison, Iowa.



      38.   City Council:  The City Council of Denison, Iowa.



      39.   Common Area:  An area held, designed, and designated
for common or cooperative use within a development.



      40.   Common Development:  A development proposed and planned
as one unified project not separated by a public street or alley.



      41.   Common Open Space:  Land within or related to a
development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use,
designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the
development.



      42.   Compatibility:  The degree to which two or more
different land use types are able to exist together in close proximity, with
no one use having significant negative effects on any other use.



      43.   Comprehensive Plan:  The duly adopted Comprehensive
Development Plan of the City of Denison.



      44.   Concept Plan:  A preliminary presentation that includes
the minimum information necessary, as determined by the Zoning Administrator,
to be used for the purpose of discussion or classification of a proposed plat
prior to formal application.



      45.   Condominium: An ownership regime whereby the title to
each unit of occupancy is held in separate ownership, and the real estate on
which the units are located is held in common ownership solely by the owners
of the units with each owner having an undivided interest in the common real
estate.  Condominiums may include residential, commercial, office, or
industrial uses. 



      46.   Conservation Development:  A development design
technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow
remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the
preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features.



      47.   Conservation (or Cluster) Subdivision:  Wholly or in
majority, a residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area,
setback, or other site development regulations, provided 1) there is no
increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a
given zoning district, and 2) the remaining land area is used for common
space.



      48.   County: Crawford County, Iowa.



      49.   Courtyard:  An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two
or more sides by the walls of the building.



      50.   Conventional Subdivision:  A subdivision which
literally meets all nominal standards of the Zoning Ordinance for lot
dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations.



      51.   Creative (or Innovative) Development or Subdivision:  A
subdivision that, while complying with the Subdivision Ordinance, diverges
from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the Zoning
Ordinance.  Creative subdivisions imply a higher level of pre-planning than
conventional subdivisions.  They may be employed for the purpose of
environmental protection or the creation of superior community design. 
Types of Creative Subdivisions include Conservation Subdivisions and
Traditional Neighborhood Districts.



      52.   Cul-de-sac:  A local street with only one outlet and
with an opposite end providing for the reversal of traffic.



      53.   Curb:  A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway,
intended to define the edge of the cartway and to channel or control drainage.



      54.   Dedication:  A grant of land to the City or another
public agency for a public purpose.



      55.   Density:  The amount of development per specific unit
of a site.



      56.   Design standards:  Standards that set forth specific
improvement requirements.



      57.   Detached:  Fully separated from any other building or
not jointed to another building in such a manner as to constitute an enclosed
or covered connection.



      58.   Detention basin:  An artificial or natural water
collection facility, designed to collect surface or subsurface water and to
control its rate of discharge, in order to prevent a net increase in the rate
of water flow that existed prior to a development.



      59.   Developer:  The legal owner(s) or authorized agent of
any land engaged in a proposed development.



      60.   Development:  A planning or construction project
involving substantial improvement or change in the character and/or land use
of a property.



      61.   Divided street:  A street with opposing lanes separated
by a median strip, center island, or other form of physical barrier, which
cannot be crossed except at designated locations.



      62.   Drive-in Services:  Uses that involve the sale of
products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles.



      63.   Drainage:  The removal of surface or ground water from
land by drains, grading, or other means.



      64.   Drainage system:  The system through which water flows
from the land.



      65.   Driveway:  A permanently paved, surfaced area providing
vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area.



      66.   Dwelling Unit:  One or more rooms, designed, occupied
or intended for occupancy as a separate place of residence, with cooking,
sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the
exclusive use of one family, as defined in this section, maintaining a
household.









 



      67.   Easement:  A privilege or right of use granted on,
above, under, or across a particular tract of land for a specific purpose by
one owner to another owner, public or private agency, or utility, where fee
simple title remains with the property owner.



      68.   Enclosed:  A roofed or covered space fully surrounded
by walls.



      69.   Existing Use:  The use of a lot or structure at the
time of the effective date of this Ordinance.



      70.   Family: One or more persons living together and sharing
common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities within an individual
housing unit, not more than three of whom may be unrelated.  The following
persons are considered related for the purpose of this definition:



         A.   Persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
within the third degree of consanguinity.



         B.   Persons residing with a family for purposes of
adoption.



   C.    Not more than eight persons residing with a family for the
purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the State.



         D.   Persons living with a family at the direction of a
court.



      71.   Fascia: A parapet-type wall used as part of the facade
of a flat-roofed building and projecting no more than six feet from the
immediately adjacent building face.  Such a wall shall enclose at least
three sides of the projecting flat roof and return to the parapet wall or the
building.



      72.   Federal:  Pertaining to the Government of the United
States of America.



      73.   Final Plat Approval:  The final official action of the
City Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, permitting
the filing of a subdivision with the Crawford County Register of Deeds and
the conveyance of individual parcels and lots to subsequent owners. 



      74.   Floor Area Ratio (FAR):  The quotient of gross floor
area of all buildings on a site divided by gross site area of the site.









 



      75.   Frontage:  The length of a property line of any one
premise abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court from
which access is permitted.



      76.   Garage: An accessory building or portion of a main
building used primarily for storage of motor vehicles.



      77.   Grade:  The elevation of the finished surface of
ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line.



         A.   For buildings having walls facing one street only,
the grade shall be the elevation of the ground at the center of the wall
facing the street.



         B.   For buildings having walls facing more than one
street, the grade shall be the average elevation of the grades of all walls
facing each street.



         C.   For buildings having no walls facing a street, the
grade shall be the average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.



      78.   Gross Floor Area (GFA):  The total enclosed horizontal
area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the
exterior walls.  This definition excludes the areas of mechanical equipment
rooms, elevator shafts, airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off-street
parking and loading areas serving a principal use.



      79.   Home Based Business/Home Occupation means an occupation
or profession which:



         A.   Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in
a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit, and



         B.   Is carried on by a member of the family residing in
the dwelling unit, employing no more than two persons outside of the
immediate family residing on the premises, and



         C.   Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and



         D.   Has no exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation from the residential character of the principal building, and



         E.   Does not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the area of one floor of the dwelling unit, and



         F.   Has not more than one exterior sign which sign does
not exceed twelve square feet in area, and



         G.   Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat or glare rendering such building or premises objectionable
or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood, and causes
no electrical interference with radio or television reception in the
neighborhood.



      80.   Impervious coverage:  The total horizontal area of all
buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and
driveways, and any other site improvements that decrease the ability of the
surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. 
The surface water area of swimming pools is excluded from this definition.



      81.   Landscaped Area:  The area within the boundaries of a
given lot, site or common development consisting primarily of plant material,
including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and
other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such
that the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped.



         A.   Perimeter Landscaped Area:  Any required
landscaped area that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common
development.



         B.   Interior Landscaped Area:  Any landscaped area
within a site exclusive of required perimeter landscaping.



      82.   Lane:  An approved private right-of-way that provides
access to residential properties and meets at least three of the following
conditions:



         A.   Serves twelve or fewer housing units or platted
lots.



         B.   Does not function as a local street because of its
alignment, design, or location.



         C.   Is completely internal to a development.



         D.   Does not exceed 600 feet in length.



      83.   Loading Area:  An off-street area used for the loading
or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site
on which such area is located.



      84.   Lot:  A platted parcel of property with a separate and
distinct number or other identifying designation which has been created,
assigned and recorded in the Office of the Crawford County Register of
Deeds.  Each individual lot is subject to the provisions of a particular
base Zoning District, and shall have a minimum frontage of 20 feet, except as
provided in an approved Planned Unit Development, Conservation Development,
or Traditional Neighborhood Development.



         A.   Corner Lot:  A lot located at the junction of at
least two streets, private ways or courts or at least two segments of a
curved street, private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no
greater than 135 degrees.



         B.   Double Frontage Lot:  A lot, other than a corner
lot, having frontage on two non-intersecting streets, private ways or
courts.  Primary access shall be restricted on a double frontage lot to the
minor of the two streets or to the front line as determined at time of
platting or as defined by this ordinance.  (Also known as a Through Lot)



         C.   Interior Lot:  A lot other than a corner lot whose
sides do not abut a street.



         D.   Common Development Lot:  When two or more
contiguous lots are developed as part of a single development, these lots may
be considered a single lot for purposes of this ordinance.



         E.   Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a
subdivision, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.



         F.   Reverse Corner Lot: A corner lot, the side street
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the first
lot to its rear. 









 



      85.   Lot Area:  The total horizontal area within the lot
lines of a lot.



      86.   Lot Depth:  The mean horizontal distance measured
between the front and rear lot lines.



      87.   Lot Line:  A property boundary line(s) of record that
divides one lot from another lot or a lot from the public or private street
right-of-way or easement.



         A.   Front Lot Line:  The lot line separating a lot and
a public or private street right-of-way or easement.



            (1)   For an interior lot, the lot line separating
the lot from the right-of-way or easement.



            (2)   For a corner lot, the shorter lot line
abutting a public or private street or easement.  In instances of equal line
dimension, the front lot line shall be determined by the Building Official,
or as may be noted on the final plat.



            (3)   For a double frontage lot, the lot lines
separating the lot from the right-of-way or easement of the more minor
street.  In cases where each street has the same classification, the front
lot line shall be determined by the Building Official at the time of
application for the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted
on the final plat.



         B.   Rear Lot Line:  The lot line that is opposite and
most distant from the front line.



         C.   Side Lot Line:  Any lot line that is neither a
front or rear lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from a street,
private way or court is a street side lot line.  A side lot line separating
a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.



      88.   Lot Width:  The horizontal distance measured between
the side lot lines of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight
line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback
line.



      89.   Main:  The principal artery of a system of continuous
piping which conveys fluids and to which branches may be connected.



      90.   Major subdivision:  Any subdivision not defined and
approved as a minor subdivision.



      91.   Manufactured Home Dwelling:  A dwelling unit built in
compliance with National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act, 42USC 5401 to 5426 et seq., and the regulations promulgated by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and when
constructed shall bear the seal of the Department of Health and Human
Services Regulation and Licensure as required by the State of Iowa.



         A.   Dwelling units built in compliance with the above
may be placed in any zoning district where single-family dwelling units are
permitted when the following additional requirements are met:



            (1)   Any dwelling unit shall have no less than
nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area. 



            (2)   Any dwelling shall have no less than
eighteen (18) feet exterior width. 



            (3)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum
vertical rise of two (2) and one-half (1/2) inches for each twelve (12)
inches of horizontal run. 



            (4)   The exterior shall be of a color, material
and scale comparable with existing residential site-built single-family
dwellings.  The home shall have a non-reflective roof material.



            (5)   The dwellings shall have wheels, axles,
transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed if present.



            (6)   The dwelling shall be placed upon a
permanent foundation approved by the City of Denison.



            (7)   All utility services shall be directly
connected to the structure.



         B.   Manufactured homes which do not meet all of the
standards above, may be placed in a manufactured home park or as permitted by
code, provided the structure is transportable in one (1) or more sections
which in the traveling mode are eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty
(40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, are three hundred
twenty (320) or more square feet and which are built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.



      92.   Minor subdivision:  A subdivision of land which creates
no more than four lots from any single parcel of land; requires no extension
of streets, sewers, utilities, or other municipal facilities; no dedication
of easements or rights-of-way or annexation; complies with all pre-existing
zoning requirements; and has not been subject to a previous administrative or
minor subdivision.



      93.   Mixed Use Building:  A building or structure that
incorporates two or more use types within a single building or structure,
provided that each use type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning
District in which the building or structure is to be located.



      94.   Mixed Use Development:  A single development that
incorporates complementary land use types into a single development.



      95.   Mobile Homes:  A building type designed to be
transportable in one or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or
undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Iowa
Department of Health or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and
enforcement regulations, as adopted by the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development; or not otherwise satisfying the definition of Manufactured Home
Dwellings.



      96.   Mobile Home Park:  A unified development under single
ownership, developed, subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of
mobile home units for non-transient use.  Mobile Home Parks include common
areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services,
storage, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on
which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purposes of display,
inspection, sale, or storage.



      97.   Mobile Home Subdivision:  A development subdivided,
planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units on lots for uses
by the individual owners of such lots.  Mobile Home Subdivisions may include
common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility
services, storage, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales
lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of display,
inspection, sale, or storage.



      98.   Monument: An identification marker established by a
registered land surveyor at each section corner, block corner, lot corner, or
other point as required by this Ordinance.



      99.   Moving lane:  Any traffic lane within a cartway where
traffic movement is the primary or sole function.



      100.   Nonconforming Development:  A building, structure, or
improvement which does not comply with the regulations for its zoning
district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance but which complied with
applicable regulations at the time of construction.



      101.   Nonconforming Lot:  A lot which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance but that fails
by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  No action can be taken which would
increase the non-conforming characteristics of the lot.



      102.   Nonconforming Sign:  A sign that was legally erected
prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance but
that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to
the present requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.



      103.   Nonconforming Structure:  A structure which was lawful
prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance but
that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to
the present requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  No action can be taken
which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the structure.



      104.   Nonconforming Use:  A land use which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance but that
fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the
present requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  No action can be taken which
would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the land use.



      105.   Nuisance:  An unreasonable and continuous invasion of
the use and enjoyment of a property right which a reasonable person would
find annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive.



      106.   Off-site:  Located outside the boundaries of the
parcel that is the subject of an application.



      107.   Open Space:  Area included on any site or lot that is
open and unobstructed to the sky, except for allowed projections of cornices,
overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant materials.



      108.   Outdoor Storage:  The storage of materials, parts, or
products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding
three days.



      109.   Overlay District:  A district established by this
Ordinance that prescribes special regulations to be applied to a site only in
combination with a base district.



      110.   Owner:  An individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek
development of land.



      111.   Parking Facility:  An area on a lot and/or within a
building, including one or more parking spaces, along with provision for
access circulation, maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance.  Parking facilities include parking lots, private
garages, and parking structures.  Vehicle storage is a use distinct from
parking.  Vehicle storage is also governed by applicable provisions of
Chapter 172.



      112.   Parking Lane:  A lane located on the sides of streets,
designated or allowing on-street parking of motor vehicles.



      113.   Parking Spaces:  An area on a lot and/or within a
building, intended for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. 
This term is used interchangeably with “parking stall”.  Each parking
space must have a means of access to a public street.  Tandem parking stalls
in single-family detached, single-family attached, and townhouse residential
uses shall be considered to have a means of access to a public street.



      114.   Paved:  Permanently surfaced with poured concrete,
concrete pavers, or asphalt.



      115.   Performance Bond: A surety bond or cash deposit posted
by a contractor or developer made out to the city in an amount equal to the
full cost of the improvements.  The bond amount shall be that of the
contract price and shall be legally sufficient to secure to the City that
said improvements will be constructed in accordance with the terms of the
contract documents within a period specified by this Ordinance.



      116.   Permitted Use:  A land use type allowed as a matter of
right in a zoning district, subject only to special requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance.



      117.   Planning Commission:  The Planning Commission of the
City of Denison.



      118.   Planning Director:  The City Manager.



      119.   Planned Unit Development:  A development of land which
is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single
development operation or programmed series of development stages.  The
development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open
spaces, and other site features and improvements.



      120.   Plat:  A document, usually a map or maps, expressing
the designation or division of land into one or more lots or parcels, any one
of which is ten acres or less.  Plats include preliminary and final plats.



         A.   Preliminary Plat:  A plat indicating the proposed
layout of a development and related information, intended for the purpose of
preliminary approval by approving authorities but not for filing with the
Crawford County Register of Deeds.



         B.   Final Plat:  The final map of the subdivision
which is presented for Final Approval.  The Final Plat contains detailed
information and documentation and is designed to be filed with the Register
of Deeds.



      121.   Porch, Unenclosed:  A roofed or unroofed open
structure projecting from an exterior wall of a building and having no
enclosed features more than thirty inches above its floor other than wire
screening and a roof with supporting structure.



      122.   Premises:  A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land,
contiguous and under common ownership or control, together with the buildings
and structure thereon.



      123.   Principal use:  The main use of land or structures as
distinguished from an accessory use.



      124.   Private Garage:  A building for the storage of motor
vehicles where no repair service facilities are maintained and where no motor
vehicles are kept for rental or sale.



      125.   Property Line: The boundary between separate property
ownerships, as recorded by the legal description of a parcel and defined by
the Crawford County Register of Deeds.  In subdivisions, property lines are
usually but not in every case coincident with lot lines.



      126.   Recreational Vehicle:  A vehicle towed or self
propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle
and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting
purposes.  Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel
trailers; campers; motor coach homes; converted buses and trucks, boats, and
boat trailers.



      127.   Regulation:  A specific requirement set forth by this
Zoning Ordinance that must be followed.



      128.   Remote Parking:  A supply of off-street parking at a
location not on the site of a given development.



      129.   Right-of-way:  A strip of land, generally linear,
occupied or intended to be occupied by a system that conveys people, traffic,
fluids, utilities, or energy from one point to another.  Rights-of-way may
include streets and roads, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails,
railroads or fixed guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas
pipelines, water mains, or sewer mains.



      130.   Rural Subdivisions:  A residential subdivision located
more than one-half mile past the corporate limits but within the two mile
planning jurisdiction of the City; or outside of areas designated for future
urban development by the Comprehensive Plan.



      131.   Salvage Yard (or Salvage Services):  Places of
business engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of
used or waste materials that are not intended for reuse in their original
forms, including automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, or paper salvage yards.



      132.   Sanitary Sewer:  A sewer that conducts sanitary wastes
from a point of origin to a treatment or disposal facility.  In developing
areas, sanitary sewers normally include interceptor, outfall, local, and
lateral sewers.



         A.   Interceptor:  A sanitary sewer that serves as a
trunk, collecting sewage generated by a number of individual developments.



         B.   Outfall:  A sanitary sewer that may be developed
to connect an individual subdivision or development to an interceptor sewer.



         C.   Local:  A pipe that connects lateral sewers to an
outfall or interceptor sewer.



         D.   Lateral: A private service line connecting
buildings to local sewers.



      133.   Septic system:  An underground system, utilizing a
watertight receptacle to receive the discharge of sewage and a soil
absorption leach field, which provides for the decomposition of wastes
produced by development on a single lot.



      134.   Screening:  The method by which a view of one site
from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden.  Screening
techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features as may be
permitted by the landscape provisions of this ordinance.



      135.   Setback:  The distance, as required by the minimum
setback(s) which establishes the horizontal component(s) of the building
envelope.



      136.   Sidewalk:  A paved path provided for pedestrian use,
usually located at the side of and detached from a road, but within the
right-of-way.



      137.   Sign:  A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a
building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land, which is intended to convey
information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution,
candidate, or political idea.



      138.   Site:   The parcel of land to be developed or built
upon.  A site may encompass a single lot; or a group of lots developed as a
common development under the special and overlay districts provisions of this
ordinance.



      139.   Site Plan:  A plan, prepared to scale, showing
accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the
location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development
features proposed for a specific parcel of land; and any other information
that may be reasonably requested by the City in order that an informed
decision can be made on the associated request.



      140.   Special Use Permit:  An approval of a use with
operating and/or physical characteristics different from those of permitted
uses in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with
those uses under special conditions and with adequate public review. 
Special uses are allowed in a zoning district only at the discretion of and
with the explicit permission of the Planning Commission.



      141.   State:  The State of Iowa.



      142.   Storm Sewer:  A conduit that conducts storm drainage
from a development or subdivision, ultimately to a drainageway or stream.



      143.   Story:  The portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; if there is
no floor above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling above
it.  A half story is a story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which
on at least two opposite, exterior walls are less than four feet.



      144.   Street:  Land dedicated for public use, from
right-of-way line to right-of-way, which affords a primary means of access to
the abutting property.  Streets may be categorized in a hierarchy or
conceptual arrangement of streets based on function.  The hierarchical
approach classifies streets from courts or lanes, which provide private
access to a limited number of lots, to arterials, which accommodate large
volumes of high-speed, regional traffic.  Street types contained within the
hierarchy include:



         A.   Court or lane



         B.   Local



         C.   Collector



         D.   Expressway



         E.   Minor Arterial



         F.   Major Arterial



      145.   Street, Arterial: Street or highways intended to
provide for through traffic movement between areas of the city or across the
city.  Major arterials usually imply relatively high speeds and traffic
volumes, and are often subject to control of access to individual
properties.  Minor arterials are generally intended to provide trips of
moderate lengths and imply lower operating speeds and more frequent points of
local access than major arterial streets.



      146.   Street, Collector:  A street connecting neighborhoods
within the same communities, designed to carry traffic from local to arterial
streets.



      147.   Street, Designed:  A future street designated on the
Comprehensive Development Plan to insure traffic carrying capacity between
neighborhoods, connections between neighborhoods and major activity centers
and accommodation of major through traffic.  Such streets may be designated
as collectors, arterials or expressways with the tentative location of the
street shown on the Transportation Plan.



      148.   Street, Expressway:  A major street with limited
access for high traffic speeds and volumes designed to move traffic around
the city rather than through it.



      149.   Street, Intersecting and Principal:  In regard to a
site, the principal street shall be the street to which the majority of lots
on a blockface are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street other
than a principal street.



      150.   Street, Local:  A street which is used primarily for
access to the abutting properties.



      151.   Street, Major:  A street carrying traffic between
neighborhoods, connecting neighborhoods with major activity centers, or
accommodating major through traffic.  Major streets are designated as
collectors, arterials, or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan.



      152.   Street Yard:  The distance between a lot line adjacent
to a public street and the wall or façade of a building parallel to such lot
line.  If the building wall is not parallel to the lot line, the street yard
depth shall be the distance between the street lot line and a parallel line
that equals the average distance of the building wall or façade from the
street lot line.



      153.   Structure:  Any object constructed, erected or built,
the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground and
which is designed for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, including but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, installations such as signs,
billboards, radio towers and other facilities not designed for storage of
property or occupancy by persons. 



      154.   Subdivision:  The division of a lot, tract, or parcel
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other units of land for title
transfer or development, when one of the resultant lots is equal to ten acres
or less.



      155.   Townhouse:  A dwelling unit having a common wall with
or abutting one or more adjacent dwelling units in a townhouse structure,
with its own front and rear access to the outside, and neither above nor
below any other dwelling unit.



      156.   Townhouse Structure:  A building formed by at least
two and not more than twelve contiguous townhouses with common or abutting
walls.



      157.   Urban Subdivision: A residential subdivision generally
located within the corporate limits of the City of Denison or less than  1/2
mile of such corporate limits; or within an area designated for future urban
development by the Comprehensive Development Plan.



      158.   Use:  The conduct of an activity, or the performance
of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility.



      159.   Utilities:  Installations, either above or below
ground, necessary for the production, generation, transmission, delivery,
collection, treatments, or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes, storm
water, energy media, gas, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other
services which are precedent to development and use of land.



      160.   Vacation:  The official abandonment of public
right-of-way or easement by the City in accordance with State law.



      161.   Variance: A modification of the application of certain
regulations or provisions of this Ordinance by the Board of Adjustment, under
the authority provided by this Ordinance and State Statutes.



      162.   Vehicle, motor:  Any passenger vehicle, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle, or truck that is propelled or drawn by mechanical power.



      163.   Vision Clearance Zone: Refer to Section 170.04,
subsection 8 – “Vision Clearance Zones” 



      164.   Yard; Required:  That portion of a lot that lies
between a lot line and the corresponding building setback line or the
required landscape area.  This area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided for or required
by this ordinance.



         A.   Front Yard:  The space extending the full width of
a lot, lying between the front lot line and the front setback line.  For a
corner lot, the front yard shall normally be defined as that yard along a
street which meets one of the following two criteria:



            (1)   The yard along the blockface to which a
greater number of structures are oriented; or



            (2)   The yard along a street that has the smaller
horizontal dimension.



         B.   Rear Yard:  The space extending the full width of
a lot, lying between the rear lot line and the rear setback line.



         C.   Side Yard:  The space extending the depth of a lot
from the front to rear



         D.   Street Side Yard:  On a corner lot, the space
extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the street side yard
setback line and the street side lot line.









 



      165.   Zoning Administrator:  The City Manager or his/her
designee duly authorized to administer this Zoning Ordinance.



166   Zoning District:  A designated specified land classification,
within which all sites are subject to a unified group of use and site
development regulations set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.



(Chapter 165 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 166
ZONING AND PROPERTY
USE TYPES



 

166.01  Purpose
 
166.07  Commercial Use Types


166.02  Determinations
 
166.08  Parking Use Types


166.03  Agricultural Use Types
 
166.09  Industrial Use Types


166.04  Residential Use Types
 
166.10  Transportation Use Types


166.05  Civic Use Types
 
166.11  Miscellaneous Type Uses


166.06  Office Use Types
 



 



166.01    PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system
for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted or
conditionally permitted within various zoning districts.  The Use Types
chapter also provides a procedure for determining the applicable use type of
any activity not clearly within any defined use type.



166.02    DETERMINATIONS.



      1.   Classification of Uses.  In the event of any question as
to the appropriate use types of any existing or proposed use or activity, the
Zoning Administrator of the City of Denison shall have the authority to
determine the appropriate use type.  A determination of the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.  In making such
determinations, the Zoning Administrator and Board of Adjustment shall
consider such characteristics or specific requirements of the use in common
with those included as examples of use types.  Those examples, when included
in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to
exclusive lists.



      2.   Records.  The Zoning Administrator shall make all such
determinations of appropriate use types in writing.  The record of the
determination shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the
determination.



166.03    AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES.



   Agricultural use types include the planting, cultivating, harvesting,
and storage of grains, hay, or plants commonly grown in Denison or Crawford
Counties; or the raising and feeding of livestock or poultry.



      1.   Horticulture.  The growing of horticultural and
floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for
ornamental or landscaping purposes.  This definition may include accessory
retail sales under certain conditions.  Typical uses include wholesale plant
nurseries and greenhouses.



      2.   Crop Production.  The raising and harvesting of tree
crops, row crops or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. 
This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.



      3.   Animal Production.  The raising of animals or production
of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products on an agricultural or
commercial basis on a site which is also used for crop production or where
grazing of natural vegetation is the major feed source; or the raising of
animals for recreational or educational use.  Typical uses include grazing,
ranching, free ranch dairy farming, and poultry farming.



      4.   Confined Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO).  The use of a
site of any size for the confined feeding or holding of 1,000 or more animal
units of livestock or poultry, or of a site with a gross density of 2 or more
animal units per acre, within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters
which are not used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation
is not the major feed source.  Livestock and poultry shall include any
animal or fowl that are used primarily for use as food or food products for
human consumption, or for laboratory or testing purposes.  A CAFO does not
include areas which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation,
and upon which livestock are allowed to graze or feed. For the purpose of
calculating animal units, the animal unit equivalents for each type of
livestock are established as follows:



 



Type of Livestock
 
Equivalent Animal Units Per placeAcre


Slaughter and feed cattle
 
1.00


Mature dairy cattle
 
1.40


Swine
 
0.75


Sheep
 
0.20


Horses
 
2.00


Turkeys
 
0.20


Ducks
 
0.20


Chickens
 
0.10




 



      5.   Livestock Sales.  The use of a site for the temporary
confinement and exchange or sale of livestock.  Typical uses include sales
barns.



166.04    RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES.



   Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily
non-transient living accommodations.  They exclude institutional living
arrangements providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care, forced
residence, or therapeutic settings.



      1.   Single-Family Residential.  The use of a site for one
dwelling unit, occupied by one family.  Mobile home units, as defined by
this section, are not a single-family residential use type.



         A.   Single-Family Residential (Detached):  A
single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a
single lot, with no physical or structural connection to any other dwelling
unit.



         B.   Single-Family Residential (Attached):  A
single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a
single lot and is attached by a common vertical wall to only one other
adjacent dwelling unit on another single lot.



      2.   Duplex Residential.  The use of a legally-described lot
for two dwelling units, each occupied by one family within a single building,
excluding manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing
units.



      3.   Two-Family Residential.  The use of a site for two
dwelling units, each occupied by one family, each in a separate building,
excluding a mobile home unit.



      4.   Townhouse Residential.  The use of a site for three or
more attached dwelling units, each occupied by one family and separated by
vertical side walls extending from foundation through roof without
openings.  Each townhouse unit must have at least two exposed exterior walls.



      5.   Multiple-Family Residential.  The use of a site for
three or more dwelling units within one building not otherwise defined as
townhouse units.



      6.   Downtown Residential.  The use of upper levels above
street level of a building within the Central Business District of the City
of Denison for single- or multiple-family residential uses.



      7.   Group Residential.  The use of a site for the residence
of more than three unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in
which occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units. 
Group Residential uses are limited to facilities that are officially
recognized or operated by a college or university, government agency, or
nonprofit organization.  Typical uses include fraternity or sorority houses
and dormitories not incorporated into a College and University use type.



      8.   Lodging House.  The use of a site for the residence of
more than four unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in which
occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units.



      9.   Manufactured Home Residential.  Use of a site for one or
more manufactured home dwellings, as defined in Section 165.11.



      10.   Mobile Home Park.  Use of a site under single ownership
for one or more mobile home units.  Generally, the land on which mobile
homes are placed in a Mobile Home Park is leased from the owner of the
facility.



      11.   Mobile Home Subdivision.  Division of a tract of land
into lots that meet all the requirements of the City of Denison's subdivision
ordinance for the location of mobile homes.  Generally, a lot within a
Mobile Home Subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon
such lot.



      12.   Retirement Residence.  A building or group of buildings
which provide residential facilities, provided that 75% of the  residents
are at least sixty years of age, or households headed by a householder of at
least sixty years of age.  A retirement residence may provide a range of
residential building types and may also provide support services to
residents, including but not limited to food service, general health
supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services,
recreation facilities, and transportation services.  The retirement
residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or meal
service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may include
additional health care supervision or nursing care.



166.05    CIVIC USE TYPES.



   Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational,
recreational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses
that are strongly vested with social importance.



      1.   Administration.  Governmental offices providing
administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with
the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary
vehicles.  Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices.



      2.   Cemetery.  Land used or intended to be used for the
burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.



      3.   Clubs.  Uses providing meeting, recreational, or social
facilities for a private, nonprofit or noncommercial association, primarily
for use by members and guests.



         A.   Clubs (Recreational): Clubs that provide indoor
and/or outdoor athletic facilities, with or without social or meeting
facilities.  Typical uses include country clubs, private or nonprofit
community or recreation centers, and private golf courses and driving ranges.



         B.   Clubs (Social): Clubs that provide primarily social
or meeting facilities.  Typical uses include private social clubs and
fraternal organizations.



      4.   College and University Facilities.  An educational
institution of higher learning that offers a course of study designed to
culminate in the issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized
accrediting organization.



      5.   Convalescent Services.  A use providing bed care and
inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but
excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and
excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental
disease, or communicable disease.  Typical uses include nursing homes.



      6.   Cultural Services.  A library, museum, or similar
registered nonprofit organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting
objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and
sciences.



7.   Day Care Services (Limited).  This Use Type includes all
classifications of day care facilities regulated by the State of Iowa that
operate providing care for not more than six (6) persons.  This term
includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or
adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and
secondary educational facilities.



      8.   Day Care Services (General).  This Use Type includes all
classifications of day care facilities regulated by the State of Iowa that
operate providing care for more than six (6) persons.  This term includes
nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults, and
similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary
educational facilities.



      9.   Detention Facilities.  A publicly operated or contracted
use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to
isolate those individuals from the community.



      10.   Emergency Residential Services.  A facility or use of a
building to provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse,
including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape,
abuse, or physical beatings.



      11.   Group Care Facility.  A facility licensed or approved
by the State of Iowa or other appropriate agency, which provides for the care
and short or long-term, continuous multi-day occupancy of more than four
unrelated persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on site as
part of an organized and therapeutic ongoing program for any of the purposes
listed below.  Such facilities shall exclude those uses defined as group
homes.  Group Care Facilities include facilities which provide for the:



         A.   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from,
the handicaps of physical disability.



         B.   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from,
the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder; or of mental retardation if
such facility has an overnight occupancy of more than eight persons.



         C.   Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol
abuse.



         D.   Supervision while under a program alternative to
imprisonment, including but not limited to pre-release, work-release, and
probationary programs.



      12.   Group Home.  A facility licensed by the State of Iowa
in which no more than eight persons, not including resident managers or house
parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption reside while
receiving therapy, training, or counseling for the purpose of adaptation to
living with or rehabilitation from cerebral palsy, autism, or mental
retardation.



      13.   Guidance Services.  A use providing counseling,
guidance, recuperative, or similar services to persons requiring
rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism,
detention, drug addiction, or similar condition on a daytime care basis.



      14.   Health Care.  A facility providing medical,
psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on
an outpatient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services,
training, administration and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors.



      15.   Hospital.  A facility providing medical, psychiatric,
or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient
basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training,
administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.



      16.   Maintenance Facilities.  A public facility, supporting
maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and
similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment service
centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or
contracting or industrial activities.



      17.   Park and Recreation Services.  Publicly owned and
operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities including publicly-owned
community centers, and open spaces.



      18.   Postal Facilities.  Postal services, including post
offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers operated by the United
States Postal Service.



      19.   Primary Educational Facilities.  A public, private, or
parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the
branches of learning study required to be taught in schools within the State
of Iowa.



      20.   Public Assembly.  Facilities owned and operated by a
public agency, charitable nonprofit or private organization accommodating
major public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment
purposes.  Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports
stadiums and arenas, convention facilities, fairgrounds, incidental sales,
and exhibition facilities.



      21.   Religious Assembly.  A use located in a permanent
building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious
education incidental thereto (excluding private primary or private secondary
educational facilities, community recreational facilities, day care
facilities, and incidental parking facilities).  A property tax exemption
obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Iowa shall constitute
prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.



      22.    Safety Services.  Facilities for conduct of public
safety and emergency services including police and fire protection services
and emergency medical and ambulance services.



      23.    Secondary Educational Facilities.  A public, private,
or parochial school offering instruction at the junior high or high school
level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the
schools of the State of Iowa.



      24.    Utilities.  Any above ground structures or facilities,
other than lines, poles, and other incidental facilities, used for the
production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of
water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications,
electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent
to development and/or use of land.



166.06    OFFICE USE TYPES.



   Office use types include uses providing for administration,
professional services, and allied activities.  These uses often invite
public clientele but are more limited in external effects than commercial
uses.



      1.   Corporate Offices.  Use of a site for administrative,
processing, or research offices, which generally does not provide service to
clientele from Denison and the surrounding region.  Corporate offices are
destinations for commuters drawn from a relatively wide region around
Denison, as well as from the community itself.  Typical uses include
corporate headquarters offices, telemarketing, or information processing
offices.



      2.   General Offices.  Use of a site for business,
professional, or administrative offices who may invite clients from both
local and regional areas.  Typical uses include real estate, insurance,
management, travel, or other business offices; organization and association
offices; or professional offices.



      3.   Financial Services.  Provision of financial and banking
services to consumers or clients.  Walk-in and drive-in services to
consumers are provided on site.  Typical uses include banks, savings and
loan associations, credit unions, savings banks, and loan companies.  An ATM
(Automatic Teller Machine) that is not accompanied on-site by an office of
its primary financial institution is considered within the Personal Services
Use Type.  The Financial Services use type is divided into two categories. 
Financial Services A includes less than 4,000 square feet of floor area and
has no more than two drive-up lanes (including ATM lanes).  Financial
Services B includes 4,000 square feet or more of floor area and/or has more
than two drive-up lanes.



      4.   Medical Offices.  Use of a site for facilities which
provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not
provide prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care.  Medical offices are
operated by doctors, dentists, or similar medical practitioners licensed for
practice in the State of Iowa. The Medical Offices use type is divided into
two categories.  Medical Offices A includes less than 3,000 square feet of
floor area.  Medical Offices B includes 3,000 square feet or more of floor
area.



166.07    COMMERCIAL USE TYPES.



   Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of
goods; and the provision of services other than those classified under other
use types.



      1.   Agricultural Sales and Service.  Establishments or
places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain,
fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision
of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than
where the service is rendered.  Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm
implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.



      2.   Automotive and Equipment Services.  Establishments or
places of business primarily engaged in sale and/or service of automobiles,
trucks, or heavy equipment.  The following are considered automotive and
equipment use types:



         A.   Automobile Auction Lots: Sale of motor vehicles
through a process of periodic auctions or bid procedures.  Automobile
auction lots usually include large on-site storage areas of motor vehicles
and lack showrooms, auto repair facilities and other structures and
facilities that are typical of new car dealerships. 



         B.   Automotive Rental and Sales:  Sale or rental of
automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational
vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing.
Typical uses include new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships;
and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.



         C.   Auto Services:  Provision of fuel, lubricants,
parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing
and cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale,
installation, and servicing of equipment and parts.  Typical uses include
service stations, car washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales
and installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair and service
activities but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair
services.



         D.   Body Repair:  Repair, painting, or refinishing of
the body, fender, or frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes,
recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural
implements, and similar vehicles or equipment.  Typical uses include body
and fender shops, painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing
garages.



         E.   Equipment Rental and Sales:  Sale or rental of
trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile
homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage,
maintenance, and servicing.  Typical uses include truck dealerships,
construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments.



         F.   Equipment Repair Services:  Repair of trucks,
tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy
equipment.  Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm
implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling,
salvage, or body and fender repair services.



      3.   Bed and Breakfast.  A lodging service that provides
overnight or short-term accommodations to guests or visitors, usually
including provision of breakfast.  Bed and breakfasts are usually located in
large residential structures that have been adapted for this use.  For the
purpose of this definition, bed and breakfasts are always owned and operated
by the resident owner or resident manager of the structure, include no more
than six (6) units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than 14
consecutive days during any one month period.



      4.   Business Support Services.  Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment,
supplies and materials or the provision of services used by office,
professional and service establishments to the firms themselves but excluding
automotive, construction and farm equipment.  Typical uses include office
equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel
equipment and supply firms, messenger and delivery services, custodial or
maintenance services, and convenience printing and copying.



      5.   Business or Trade Schools.  A use providing education or
training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or
occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college
or university, or public or private educational facility.



      6.   Campground.  Facilities providing camping or parking
areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or
tents, which accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than 14
consecutive days during any one month period.



      7.   Cocktail Lounge.  A use engaged in the preparation and
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including
taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant as
that term is defined in this section.



      8.   Commercial Recreation (Controlled Impact).  Private
businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by
structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or
sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or
spectators.  Controlled Impact Commercial Recreation uses typically take
place entirely within enclosed buildings or, when outdoors, have limited
effects related to lighting, hours of operation, or noise.  Typical uses
include theaters, private dance halls, billiard or bowling centers, game
arcades, indoor skating facilities, miniature golf courses, and private golf
courses. 



      9.   Commercial Recreation (High Impact).  Private
businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by
structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or
sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or
spectators.  High Impact Commercial Recreation uses are typically located
outdoors and have operating effects caused by lighting, noise, traffic, or
hours of operation that create substantial environmental impacts.  Typical
uses include shooting ranges, lighted driving ranges, go-kart tracks,
amusement parks, race tracks, and private baseball complexes.



      10.   Communications Services.  Establishments primarily
engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services
accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but
excludes those classified as Utilities.  Typical uses include television
studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or
film and sound recording facilities.  Broadcast and communications towers,
and their minor ancillary ground structures are classified as "Miscellaneous
Use Types."



      11.   Construction Sales and Services.  Establishments or
places of business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sale, from
the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other
structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware.  This use
type excludes those uses classified under Automotive and Equipment
Services.  Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and
equipment rental or sales.



      12.   Consumer Services.  Establishments that provide
services, primarily to individuals and households, but excluding Automotive
Use Types.  Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance
repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair
shops.



      13.   Convenience Storage.  Storage services primarily for
personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having
individual access but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby shops,
manufacturing, or commercial activity.  Typical uses include
mini-warehousing.



      14.   Food Sales.  Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home
consumption.  Food Sales establishments may include the sale of non-food
items.  Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail
bakeries, and candy shops.



         A.   Convenience Food Sales:  Establishments occupying
facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of
specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, and the sales of fuel
for motor vehicles.



         B.   Limited Food Sales:  Establishments occupying
facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of
specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, but excluding the
accessory sale of fuel for motor vehicles.  Typical uses include
delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops, and small grocery
stores.



         C.   General Food Sales:  Establishments selling a wide
variety of food commodities and related items, using facilities larger than
10,000 but less than 40,000 square feet.  Typical uses include grocery
stores and locker plants.



         D.   Supermarkets:  Establishments selling a wide
variety of food commodities, related items, and often providing a variety of
non-food goods and services, using facilities larger than 40,000 square
feet.  Typical uses include large grocery stores.



      15.   Funeral Services.  Establishments engaged in
undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial, and
arranging and managing funerals.  Typical uses include funeral homes or
mortuaries.



      16.   Gaming Facilities.  Establishments engaged in the
lawful, on-site operation of games of chance that involve the risk of money
for financial gain by patrons.  Gaming facilities shall include the
accessory sale of liquor and food, pursuant to regulations of the City of
Denison and/or the State of Iowa.



      17.   Kennels.  Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and
similar small mammals or large birds; or any premises on which more than four
animals included under this definition over four months of age are kept and
maintained.  Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich raising
facilities; pet motels, or dog training centers.



      18.   Laundry Services.  Establishments primarily engaged in
the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those
classified as Personal Services.  Typical uses include bulk laundry and
cleaning plans, diaper services, or linen supply services.



      19.   Liquor Sales.  Establishments or places of business
engaged in retail sale for off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of
liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption.



      20.   Lodging.  Lodging services involving the provision of
room and/or board, but not meeting the classification criteria of Bed and
Breakfasts.  Typical uses include hotels, apartment hotels, and motels.



      21.   Personal Improvement Services.  Establishments
primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal
improvements and similar services of a nonprofessional nature.  Typical uses
include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, music schools,
reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.



      22.   Personal Services.  Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in the provision of services of a personal
nature.  Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor,
or shoe repair shops; photography studios; television or electronics repair;
or dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households.  Personal
Services include establishments providing for the administration of massage
or massage therapy carried out by persons licensed by the State of Iowa when
performing massage services as a part of the profession or trade for which
licensed or persons performing massage services under the direction of a
person so licensed; or persons performing massage services or therapy
pursuant to the written direction of a licensed physician.



      23.   Pet Services.  Retail sales, incidental pet health
services, and grooming and boarding, when totally within a building, of dogs,
cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household
pets.  Typical uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing
and clipping salons, and pet grooming shops, but exclude uses for livestock
and large animals.



      24.   RV (Recreation Vehicle) Storage.  Establishments that
include the storage and/or display of boats, campers, and motorized
recreational vehicles for the purpose of rental or sale.



      25.   Research Services.  Establishments primarily engaged in
research of an industrial or scientific nature.  Typical uses include
electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms,
testing laboratories, or pharmaceutical research labs.



      26.   Restaurants.  A use engaged in the preparation and
retail sale of food and beverages; including the sale of alcoholic beverages
when conducted as a secondary feature of the use.



         A.   Restaurant (Drive-in or Fast Food):  An
establishment that principally supplies food and beverages in disposable
containers and is characterized by high automobile accessibility and on-site
accommodations, self-service, and short stays by customers.



         B.   Restaurant (General):  An establishment
characterized by table service to customers and/or accommodation to walk-in
clientele, as opposed to Drive-in or Fast Food Restaurants.  Typical uses
include cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants.



      27.   Restricted (or Adult) Businesses.  Any business
activity that offers the opportunity to view specified sexual activities or
view and touch specified anatomical areas in a manner that lacks serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.  This category includes
the sale or viewing of visual or print materials that meet this criteria if
the sale of such material constitutes more than 20% of the sales or retail
floor area of the establishment. For the purposes of this definition,
specified anatomical areas include the following if less than opaquely
covered: human genitals, the pubic region, pubic hair, or the female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.  Specified sexual
activities include any of the following conditions:



         A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.



         B.   Acts or representations of acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse with humans or animals, oral sex, or
flagellation.



         C.   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, or female breast.



         D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any activities set forth in A through C above.



   Typical uses include retail services or stores which are distinguished
by an emphasis on activities or materials that emphasize primarily sexual
content in their inventory and marketing practices; businesses which offer
live performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas;
and adult theaters.  Businesses may be classified as adult entertainment
businesses without regard to service of alcoholic beverages.



      28.   Retail Services.  Sale or rental with incidental
service of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use
but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type
classifications.  Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores,
furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or
services:



   Household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery,
notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers,
plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel jewelry,
fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household electronic
equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and
appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper,
hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating services; office
supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and
accessories (excluding service and installation).  General Retail Services
include:



         A.   Limited Retail Services:  Establishments providing
retail services, occupying facilities of 3,000 square feet or less. Typical
establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to
Denison and its surrounding vicinity.



         B.   Medium Retail Services:  Establishments providing
retail services, occupying facilities between 3,001  and 10,000 square feet
in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments
provide for specialty retailing or general purpose retailing oriented to
Denison and its surrounding vicinity.



         C.   Large Retail Services:  Establishments providing
retail services, occupying facilities between 10,001 and 40,000 square feet
in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments
provide for specialty retailing or general retailing oriented to Denison and
its surrounding vicinity.



         D.   Mass Retail Services:  Establishments providing
retail services, occupying facilities over 40,000 square feet in a single
establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for
general retailing oriented to Denison and the surrounding region.



      29.   Stables and/or Riding Academies.  The buildings, pens
and pasture areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or
other equine not owned by the occupants of the premises.  This use includes
instruction in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine
for hire.



      30.   Surplus Sales.  Businesses engaged in the sale,
including sale by auction, of used items or new items which are primarily
composed of factory surplus or discontinued items.  Surplus sales uses
sometimes include regular outdoor display of merchandise.  Typical uses
include flea markets, auction houses, factory outlets, or merchandise
liquidators.



      31.   Trade Services.  Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the provision of services that are not retail or
primarily dedicated to walk-in clientele.  These services often involve
services to construction or building trades and may involve a small amount of
screened, outdoor storage in appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses
include shops or operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or HVAC (heating
, ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors.



      32.   Travel Centers.  Facilities that provide for the sale
of fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including operators of
over-the-road trucks, in which less than 30% of the total site area is
devoted to the servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road
trucks.  The calculation of these areas includes but is not limited to fuel
islands for Diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and
associated maneuvering areas.  Travel centers include a mix of uses,
including food sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services,
and restaurants, and are typically located along or near Interstate Highways
or other principal State and Federal designated highway routes.



      33.   Truck Stops.  Facilities that provide for the sale of
fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including operators of over-the-road
trucks, in which 30% or more of the total site area is devoted to the
servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks.  The
calculation of these areas includes but is not limited to fuel islands for
Diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and associated
maneuvering areas.  Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food
sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services, and restaurants,
and are typically located along or near Interstate Highways or other
principal State and Federal designated highway routes.



      34.   Vehicle Storage (Short-term).  Short-term storage of
operating or non-operating vehicles for a period of no more than 21 days. 
Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-a-ways or impound yards
but exclude dismantling or salvage.  Long-term storage beyond 21 days
constitutes an Industrial Use Type.



      35.   Veterinary Services (General).  Veterinary services and
hospitals for small animals.  Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat
hospitals, pet cemeteries and crematoria, and veterinary hospitals for
livestock and large animals.



      36.   Veterinary Services (Large Animal).  Veterinary
services and hospitals for large animals such as cows, bulls, horses, and
other livestock.  Typical uses include veterinary hospitals for livestock
and large animals.



166.08    PARKING USE TYPES.



      1.   Off-Street Parking.  Parking use types include surface
parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately or publicly
owned off-street parking facility.



      2.   Parking Structure.  The use of a site for a multilevel
building which provides for the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary
basis, other than as an accessory to a principal use on the same site.



166.09    INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES.



   Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of
goods by nonagricultural methods, and the storage and distribution of
products.



      1.   Agricultural Industry.  Establishments which include the
storage, manufacture, sale, or distribution of agricultural supplies or
products that create major external effects, including substantial truck or
rail traffic and/or significant potential for hazard.  Typical uses include
grain elevators, storage of agricultural chemicals such as anhydrous
ammonia.  Agricultural industries do not include retailers of farm equipment
or other, generally non-hazardous agricultural supplies.



      2.   Construction Yards.  Establishments housing facilities
of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including
incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction
sites.  Typical uses are building contractor's yards.



      3.   Custom Manufacturing.  Establishments primarily engaged
in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed
structures, involving:



         A.   The use of hand tools, or



         B.   The use of domestic mechanical equipment not
exceeding 2 horsepower, or



         C.   A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.



   This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of
only those goods produced on site.  Typical uses include ceramic studios,
custom jewelry manufacturing, and candle making shops.



      4.   Light Industry.  Establishments engaged in the
manufacture or processing of finished products from previously prepared
materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and
packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and
distribution.  These establishments are characterized by having no major
external environmental effects across property lines and include no
unscreened or unenclosed outdoor storage.  Typical uses include commercial
bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel
assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and publishing
houses.



      5.   General Industry.  Enterprises engaged in the
processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or
fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw
materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects
across property lines, but often including outdoor storage of materials or
products.



      6.   Heavy Industry.  Enterprises involved in the basic
processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials,
with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across
property lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes
involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive, flammable,
radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials.



      7.   Recycling Collection.  Any site which is used in whole
or part for the receiving or collection of any post-consumer, non-durable
goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard,
aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities.



      8.   Recycling Processing.  Any site which is used for the
processing of any post-consumer, non-durable goods including, but not limited
to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable
commodities.



      9.   Resource Extraction.  A use involving on-site extraction
of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding
site grading for a specific construction project or preparation of a site for
subsequent development.  Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and
gravel operations, mining, and removal of dirt for off-site use.



      10.   Salvage Services.  Places of business engaged in the
storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials
that are not intended for reuse in their original forms.  Typical uses
include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, or paper salvage yards.



      11.   Vehicle Storage (Long-term).  Long-term storage of
operating or non-operating vehicles for a period exceeding 21 days.  Typical
uses include storage of private parking tow-a-ways or impound yards but
exclude dismantling or salvage.  Long-term storage of 21 days or less
constitutes a Commercial Use Type.



      12.   Warehousing (Enclosed).  Uses including storage,
distribution, and handling of goods and materials within enclosed
structures.  Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage
warehouses, and van and storage companies.



      13.   Warehousing (Open).  Uses including open air storage,
distribution, and handling of goods and materials.  Typical uses include
monument yards, grain elevators, and open storage.



166.10    TRANSPORTATION USE TYPES.



   Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of
providing facilities supporting the movement of passengers and freight from
one point to another.



      1.   Aviation (General).  Airports, including take-off and
landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related
facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales,
and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the
operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety
and security. Typical uses include private or municipal airports.



      2.   Aviation (Private).  Take-off or landing strips or
fields within a parcel generally put to other uses and primarily used for the
convenience of the owner of the parcel.  Typical uses include private
airstrips within a large property.



      3.   Railroad Facility.  Fixed railroad facilities, including
switching yards, equipment servicing facilities, and freight terminal
facilities, but not including normal right-of-way.



      4.   Transportation Terminal.  Facility for loading,
unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or
package express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, public transit
facilities.



      5.   Truck Terminal.  A facility for the receipt, transfer,
short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck.



166.11    MISCELLANEOUS TYPE USES.



      1.   Alternative Energy Production Devices.  The use of a
site for the production of energy utilizing methods that do not involve the
oxidation, combustion, or fission of primary materials.  Typical uses
include solar collector fields, geothermal energy installations, or
water-powered mills or generating facilities.



      2.   Amateur Radio Tower.  A structure(s) for the
transmission or broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by FCC licensed
Amateur Radio operators.



      3.   Communications Tower.  A structure(s) for the
transmission or broadcasting of radio, television, radar, or microwaves,
ordinarily exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district. 
Typical uses include broadcasting towers and cellular communications towers.



      4.   Construction Batch Plant.  A temporary demountable
facility used for the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other
paving materials intended for specific construction projects.



      5.   Landfill A  (Non-putrescible Solid Waste Disposal). 
The use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do not readily
undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated
with land disposal operations.  Typical disposal material would include
ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and
ceramic tile.



      6.   Landfill B (Putrescible and Non-putrescible Solid Waste
Disposal).  The use of a site as a depository for any solid waste except
hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency and/or the State of Iowa. Typical disposal material would include
non-putrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree
parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure.



      7.   Wind Energy Conservation System (WECS).  Any device that
converts wind energy to a form of usable energy, including wind charges,
windmills or wind turbines.



(Chapter 166 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 167
ZONING AND PROPERTY
DISTRICT REGULATIONS



 



167.01  Purpose
 
167.19  R-2 – Two Family Residential District


167.02  Establishment of Districts
 
167.20  R-3 – Townhome Residential Moderate Density District


167.03  Application of Districts
 
167.21  R-4 – Multi-Family Residential Medium Density District


167.04  Hierarchy
 
167.22  R-5 – Multi-Family Residential High Density District


167.05  Development Regulations
 
167.23  RM – Mobile Home Residential District


167.06  Zoning Map
 
167.24  HC-1 – Health Care District


167.07  Interpretation of District Boundaries
 
167.25  C-1 – Neighborhood Commercial District


167.08  Vacation of Streets and Alleys
 
167.26  C-2 – Highway Commercial District


167.09  Annexation of Territory
 
167.27  C-3 – Central Business District


167.10  Required Conformance
 
167.28  BP – Business Park District


167.11  Required Frontage
 
167.29  I-1 – Light Industrial District


167.12  Use Matrix:  Levels of Permitted Uses
 
167.30  I-2 – Heavy Industrial District


167.13  Guide to Site Development Regulators
 
167.31  Overlay and Special Districts


167.14  AG - Agricultural District
 
167.32  PUD – Planned Unit Development District


167.15  RR - Rural Residential District
 
167.33  RC – Rural Conservation Development Overlay District


167.16  R1-70 – Single-Family Residential District (Low-Density)
 
167.34  Highway 30 Gateway Corridor Overlay District


167.17  R1-60 – Single-Family Residential District (Low-Density)
 
167.35  FP/FW – Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District


167.18  R1-50 – Single-Family Residential District (Low-Density)
 
167.36  AV – Aviation Overlay District




 



167.01    PURPOSE.



   Zoning Districts are established in the Zoning Regulations to promote
compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations
appropriate to the purposes and specific nature of each district.



167.02    ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby
established.  These districts correspond to the Land Use Districts
established by the Denison Comprehensive Plan.



 



BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
 
DISTRICT NAMES


AG
 
Agricultural/Urban Reserve District


RR
 
Rural Residential District


R1-50, R1-60, R1-70
 
Single Family Low-Density District


R-2
 
Two Family Low-Density District


R-3
 
Townhome Residential Moderate Density District


R-4
 
Multi-Family Residential Medium Density District


R-5
 
Multi-Family Residential High Density District


RM
 
Mobile Home Residential District


HC-1
 
Health Care District


C-1
 
Neighborhood Commercial District


C-2
 
Highway Commercial District


CBD
 
Downtown CityplaceDenison Mixed Use District


BP
 
Business Park District


I-1
 
Light Industrial District


I-2
 
Heavy Industrial District










(Ord. 1406 - June 11 Supp.)




 

OVERLAY AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS


PUD
 
Planned Unit Development Overlay District


RC
 
Rural Conservation Development Overlay District


HW30
 
Highway 30 Gateway Corridor Overlay District


FP/FW
 
Floodplain Overlay District


AV
 
Aviation Overlay District


CBD
 
Central Business Core Overlay District



 




(Ord. 1504 - Sep. 19 Supp.)




167.03    APPLICATION OF DISTRICTS.



   A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the
City and its planning jurisdiction.  A site must be in one base district. 
Overlay and special districts may be applied to any lot or site or any
portion thereof, in addition to a base district designation.



167.04    HIERARCHY.



   References in the Zoning Ordinance to less intensive or more
intensively urbanized districts shall be deemed to refer to those
agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts
established in Section 167.02, and shall represent a progression from the AG
Agricultural District as the least intensively urbanized to the I-2 General
Industrial District as the most intensively urbanized. 



167.05    DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   For each Zoning District, permitted uses are set forth in the Use
Matrix.  Individual sections describe the purpose and specific development
regulations for each zoning district.  Supplemental Regulations may affect
specific land uses or development regulations in each zoning district.  The
applicable Supplemental Regulations are noted in Use Matrix.



167.06    ZONING MAP.



      1.   Adoption of Zoning Map.  Boundaries of zoning districts
established by this Zoning Regulations shall be shown on the Zoning Map
maintained by the City Clerk.  This map shall bear the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Clerk under the certification that this is the
Official Zoning Map referred to by this Ordinance.  This map, together with
all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall be
adopted as a part of, and concurrent with these regulations.  Said Zoning
Map shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be readily accessible to
the public at Denison City Hall.



      2.   Changes to the Zoning Map.  The City Council may from
time to time adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior
official zoning map, in the event that the official zoning map becomes
damaged or destroyed; or for purposes of clarity due to a number of boundary
changes, or to correct drafting errors or omissions; provided, however, that
any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending the original Zoning
Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. 7



167.07    INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any
zoning district shown on the Zoning Map.



      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district
boundaries.



      2.   Where district boundaries are indicated as within street
or alley, railroad, streams or creeks, or other identifiable rights-of-way,
the centerline of such rights-of-way shall be deemed the district boundary.



      3.   Where a district boundary divides a property, the
location of the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on the Zoning Map.



      4.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following corporate limits, such corporate limits shall be considered the
district boundaries.



      5.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following section lines, quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section
lines, such lines shall be considered the district boundaries.



      6.   Boundaries not capable of being determined as set forth
in 1 through 5 shall be as dimensioned on the official Zoning Map or if not
dimensioned shall be determined by the scale shown on the map.



167.08    VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEY.



   Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such right-of-way shall be extended out to the former
centerline.



167.09    ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY.



   All unimproved or agricultural territory that may hereafter be annexed
to the City shall be considered as lying in the AG Agricultural/Urban Reserve
District until such classification shall be changed as provided by this
ordinance.  Any improved property that is annexed into the city shall be
zoned according to the zoning district that most nearly describes either its
present use or the use proposed by Denison’s Comprehensive Development
Plan.  This zoning shall be established by the Planning Commission and the
City Council at the time of annexation.



167.10    REQUIRED CONFORMANCE.



   Except as specified in this chapter, no building or structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor
shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the
district regulations established by this chapter for the district in which
the building or land is located.



167.11    REQUIRED FRONTAGE.



   No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for
residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least twenty feet on at least
one public street, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private
easement of access or right-of-way of at least twenty feet wide to a street;
and there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage
or easement, except that a common easement of access at least fifty feet wide
may be provided for two or more such single-family dwellings or for one or
more two-family or multiple dwellings.



167.12    USE MATRIX:  LEVELS OF PERMITTED USES.



   Within zoning districts in Denison, different uses are permitted with
different conditions.  These are displayed in the Use Matrix.  Levels of
permission include:



      1.   Uses Which are Permitted by Right.  These uses are
permitted subject to issuance of a building permit by the Building Official,
subject only to compliance with all regulations of this ordinance.  Uses
permitted by right might be subject to supplemental regulations contained in
this ordinance.  These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a “P” in
the applicable cell.



      2.   Special Uses.  These uses are subject to approval of a
Special Use Permit by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, following the procedure
set forth in Section 174.11.  These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by
a “S” in the applicable cell.



      3.   Site Plan Approval.  Some use types require an
additional site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator/Building Official,
based on specific criteria for review.  This procedure is set forth in
Section 174.06.  These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by an asterisk
(*) following the citing of a specific use type.



167.13    GUIDE TO SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATORS.



   The regulators set forth in the tables in Sections 167.14 through
167.30. establish the limits and requirements for most development in the
City of Denison and its extra-territorial jurisdiction.  This section is
intended to provide guidance for applying the regulators contained in these
tables.



      1.   Site Area per Housing Unit.  This indicates the gross
land area per unit within a residential development.  For example, a 40-lot
subdivision on a 10-acre (435,600 square foot tract) will have a site area
per unit of 10,890 square feet.  Site area per unit, which measures gross
density, may differ from minimum lot size.  In conservation development, the
site area per unit will be larger than minimum lot size, permitting the
clustering of lots in exchange for common open space.  In multi-family
development, the site area per unit will usually be smaller than minimum lot
size, because the lot is the legal parcel on which a multiple-unit building
is built.



      2.   Minimum Lot Area.  This indicates the minimum size of a
legally described and recorded parcel upon which development can take
place.  As noted above, minimum lot area and site area per unit may not be
the same.



      3.   Minimum Lot Width.  This is the required minimum
distance connecting at points along opposite side lot lines, measured at the
required front yard setback.  For example, the lot width of an irregular lot
in a district requiring a 25-foot front yard setback is determined by:



         A.   Locating the points along each side lot line at a
distance of 25 feet back from the front property line.



         B.   Drawing a line connecting these two points.



         C.   Measuring the length of this line.  The length is
the lot width.



      4.   Minimum Yards.  These define the required setbacks of
buildings from front, side, and rear property lines.  While the yard
requirements apply to a majority of development, the ordinance provides for a
number of exceptions.  Some of these include:



         A.   Planned Developments.  Front yard setbacks can be
varied within Planned Developments, which are reviewed and approved by the
City Council after a recommendation from the Planning Commission.



         B.   Major Streets.  The City may require greater than
normal setbacks along segments of the City’s arterial street system, as
defined in the comprehensive development plan. 



         C.   Flexibility Provided by Supplemental Development
Regulations.  Section 170.04 establishes supplemental regulations, many of
which provide flexibility or variations in setback regulations for specific
contexts.



         D.   Maximum Setbacks.  Some specific zoning districts
provide maximum as well as minimum setbacks.  These setbacks establish
“build-to” lines that may be necessary to protect the appearance and
character of special urban districts.



      5.   Maximum Height.  Height normally measures the vertical
distance from the established grade to the highest point of a building. 
However, as established by the definition of height, the point of measurement
may vary for different types of buildings and roof slopes.



      6.   Maximum Building Coverage.  This measures the percentage
of a site that may be covered by the footprint of buildings.  Thus, a 20,000
square foot building on a 40,000 square foot site has a building coverage of
50%.  This is a method of regulating the scale of buildings in an area.



      7.   Maximum Impervious Coverage.  This measures the
percentage of a site that may be covered by buildings and other surfaces and
development features which prevent the penetration of water into the ground
(such as driveways, porches, parking lots, and other features).  Limits on
impervious coverage help control the velocity and quantity of storm water
runoff and provide for groundwater recharge.



      8.   Floor Area Ratio.  Just as site area per unit controls
the density of residential development, floor area ration (FAR) controls the
density of non-residential development.  FAR is the ratio of gross floor
area of a building to total site area.  Thus, in an area with a maximum
permitted FAR of 1.0, a 40,000 square foot building may be located on a
40,000 square foot site.  Naturally, because of coverage ratios,
landscaping, and parking requirements, such a building will be multi-story.



      9.    Maximum Amount of Total Parking in Street Yard.  This
controls the maximum amount of parking that can be located in the area
between a building facade and the street.  When applied in certain zoning
districts, it is intended to reduce the number of cars seen from the street,
encourage site planning which locates parking in rear and side yards, and
produce a stronger relationship between buildings and streets.  For example,
a project with 100 parking stalls and a 50% limit on the amount of parking
located in street yards must locate 50 of its stalls in rear or side yards
without street exposure.



      10.   Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street
Right-of-Ways.  This establishes the depth of landscaping that must be
provided on private property adjacent and in from the right-of-way line. 
Thus, if the required minimum depth is fifteen feet, a project must landscape
the first fifteen feet of its site back from the right-of-way line.  All
landscaping must be done in accordance with Chapter 171, establishing
landscaping standards.



      11.   Minimum Buffer Yard Requirements.  This establishes the
depth of a buffer yard that must be provided by intensive land uses adjacent
to primarily residential land uses in residential zoning districts.  All
landscaping must be done in accordance with Chapter 171, establishing
landscaping standards.



      12.   Supplemental Use Regulations.  Certain permitted uses
require satisfaction of specific requirements in order to function
successfully in their urban or rural contexts.  These supplemental
requirements are set forth in Chapter 169.  These requirements are
cross-referenced in the “Supplementary Regulations” column of the Use
Matrix.




Table 167.1 - Use Matrix: Agricultural and Residential Types (AG through RM
Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Agricultural Uses


Horticulture
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Crop Production
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Animal Production
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Confined Animal Feeding Operations
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Livestock Sales
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Residential Uses


Single-Family Detached
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Single-Family Attached
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Duplex
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Two-Family*
 
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
S


Townhouse*
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S


Multiple-Family*
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Downtown Residential*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Group Residential*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
S


Boarding House*
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 


Manufactured Housing Residential
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Mobile Home Park*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Mobile Home Subdivision
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Retirement Residential*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
S




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



S(x)   Expansion of an existing use is permitted subject to approval of a
Special Use Permit



E   Permitted by right if lawfully existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.1 - Use Matrix: Agricultural and Residential Use Types (C-1 through
I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Agricultural Uses


Horticulture
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Crop Production
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Animal Production
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Confined Animal Feeding Operations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Livestock Sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Residential Uses


Single-Family Detached
 
 
S/E
 
S/E
 
S/E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Single-Family Attached
 
 
S/E
 
S/E
 
S/E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Duplex
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Two-Family
 
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 


Townhouse*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Multiple-Family*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Downtown Residential*
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 


Group Residential*
 
 
P
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Boarding House*
 
 
P
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Manufactured Housing Residential
 
 
 
S/E
 
S
 
E
 
E
 
E
 


Mobile Home Park*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Mobile Home Subdivision
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Retirement Residential*
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
 
 
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



E   Permitted by right if lawfully existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.2 - Use Matrix: Civic Use Types (AG through RM Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Civic Uses


Administration
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 


Cemetery*
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 


Clubs (Recreational)*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 


Clubs (Social)*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
S


College/University*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 


Convalescent Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
S


Cultural Services*
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Day Care (Limited)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Day Care (General)*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P


Detention Facilities*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Emergency Residential
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P


Group Care Facility*
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Group Home
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Guidance Services
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
S


Health Care*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 


Hospitals*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Maintenance Facility*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Park and Recreation
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Postal Facilities*
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
S
 
S
 


Primary Education*
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Public Assembly*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Religious Assembly*
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Safety Services*
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Secondary Educ*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Utilities*
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.2 - Use Matrix: Civic Use Types  (C-1 through I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Civic Uses


Administration
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Cemetery*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Clubs (Recreational)*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Clubs (Social)*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


College/University*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Convalescent Services*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
 
 


Cultural Services*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Day Care (Limited)
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 


Day Care (General) *
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Detention Facilities*
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
 
S
 
S
 


Emergency Residential
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 


Group Care Facility*
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Group Home
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Guidance Services
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Health Care*
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 


Hospitals*
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Maintenance Facility*
 
 
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Park and Recreation
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Postal Facilities*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Primary Education*
 
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 


Public Assembly*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 


Religious Assembly*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 


Safety Services*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Secondary Educ*
 
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 


Utilities*
 
 
S
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.3 - Use Matrix: Office Use Types (AG through RM Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Office Uses


Corporate Offices*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


General Offices
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Financial Services A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Financial Services B*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Medical Offices A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Medical Offices B*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 




 




Table 167.3 - Use Matrix: Office Use Types (C-1 through I-2 Districts) 




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Office Uses


Corporate Offices*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


General Offices
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Financial Services A
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Financial Services B*
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Medical Offices A
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Medical Offices B*
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.4 - Use Matrix: Commercial Use Types (AG through RM Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Commercial Uses


Ag Sales/Service*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto Auction Lots*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto Rental/Sales*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto Services*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Body Repair*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Equip Rental/Sales*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Equipment Repair*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bed and Breakfast*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Business Support Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Business/Trade School*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 


Campground*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Cocktail Lounge*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Commercial Rec (Controlled Impact)*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Commercial Rec (High Impact)*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Communication Service*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Construction Sale/Service*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Consumer Service*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Convenience Storage*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Food Sales (Convenience)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Food Sales (Limited)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Food Sales (General)*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Food Sales (Super markets)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.4 - Use Matrix: Commercial Use Types (C-1 though I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Commercial Uses


Ag Sales/Service*
 
 
 
P
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Auction Lots*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Rental/Sales*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Auto Services*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Body Repair*
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Equip Rental/Sales*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Equipment Repair*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
 
P
 
P
 


Bed and Breakfast*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
 
 


Business Support Services*
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Business/Trade School*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Campground*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 


Cocktail Lounge*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Commercial Rec (Controlled Impact)*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Commercial Rec (High Impact)*
 
 
 
P
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Communication Service*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Construction Sale/Service*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Consumer Service*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Convenience Storage*
 
 
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Food Sales (Convenience)*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
S
 


Food Sales (Limited)*
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
 
 


Food Sales (General)*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
 
 


Food Sales (Super markets)*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
 
 
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.4 - Use Matrix: Commercial Use Types (AG through RM Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Commercial Uses


Funeral Service*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
 


Gaming Facilities*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Kennels*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Laundry Services*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Liquor Sales*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lodging*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Personal Improvement
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 


Personal Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
 


Pet Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


RV Storage
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Research Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Restaurants (Drive-in)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Restaurants (General)*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Restricted Business*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Retail Services (Limited)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Retail Services (Medium)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Retail Services (Large)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Retail Services (Mass)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Stables*
 
P
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Surplus Sales*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Trade Services*
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Travel Centers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Truck Stops
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Vehicle Storage (Short-term)*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Veterinary Services (General)*
 
P
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Veterinary Services (Large Animal)
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.4 - Use Matrix: Commercial Use Types (C-1 through I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Commercial Uses


Funeral Service*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


Gaming Facilities*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 


Kennels*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Laundry Services*
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Liquor Sales*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
P
 
 


Lodging*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 


Personal Improvement
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Personal Services*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Pet Services*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


RV Storage
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Research Services*
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Restaurants (Drive-in)*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
S
 


Restaurants (General)*
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
S
 


Restricted Business*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Retail Services (Limited)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 


Retail Services (Medium)
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 


Retail Services (Large)*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
 
 
 


Retail Services (Mass)*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
 
 


Stables*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Surplus Sales*
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Trade Services*
 
 
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Travel Centers*
 
 
 
P
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Truck Stops*
 
 
 
S
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Veh. Storage (Short-term)*
 
S
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Veterinary Services (General)*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Veterinary Services (Large Animal)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.5 - Use Matrix: Parking and Transportation Use Types (AG through RM
Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Parking Uses


Off-Street Parking*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Parking Structure*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Transportation Uses


Aviation (General)*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Aviation (Private)*
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Railroad Facilities*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Truck Terminal*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Transportation Terminal*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




Table 167.5 - Use Matrix: Parking and Transportation Use Types (C-1 through
I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




  Parking Uses


Off-Street Parking*
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Parking Structure*
 
P
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Transportation Uses


Aviation (General)*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Aviation (Private)*
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Railroad Facilities*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Truck Terminal*
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Transportation Terminal*
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.6 - Use Matrix: Industrial Use Types  (AG through RM Districts)




 

Use Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-70, 60, 50
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-5
 
RM




Industrial Uses


Agricultural Industry*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Construction Yards*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Custom Manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Light Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


General Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Heavy Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Recycling Collection*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Recycling Processing*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Resource Extraction*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Salvage Services*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Vehicle Storage (Long-term)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Warehousing (Enclosed)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Warehousing (Open)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Miscellaneous Uses


Amateur Radio Tower
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Communications Tower
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 


Construction Batch Plant*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Landfill (Non-Putrescrible)*
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Landfill (Putrescible)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


WECS
 
S
 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)




Table 167.6 - Use Matrix: Industrial Use Types (C-1 through I-2 Districts)




 

Use Types
 
HC-1
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
Supplemental Regulations




Industrial Uses


Agricultural Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Construction Yards*
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Custom Manufacturing
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Light Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


General Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Heavy Industry*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Recycling Collection*
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 
P
 


Recycling Processing*
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Resource Extraction*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Salvage Services*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Vehicle Storage (Long-term)*
 
 
 
S
 
 
 
P
 
P
 


Warehousing (Enclosed)*
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Warehousing (Open)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Miscellaneous Uses


Amateur Radio Tower
 
 
P
 
P
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 


Communications Tower
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 


Construction Batch Plant*
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 
P
 


Landfill (Non-Putrescrible)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


Landfill (Putrescible)*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
 


WECS
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 




 



P   Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations



S   Permitted by Special Use Permit (Section 174.11)



Blank   Use not permitted in zoning district



*   Use subject to Special Site Plan review (Section 174.06)



167.14    AG - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The AG district promotes and preserves
agricultural uses, including crop and animal production. This district is
intended to accommodate activities such as agriculture, horticulture, dairy
farming, livestock farming, poultry farming, general farming and other
agricultural activities. This district discourages low density single family
residential development often associated with agricultural areas by requiring
a minimum 10-acre lot size. The AG district is also intended to maintain
interim agricultural uses within areas designated in the Denison
comprehensive plan as long-term urban growth areas.  The intent here is to
discourage rural residential growth in these areas that are in watersheds
that can eventually accommodate development served by extension of public
sewers.  Where these areas are outside the city limits of Denison, but
within its two-mile subdivision jurisdiction, it is intended that the City
work with the County to apply this district’s site development regulations
to these long term urban growth areas. 



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
Other Permitted Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit
 
NA
 


Minimum Lot Area
 
10 acres
 
5 acres


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
150 ft.
 


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 


   Front Yard (Note 1)
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.


     Side Yard
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.


     Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.


     Rear Yard
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.




 



   Note 1:  Front yard setback is measured from property line of platted
lots.  For unplatted lots along roads, residential structures shall be set
back sufficiently to allow for future right-of-way dedications.  This
setback is typically 75 feet from the center line of the adjacent road.  The
Building Official may establish a different set-back requirement based on the
specific context of a parcel.  The reason for any such variation shall be
documented in writing by the Building Official. 



167.15    RR - RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The RR district provides for the rural
residential use of land, accommodating agriculture and very low density
residential environments.  It is designed for permanent development of
relatively remote areas that are beyond the reach of Denison’s foreseeable
urban development pattern, making eventual extension of urban services
extremely unlikely.  Subdivisions in RR districts generally will be
developed to rural standards, with gravel roads, surface drainage, and
individual water and wastewater management systems.  In parts of the Denison
jurisdiction with distinctive landforms, conservation development design is
required to maintain the character of the land.  These areas are designated
by the RC Rural Conservation Overlay District and are subject to special
standards and planning procedures set forth in Section 167.33 of this
chapter.  These standards encourage the preservation of important open space
resources without reducing the density permitted the developer or property
owner.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Units
 
Other Permitted Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit (RC designated areas)
 
3 acres
 
NA


Minimum Lot Area
 
1 acre
 
2 acres


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
150
 
150


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 


       Front Yard
 
50
 
50


       Side Yard
 
25
 
25


       Street Side Yard
 
50
 
50


       Rear Yard
 
50
 
100


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35




 



167.16    R1-70 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (LOW-DENSITY).



      1.   Purpose. The R1-70 district is intended to provide for
single family residential development, with gross densities at approximately
5 units per acre.  These areas generally include single-family dwellings on
relatively large lots with supporting community facilities and urban
services, including city water and sanitary sewer service. 



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
Other Permitted Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Permitted Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit
 
N/A
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
8,400
 
10,000
 
20,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
70
 
70
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 
 


   Front Yard
 
30
 
30
 
40


   Side Yard: (Note 1)
 
 
 
35


      One Story
 
8
 
8
 


      Two Stories or More
 
10
 
10
 


   Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
20
 
20
 
35


Rear Yard Area
 
30
 
30
 
40


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
0
 
0
 
0




 



   Note 1:  Zero Lot Line Development.  Within a common development, one
interior side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached
residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



167.17    R1-60 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (LOW-DENSITY).



      1.   Purpose.  The R1-60 district is intended to provide for
single family residential development, with gross densities at approximately
6 units per acre.  These areas generally include single-family dwellings on
moderately-sized lots with supporting community facilities and urban
services, including city water and sanitary sewer service.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
Other Permitted Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Permitted Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit
 
N/A
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
7,200
 
10,000
 
20,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
60
 
70
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 
 


   Front Yard
 
30
 
30
 
40


   Side Yard: (Note 1)
 
 
 
35


      One Story
 
7
 
8
 


      Two Stories or More
 
7
 
10
 


   Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
20
 
20
 
35


   Rear Yard Area
 
30
 
30
 
40


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
0
 
0
 
0




 



   Note 1:  Zero Lot Line Development.  Within a common development, one
interior side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached
residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



167.18    R1-50 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (LOW-DENSITY).



      1.   Purpose.  The R1-50 district is intended to recognize
the development pattern established in pre-world war II single family
residential neighborhoods in Denison.  Gross densities in these historic
neighborhoods are around 7 units per acre.  While initially developed as
single-family neighborhoods, these areas sometimes include conversions to
multiple-family dwellings that have occurred over time.  Nonetheless, the
use predominate in these areas is single-family homes, and the R1-50 district
is intended to protect and preserve this character.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
Other Permitted Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Permitted Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit
 
N/A
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
6,000
 
10,000
 
20,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
50
 
70
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 
 


   Front Yard
 
25
 
25
 
40


   Side Yard: (Note 1)
 
 
 
35


      One Story
 
5
 
7
 


      Two Stories or More
 
5
 
10
 


   Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
20
 
20
 
35


   Rear Yard Area
 
30
 
30
 
40


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
0
 
0
 
0




 



   Note 1:  Zero Lot Line Development.  Within a common development, one
interior side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached
residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



167.19    R-2 – TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The R-2 district is intended to provide for
low/moderate density residential development, with gross densities generally
between 6 and 10 units per acre.  These developments include single-family
dwellings on moderate-sized lots and two family dwellings or
duplexes/bi-attached homes.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
1-Family Attached
 
Duplex (2-Family)
 
Other Non-
Institutional Permitted Use
 
Other Permitted Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit
 
 
 
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
7,200
 
4,200 per unit
 
8,400
 
                    6,000
 
6,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
60
 
35 per unit
 
70
 
60
 
60


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 2)
 
 
 
 
 


   Front Yard
 
25
 
25 ft.
 
25
 
25
 
35


   Side Yard:  (Note 1)
 
 
 
 
 


      One Story
 
6
 
7.5
 
6
 
6
 
15


      Two Story
 
8
 
7.5
 
8
 
8
 
15


   Street Side Yard/Corner Lot
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
20


   Rear Yard Area
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  Zero Lot Line or Single-Family Attached Development.  Within
a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for
single-family detached residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



   Note 2:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Developments.  The
Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in
planned districts.  However, the setback from the front facade of a garage
to any public or private street right-of-way including the boundary of
sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.



167.20    R-3 - TOWNHOME RESIDENTIAL MODERATE DENSITY DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The R-3 district is intended to provide for
moderate density mixed residential development including small lot Single
Family dwellings, Two Family Dwellings, and Townhouse residential
development, with gross densities below 15 dwellings per acre.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family  Detached
 
1-Family Attached (Note 1)
 
Duplex (Two Family)
 
Town-house (Note 1)
 
Other Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit  (sq. ft.)
 
 
 
 
3,000
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
7,200
 
3,500
 
7,000
 
2,400
 
6,000
 
6,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
 
 
 
 
 


In Conventional Development
 
60
 
35
 
70
 
NA
 
60
 
55


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 3)
 
 
 
 
 
 


Front Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


Side Yard (Note 1, 2)
 
 
 
 
 
 


   One Story
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
7
 
15


   Two Stories
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
15


   Three Stories
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
15


Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
15
 
25
 
15
 
15
 
25
 
25


Rear Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
50%
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  1-Family Attached and Townhouse Development.  Regulators are
shown on a per unit basis.  Side yard setbacks are indicated for detached
building walls.



   Note 2:  Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development. 
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for
single-family detached residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



   Note 3:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.  The Planning
Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned
districts.  However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any
public or private street right-of-way Including the boundary of sidewalks)
must be at least 20 feet.



      3.   Additional Requirements.  Parking areas, accessory
buildings, and garages must be at least 5 feet from a side or rear lot
line.  A greater separation from residential zoning districts may be
required by Section 171.05.



167.21    R-4 – MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The R-4 district is intended to provide for
medium density development, including small lot two-family development and
multi-family residential development, with gross densities up to about 17
units per acre depending on the project size. This district is oriented
towards accommodation of townhouse projects and typical 3-story walkup
apartment buildings.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
1-Family Attached
(Note 1)
 
Duplex
(Two Family)
 
Town- house
(Note 1)
 
Multi- Family
 
Other Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.)
 
 
 
 
3,000
 
2,500
 
 


Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
7,200
 
3,500
 
3,500
 
2,400
 
10,000
 
6,000
 
6,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
60
 
35
 
70
 
NA
 
NA
 
60
 
55


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 4)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Front Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35


Side Yard (Note 1,2,3)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   One Story
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
7
 
7
 
15


   Two Stories
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
15


   Three Stories
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
15


Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
15
 
25
 
15
 
15
 
25
 
25
 
25


Rear Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
 
35
 
35
 
50
 
50
 
50


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
50%
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  Single-Family Attached and Townhouse Development. Regulators
are shown on a per unit basis.  Side yard setbacks are indicated for
detached building walls.



   Note 2:  Multi-Family Development.  The minimum side yard setback
increases by 1 feet for each 1 foot in height above 35 feet, up to a maximum
height of 50 feet.



   Note 3:  Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development. 
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for
single-family detached residential use if:



      1   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



   Note 4:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.  The Planning
Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned
districts.  However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any
public or private street right-of-way including the boundary of sidewalks
must be at least 20 feet.



167.22    R-5 – MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The R-5 district is intended to provide for
high density development, including small lot one- and two-family development
and multi-family residential development, with gross densities up to 43.5
units per acre depending on the project size. This district is oriented
towards accommodation of multi-story apartment developments, including senior
housing projects.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached
 
1-Family Attached
(Note 1)
 
Duplex
(Two Family)
 
Town- house (Note 1)
 
Multi- Family
 
Other Non- Institutional Uses
 
Other Institutional Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit  (sq. ft.)
 
 
 
 
3,000
 
1,000
 
 


Minimum Lot Area  (sq. ft.)
 
6,000
 
3,500
 
3,500
 
2,400
 
10,000
 
6,000
 
6,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
60
 
35
 
70
 
NA
 
NA
 
60
 
55


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 4)               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Front Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35


Side Yard (Note 1,2,3)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   One Story
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
6
 
7
 
7
 
15


   Two Stories
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
8
 
15


   Three Stories
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
15


Street Side Yard, Corner Lot
 
15
 
25
 
15
 
15
 
25
 
25
 
25


Rear Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
35


Maximum Height (feet)   (Note 2)
 
35
 
 
35
 
35
 
50
 
50
 
50


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
50%
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  Single-Family Attached and Townhouse Development. 
Regulators are shown on a per unit basis.  Side yard setbacks are indicated
for detached building walls.



   Note 2:  Multi-Family Development. 



      1.   The minimum side yard setback increases by 1 feet for
each 1 foot in height above 35 feet, up to a maximum height of 50 feet.



      2.   For each one foot that the building or a portion of it
sets back beyond the required front, side and rear yards, one foot may be
added to the height limit of such building or portion thereof, provided that
no building shall exceed a height of 90 feet. 



   Note 3:  Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development. 
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for
single-family detached residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



   Note 4:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.  The Planning
Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned
districts.  However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any
public or private street right-of-way including the boundary of sidewalks
must be at least 20 feet.



167.23    RM – MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The RM district recognizes that mobile home
development, properly planned, can provide important opportunities for
affordable housing.  It provides opportunities for mobile home development
within planned parks or subdivisions, along with the supporting services
necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
1-Family Detached and Mobile Home Units on Sub-divided  Lots
 
Duplex
 
1-Family Attached and Town-house (Note 1)
 
Mobile Home Park (Note 4)
 
Other Permitted Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit (square feet)
 
 
 
 
 


   In Conventional Development
 
5,000
 
2,500
 
3,000
 
NA
 


   In Planned Developments
 
4,000
 
2,500
 
2,500
 
5,000
 


Minimum Lot Area
 
 
 
 
 


   In Conventional Development
 
5,000
 
5,000
 
2,500
 
NA
 
6,000


   In Planned Developments
 
4,000
 
5,000
 
2,500
 
10 acres
 
6,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
 
 
 
 


   In Conventional Development
 
40
 
50
 
25
 
NA
 
60


   In Planned Developments
 
40
 
45
 
25
 
150
 
60


Minimum Yards (feet)
(Note 3)
 
 
 
 
 


   Front Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
50
 
25


   Side Yard (Note 2)
 
5
 
5
 
10
 
50
 
10


   Street Side Yard
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
50
 
25


   Rear Yard
 
20% of lot depth
 
20% of lot depth
 
20% of lot depth
 
50
 
25


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development.  No more than
four units may be attached in a single townhouse structure within an RM
District.  Regulators are shown on a per unit basis.  Side yard setbacks
are indicated for detached building walls.



   Note 2:  Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development. 
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for
single-family detached residential use if:



      1.   The normal side yard setback requirement must be
maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the
common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.



      2.   An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade
is prepared by the developer and filed with the Crawford County Register of
Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application
for a building permit. 



   Note 3:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.  The Planning
Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned
districts other than mobile home parks.  However, the setback from the front
facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way including the
boundary of sidewalks must be at least 20 feet.



   Note 4: Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions.  Complete development
standards for Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions are set forth in subsection
3 of Section 169.03.



167.24    HC-1 – HEALTH CARE DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The intent of the Health Care District is to
allow for typical uses associated with health care, including outpatient
diagnostic and surgical centers and special treatment facilities that involve
extended stay, to be permitted around existing hospital/medical uses.  This
District recognizes that medical offices benefit from being close to
hospitals.  The community as a whole benefits from a concentration of
medical services by allowing for easier access to medical services.



      2.   Site Development Regulations for Regular HC-1 Districts.



 

Regulator
 
Minimum Requirement




Minimum Lot Area
 
0.5 acre


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
70 ft.


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 2)
 


   Front Yard
 
20 ft.


   Side Yard (Note 1)
 
0


   Street Side Yard
 
10


   Rear Yard (Note 1)
 
0


Maximum Height (feet)
 
None


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
100%




 



   Note 1:  No side or rear yard except fifteen (15) feet adjacent to a
residential zone boundary or use.



      3.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.  The following
accessory uses and structures which are clearly incidental and necessary to
the permitted principal uses or structures of this district, which are
located on the same lot or contiguous lot under the same ownership shall be
permitted:



         A.   Gift stores, banking facilities, restaurants and
retail or personal service shops, provided that access is only from within
the building.



         B.   Day-care centers and associated recreational
facilities.



         C.   Chapels and places of worship.



         D.   Overnight accommodations within the hospital for
patients’ families.



         E.   Auditoriums.



         F.   Employee services, such as credit unions.



         G.   Helicopter landing site for the reception and
transport of emergency patients.



         H.   Vehicle repairs and maintenance, when incidental to
health care offices and not open to the general public.



         I.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with
construction work, provided that such buildings are removed upon completion
of this construction work.



         J.   Low powered radio service antennas and other
communication devices.



         K.   Parking ramps.



         L.   Laundry and Dry-cleaning.



      4.   Supplemental Standards for Health Care District.  All
development in the Health Care District shall be subject to the following
additional standards:



         A.   Uses which are not otherwise permitted as permitted
or accessory uses and structures shall not be permitted by variance in the
hospital zone.



         B.   All areas of the site not used for building,
parking, walks, and drives shall be suitably landscaped.  New construction
shall be designed and carried out in a manner which results in the least
disturbance to the existing landscape features of the site.



167.25    C-1 – NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is
intended for neighborhood shopping facilities serving the needs of residents
of a surrounding residential area.  Allowed commercial and office uses are
generally compatible with nearby residential areas in scale and intensity. 
Site development regulations are intended to ensure compatibility in size,
scale, and site characteristics with these residential environments.  C-1
districts are generally most appropriate at intersections of collector and/or
arterial streets, at the edge of residential areas, in planned commercial
areas in newly developing residential districts, or at other locations where
local commercial services are required.



      2.   Site Development Regulations for Regular C-1 Districts.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Residential Uses
 
All Other Permitted Uses




Minimum Lot Area
 
Same standards as for the R-3 Townhome Residential Moderate Density District
 
None


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
None


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 2)
 


   Front Yard
 
15 ft.


   Side Yard (Note 1)
 
0


   Street Side Yard
 
20


   Rear Yard (Note 1)
 
0


Maximum Height (feet)
 
35 ft.


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
100%




 



   Note 1:  No side or rear yard except where apartments are above a
store or shop, a rear yard of 20 feet shall be provided and where adjacent to
an “AG” or “R” district, a side yard of 10 feet and a rear yard of 20
feet shall be provided.



   Note 2:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.  The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required
minimum setbacks in PUD districts.  Along arterials designated in the
city’s Comprehensive Development Plan, the city may require a deeper
front-yard setback.



      3.   Supplemental Development Regulations for Office and
Commercial Uses in the C-1 District.  In order to maintain a residential
character in neighborhood commercial areas in Denison, the following design
standards shall apply to any office or commercial use developed within the
C-1 District:



         A.   No single building shall have a building coverage
area that exceeds 15,000 square feet without approval of a Special Use
Permit, as set forth in Section 174.11.



         B.   No street-facing facade may have a continuous
length of 100 feet or over without an offset in the building elevation equal
to a dimension of at least five feet.



         C.   Window area on each street-facing facade shall be
equal to at least 20% of the area of that facade.



         D.   No building facade facing a street shall have the
appearance of a rear facade.  Architectural details, including materials,
textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade
shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily
visible to the public.



         E.   All buildings and developments shall include a
direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks
to the entrances of buildings within the development.



167.26    C-2 – HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The C-2 district accommodates commercial and
office facilities that serve the needs of markets ranging from several
neighborhoods to the overall region.  While allowed commercial and office
uses are generally compatible with nearby residential areas, traffic and
operating characteristics of some uses may have an impact on adjacent
residential neighborhoods.  Use regulations require special permit review
for these selected uses.  C-2 Districts are most appropriate at
intersections of collector and arterial streets, at the junction of several
neighborhoods, along major commercial or mixed use corridors, or at
substantial commercial subcenters.  The district also permits other uses
with similar urban impacts to substantial commercial development.



      2.   Site Development Regulations for Regular C-2 Districts.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Residential Uses
 
All Other Permitted Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.)
 
Same standards as for the R-5 Multi-family Residential High Density District
 
NA


Minimum Lot Area
 
None


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
None


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 1)
 


   Front Yard
 
25


   Side Yard
 
5


   Street Side Yard
 
20


   Rear Yard
 
Lesser of 20% of lot depth or 20 feet


Maximum Height (feet)
 
50


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
80%




 



   Note 1:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.  The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required
minimum setbacks in PUD districts.  Along arterials designated in the
city’s Comprehensive Development Plan, the city may require a deeper
front-yard setback.



167.27    C-3 – CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The C-3 district provides appropriate
development regulations for Downtown Denison, the city’s central business
district.  The grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town
center’s role as a center for trade, service, and civic life. Mixed uses
are allowed and encouraged within the Central Business District.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Residential Uses
 
All Other Permitted Uses




Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.)
 
1,000
 


Minimum Lot Area
 
5,000
 
No minimum


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
No requirement
 
No minimum


Minimum Yards (feet)
 
 


   Front Yard
 
0
 
0


   Side Yard
 
0
 
0


   Street Side Yard
 
0
 
0


   Rear Yard
 
0
 
0


Maximum Height (feet)
 
50
 
4 stories or 50 feet


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
NA
 
0




 



      3.   Special Regulations and Standards.



         A.   No building facade facing a street shall have the
appearance of a rear facade.  Architectural details, including materials,
textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade
shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily
visible to the public.



         B.   All buildings and developments shall include a
direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks
to the entrances of buildings within the development.



167.28    BP – BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The BP district is designed to promote the
development of planned business parks that accommodate corporate offices,
research facilities, and structures that can combine office, distribution,
and limited industrial uses.  Permitted industrial uses are limited to those
that are compatible with an office park environment.  BP Districts serve a
more regional audience, but may provide services to local residents.  They
usually include extensive landscaping, abundant parking facilities, and good
visual and pedestrian relationships among buildings.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Uses




Minimum District Size (square feet)
 
1 acre


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
10,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet)
 


   Front Yard (Note 1)
 
30


   Side Yard
 
10


   Street Side Yard
 
20


   Rear Yard
 
20


Maximum Height (feet)
 
45


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
50%




 



   Note 1:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.  The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required
minimum setbacks in PUD districts.  Along arterials designated in the
city’s Comprehensive Development Plan, the city may require a deeper
front-yard setback.



167.29    I-1 – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The I-1 district provides appropriate space
for light industrial uses with relatively limited environmental effects. The
district is designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to
encourage good quality industrial development, while assuring that facilities
are served with adequate parking and loading facilities.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Uses




Minimum District Size (square feet)
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 1)
 


   Front Yard
 
25 ft.


   Side Yard
 
20 ft.


   Street Side Yard, Corner  Lot
 
25 ft.


   Rear Yard
 
25 ft.


Maximum Height (feet)
 
50 ft.


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
100%




 



   Note 1:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.  The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required
minimum setbacks in PUD districts.  Along arterials designated in the
city’s Comprehensive Development Plan, the city may require a deeper front
yard setback.



167.30    I-2 – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The I-2 district is intended to accommodate a
wide variety of industrial uses, some of which may have significant external
effects. These uses may have operating characteristics that create conflicts
with lower-intensity surrounding land uses. The district provides the
reservation of land for these activities and includes buffering requirements
to reduce incompatibility.



      2.   Site Development Regulations.



 

Regulator
 
Permitted Uses




Minimum District Size (square feet)
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Width (feet)
 
100


Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 1)
 


   Front Yard
 
25 ft.


   Side Yard
 
20 ft.


   Street Side Yard, Corner  Lot
 
25 ft.


   Rear Yard
 
25 ft.


Maximum Height (feet)
 
60 ft.


Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard
 
100%




 



   Note 1:  Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.  The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required
minimum setbacks in PUD districts.  Along arterials designated in the
city’s Comprehensive Development Plan, the city may require a deeper
front-yard setback.



167.31    OVERLAY AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS.



      1.   Purpose.  Overlay Districts are used in combination with
Base Districts to modify or expand base district regulations.  Special
Districts are not used in conjunction with a Base District, but otherwise
serve the same purpose as Overlay Districts.  Both districts adapt to the
special needs of areas of the city and further allow Denison’s Zoning
Ordinance to evolve as the planning and development needs and trends of
specific areas also change.  The Overlay and Special Districts are designed
to achieve the following objectives:



         A.   To recognize special conditions in specific parts
of the City which require specific regulation.



         B.   To provide for the protection of special features
in the natural and built environment of the city.



         C.   To allow for change and adaptability to different
needs and trends in land development.



         D.   To encourage comprehensive neighborhood and
environmental planning in the city, and to protect the integrity of vital
city services such as the water supply and airport operation.



         E.   To provide flexibility in development and to
encourage innovative design through comprehensively planned projects.



      2.   Establishment of Districts.  The following Overlay and
Special Districts are hereby established.



 

SPECIAL  DISTRICTS


PUD
 
Planned Unit Development District


OVERLAY DISTRICTS


RC
 
Rural Conservation Development Overlay District


HW30
 
Highway 30 Gateway Corridor Overlay District


FP/FW
 
Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District


AV
 
Aviation Overlay District



 



(Ord. 1504 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



167.32    PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The PUD planned unit development district is
intended and designed to encourage large-scale and quality development of
vacant or underutilized tracts of land throughout the city pursuant to a
unified building and site development plan incorporating a comprehensive
design based on a thorough application of professional standards of
excellence. It is further the intent of this division to allow greater
flexibility of standards and diversification of land uses than provided in
the regulations of other zoning districts set forth in this chapter in order
to accomplish the objectives to:



         A.   Preserve open space and other environmentally
sensitive areas;



         B.   Permit development of land which, because of
topographical or shape problems or other practical difficulties, otherwise
cannot be feasibly developed;



         C.   Encourage appropriate mixed-use development; and



         D.   Encourage revitalization of older neighborhoods by
permitting development or redevelopment of vacant or underutilized tracts of
land substantially surrounded by other properties which have been developed
with buildings.



      2.   Preapplication Conference.



         A.   The owner of a contiguous tract of land may file an
application for a change to the PUD planned unit development district
classification. Such tract shall be no less than two acres in area, exclusive
of streets and alleys.



         B.   Before submitting such application, the developer
shall confer with the Zoning Administrator and other relevant city
departments. The purpose of the conference shall be to discuss the
feasibility of the proposal and to provide the developer with information and
guidance regarding applicable city ordinances, specifications, standards and
procedures, before the developer enters into binding commitments or incurs
substantial expenses.



         C.   The developer is encouraged to contact adjoining
property owners to inform them of the plan to submit a development proposal.



      3.   Conceptual Plan and Evidence Required.  The application
for a change to the PUD planned unit development district classification for
shall be accompanied by six copies of a conceptual plan of the entire
proposed development, prepared and signed by an architect or a landscape
architect registered in the state. The application and all required
information must be filed by the applicant for placement on the plan and
zoning commission agenda. The application also shall be accompanied by two
copies of evidence, e.g., background studies, letters from appropriate
agencies, agency comments from the preapplication conference, etc., showing
the following:



         A.   The proposed development is in harmony with
existing or anticipated uses of other properties in the neighborhood;



         B.   The manner in which the developer proposes to
maintain any common ground to be included within the development;



         C.   The feasibility of providing adequate storm water
and surface water drainage, sanitary sewer capacity, and water service for
the proposed development;



         D.   The surrounding streets are capable of
accommodating the increased traffic that would be generated by the new
development, including a traffic study if required by city staff at the
preapplication conference;



         E.   Off-street parking and loading will be provided as
appropriate to the size and character of the proposed development;



         F.   A study to indicate a market for the proposed
development, provided such study is required by city staff at the
preapplication conference; and



         G.   The developer has the financial resources and the
professional ability to successfully complete the proposed development within
the time schedule set forth in the conceptual plan.



         H.   An environmental report, if required by city staff
at the preapplication conference, shall be submitted by a qualified
professional addressing environmental issues relative to development on the
site.



      4.   Contents of Conceptual Plan.  The conceptual plan
required in subsection 3 shall be submitted on a sheet size no larger than 24
inches by 36 inches and shall show in schematic form the following:



         A.   The boundaries of the proposed PUD district and a
description of the existing structures and uses on surrounding properties;



         B.   Topographic features of the site, including major
existing natural features;



         C.   Proposed building uses, number of stories, general
exterior design and building materials, dimensions, and floor areas, prepared
by an architect registered in this state;



         D.   Parking areas and access drives;



         E.     Streets abutting or within the proposed
development;



         F.   Landscaping plan for the entire PUD district
showing the general location and type of proposed landscaping, walks, fences,
walls and other screenings; Unless otherwise expressly provided in the
conceptual plan, fencing shall be allowed as per the standards for the R
residential districts for all lots devoted to single or two-family use, with
the required yards for fence purposes to be determined by the setbacks shown
by the typical lot layout(s) identified in the plan. If no fences are
intended, the plan shall specifically state that no fences are to be allowed;



         G.   Location, size and type of any existing and
proposed signs;



         H.   Required peripheral yards;



         I.   Common land, detention basins, recreation areas,
parks, school sites and any other amenities and shall show if any area is to
be dedicated to a governmental entity with its written acknowledgement of
such dedication;



         J.   Existing utility and other easements; and



         K.   Development stages and schedule for commencement
after the director's approval of the development plan and completion of
construction after commencement in each stage.



      5.   Approval of Conceptual Plan and Rezoning by Plan and
Zoning Commission and City Council.  The application, accompanying evidence
and conceptual plan required by this division shall be considered by the plan
and zoning commission at a public hearing. The commission shall review the
conformity of the proposed development with the city’s comprehensive plan,
the standards of this division, and with recognized principles of civic
design, land use planning, and landscape architecture. Any proposed
dedication of park or open space land to the city shall be considered by the
park and recreation board in a timely manner prior to final action by the
city plan and zoning commission. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
commission may vote to recommend either approval or disapproval of the
conceptual plan and request for rezoning as submitted, or to recommend that
the developer amend the plan or request to preserve the intent and purpose of
this chapter to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
The recommendations of the commission shall be referred to the city council.
The council may approve or disapprove the conceptual plan and request for
rezoning, as submitted or as amended after hearing before the commission, or
may require such changes in the plan or rezoning as the council deems
necessary to preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter to promote
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.



      6.   Time Requirements for Submittal of Development Plan.  If
the City Council approves the conceptual plan and request for rezoning as
provided in subsection 5, the developer shall submit within two years
thereafter to the city six copies of a development plan of one or more
development stages which must be no less than two acres in area. The Zoning
Administrator, upon written application and for good cause shown, such as
regulatory delays, unavailability of financing, or unusual weather
conditions, may grant one extension of not more than one year for the
submission of a development plan.



      7.   Contents of Development Plan.  Every development plan
submitted pursuant to this section shall comply with the site plan
requirements of this Code, including the following items of information,
unless otherwise waived by the Zoning Administrator:



         A.   The development (construction) site Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Plan, or Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP), designed by a civil engineer, landscape architect, or otherwise
qualified individual and conforming to the requirements of the Iowa
Construction Site Sediment and Erosion Control Manual and the Iowa Statewide
Urban Designs and Specifications (SUDAS), relating to storm water and erosion
control Best Management Practices (BMP’s).



         B.   Location, size and type of any existing and
proposed signs.



         C.   Plans for the shape, exterior design and
dimensions, floor areas, numbers of stories and usage of all proposed
buildings, and an estimate of the number of employees for each use, where
applicable, prepared and signed by an architect registered in this state.
However, for single-family dwellings, the building design is not required to
be submitted by a registered architect.



         D.   A landscaping plan for the entire PUD district
showing the location, amount and type of any proposed landscaping, fences,
walls and other screening, prepared and signed by a landscape architect or
architect registered in this state. Unless otherwise expressly provided in
the development plan, fencing shall be allowed as per the standards for the R
residential districts for all lots devoted to single or two-family use, with
the required yards for fence purposes to be determined by the setbacks shown
by the typical lot layout(s) identified in the plan. If no fences are
intended, the plan shall specifically state that no fences are to be allowed.



         E.   Time schedule for commencement and completion of
construction.



      8.   Documents Required with Development Plan.  Every
development plan submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by
the following documents, unless such documents have been previously submitted
to the City:



         A.   If the proposed development includes common land
which will not be dedicated to the city and the proposed development will not
be held in single ownership, proposed bylaws of a unit owners' association
fully defining the functions, responsibilities and operating procedures of
the association. The proposed bylaws shall include but not be limited to
provisions:



            (1)   Automatically extending membership in the
association to all owners of units within the development.



            (2)   Limiting the uses of the common property to
those permitted by the final development plan.



            (3)   Granting to each owner of a unit within the
development the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property.



            (4)   Placing the responsibility for operation and
maintenance of the common property in the association.



            (5)   Giving every owner of a unit voting rights
in the association.



            (6)   If the development will include rental
units, stating the relationship between the renters and the association and
the rights renters shall have to the use of the common land.



         B.   Performance bonds approved by the city legal
department and director of finance in an amount not less than the estimated
cost of the following:



            (1)   Stabilizing the site in accordance with the
approved construction site Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP),
unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator, which may include but
not be limited to grading measures, seeding, construction of retaining walls,
or other specified Best Management Practice.



            (2)   Amenities and facilities proposed for
construction or installation on any land within the entire PUD district to be
either:



               a.   Dedicated to the city; or



               b.   Used as common land which will not be
dedicated to the City.



         C.   Covenant to run with the land, in favor of the city
and all persons having a possessory interest in any portion of the
development premises, providing that the owners of the land or their
successors in interest shall maintain all interior streets, parking areas,
sidewalks, parks, and plantings which have not been dedicated to the city in
compliance with city ordinances and with the development plan as approved by
the city council, which covenant shall be recorded by the developer in the
office of the county recorder.



         D.   Warranty deeds to all land to be dedicated to the
city, all required easements and all agreements which may be required by the
city council at the time of conceptual plan approval, provided that all such
deeds and any such easements and agreements which run with the land shall be
recorded by the developer in the office of the county recorder.



      9.   Approval of Development Plan by Zoning Administrator. 
Every development plan and required documents submitted pursuant to this
division shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, who shall approve the
development plan if it complies with the standards of this division and is in
compliance with the conceptual plan.



      10.   Amendments to Conceptual Plan.  Any change in a
conceptual plan proposed after the city council has approved the plan
pursuant to this section shall be resubmitted in the same manner as the
original conceptual plan. Any such change, except an insubstantial change as
described in Section 174.22, shall be considered in the same manner as the
original conceptual plan.  However, any proposed change to the approved
conceptual plan which (i) is disapproved by the plan and zoning commission or
(ii) would increase the allowed number of dwelling units or the allowed
square footage of commercial space and which is the subject of written
protest filed with the city clerk duly signed by the owners of 20 percent or
more of the property which is located within 200 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property proposed for change shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of at least four-fifths of all members of the
council. An insubstantial change may be approved by the planning director if
it complies with the standards of this division. Within the meaning of this
section, insubstantial changes are those changes, as determined by the
planning director, to be minor and in harmony with the intent and objectives
of this division.



      11.   Amendments to Development Plan.  Any change in a
development plan proposed after the Zoning Administrator has approved the
plan pursuant to this section shall be resubmitted and considered in the same
manner as the original development plan. However, if any such change involves
an amendment to the conceptual plan, the planning director shall not approve
the amendment to the development plan until the city council has approved the
amendment to the conceptual plan pursuant to subsection 10 of this section.



      12.   Appeals from Decisions.



         A.   The applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator to approve or deny a proposed development plan or amendment
thereto pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal any
determination or action of the Zoning Administrator made within the scope of
this section. Appeal shall be made, without cost, by written notification
received by the city within 30 days after the date of the action by the
Zoning Administrator.



         B.   The appeal shall first be considered and acted upon
by the plan and zoning commission. The P&Z Commission shall consider all
appeals within 30 days after the written notification has been received by
the city and must render a decision regarding the appeal within 45 days
following the written notification of appeal, provided the appellant may
agree to a longer time period not to exceed 60 days after receipt of the
written notification. Failure to decide the appeal within such time period
shall have the effect of overturning the Administrator's action and approving
the development site plan as appealed.  At the commission meeting, the
appealing party shall be presented a reasonable opportunity to present his or
her views.



         C.   Decisions of the plan and zoning commission may be
appealed to the city council in the same manner as appeals from the action of
the subcommittee, provided a majority vote of the city council shall be
necessary to overturn or modify the action of the plan and zoning commission.



         D.   In making its decision on an appeal, an appellate
body shall determine whether the planning director's decision is in
conformity with the requirements of subsection 9 of this section. Each
decision of an appellate body shall be in writing and shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk, and notice of such decision shall be mailed by the
city within two days after its filing, to all parties to the appeal.



      13.   Permitted Uses.  Any use of structures or land
permitted in any R, C, I-1 or I-2 district may be permitted in the PUD
planned unit development district.



      14.   Standards.



         A.   All uses proposed in a PUD planned unit development
district plan shall be in harmony with the existing or anticipated uses of
other properties in the surrounding neighborhood and shall generally be in
conformance with the city's land use plan. The design of a PUD development
shall be based on harmonious architectural character; compatible materials;
orderly arrangement of structures and open space; and conservation of
woodlands, streams, scenic areas, open space and other natural resources.



         B.   Setbacks and other appropriate screens shall be
provided around the boundary of a PUD development to protect the adjoining
district properties. Only in exceptional circumstances shall such a setback
be less than the amount of the setback which the adjoining district is
required to maintain from the PUD development.



         C.   A PUD development shall comply with all applicable
city ordinances, specifications and standards relating to all dedicated
street, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities and to surface drainage and
storm water retention.



         D.   The streets surrounding a PUD development must be
capable of accommodating the increased traffic that would be generated by the
new development. The development shall be designed to provide maximum
feasible separation of vehicular traffic from pedestrian ways and
recreational areas. If turning lanes or other forms of traffic controls
within or adjacent to the development are deemed necessary by the city
council, the developer shall provide the necessary improvements.



         E.   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided as appropriate to the size and character of the development.  Each
off-street loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet
in length. All off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 172, Off-street Parking and Loading.



         F.   Where appropriate to the size and character of a
PUD development, provision shall be made therein for open space for
recreation and other outdoor uses, and for places of worship, convenience
shopping and other community services.



      15.   Building Permits.  No building permit concerning any
stage of a PUD planned unit development shall be issued until after the
development plan for that stage has been approved by the Zoning
Administrator, and until after the developer has provided the city with
satisfactory evidence of the recording with the county recorder of the
approved development plan and any amendments thereto and of any covenant,
deed, easement or agreement required to be so recorded pursuant to subsection
8 C and D of this section.



      16.   Grading Permits.  No Land Disturbance (grading) Permit
concerning any stage of a PUD planned unit development shall be issued until
after the PUD conceptual plan, the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Plan, and
the land restoration bond required pursuant to subsection 8 B of this section
has been approved by the city council.



      17.   Failure to Submit Development Plan or to Commence
Construction.  If the developer fails either (i) to submit a development
plan within the time requirements of subsection 6 of this section or (ii) to
commence construction in accordance with the time schedule set forth in the
development plan, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the plan and
zoning commission regarding such failure, and the developer shall be served
prior notice thereof by certified mail. At such meeting the commission shall
consider all circumstances relevant to the developer's failure and shall vote
to recommend to the city council that appropriate remedial measures be
initiated, which measures may include (i) the initiation of rezoning of the
subject property to the zoning classification effective immediately prior to
the rezoning of the subject property to a PUD district classification, and/or
(ii) referral of the matter to the legal department for institution of
enforcement proceedings in the courts pursuant to Sections 174.01 and 174.02.
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the commission, the city council shall
act to initiate remedial measures in conformity to the commission's
recommendations or to initiate such other remedial measures as the council
determines to be reasonably necessary under the circumstances.



167.33    RC – RURAL CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay
District is intended to require development design standards and techniques
in sensitive environmental areas around Denison that preserve unique
landforms and the character of land.  The techniques of the RC district
require that the natural landforms determine the design and character of new
residential development in these sensitive areas.  Areas of environmental
sensitivity and potential application of the RC Overlay District may be
established by the city’s comprehensive development plan.



      2.   Process.  Subdivisions in an RC Overlay district
generally follow the approval procedures outlined in the City’s Subdivision
Ordinance, establishing the process for preliminary and final plat
approval.  Projects which do not require subdivision follow approval
procedures appropriate to the specific project, including Special Use
Permits, zoning amendments, site plan review, or other applicable measures. 
The requirements and standards included in this section are in addition to
those established procedures.



      3.   Permitted Land Uses.  Land uses permitted in an RC
District are the same as those permitted in the underlying base district.



      4.   Permitted Density Yield.  Developments in RC Overlay
districts are permitted the same density on developable area as would be
allowed to conventional residential development in the underlying zoning
district.  Yield in housing units (Y) is calculated by the formula:









 



   where:



   TA = Total parcel area



   UA = Undevelopable areas, defined as the sum of wetlands designated by
the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the United States, slopes exceeding
20%, floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium
intensity maps contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Soil
Conservation Service, is subtracted from the total parcel area.



   .90 = an allowance for the typical percentage of land available after
deducting the area of public streets and right-of-ways serving a low-density
residential development.



   SA = Minimum site area per unit required by the underlying zoning
district.



      5.   Minimum Percentage of Open Space.



         A.   The minimum percentage of land that shall be
designated as permanent open space, not to be further subdivided, and
protected through a conservation easement held by the City of Denison,
Crawford County, a Homeowners Association, or a recognized land trust or
conservancy, shall be a minimum of 35% of the Net Developable Area, defined
as .90(TA-UA)



         B.   The above areas shall generally be designated as
undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and
to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved
land management standards.



         C.   All undivided open space and any lot capable of
further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a
permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly
recorded in the Crawford County Register of Deeds Office.



         D.   The required open space may be used, without
restriction, for underground drainage fields for individual or community
septic systems. “Spray fields” for spray irrigation purposed in a “land
treatment” sewage disposal system must receive prior, specific approval
from the Planning Commission.  “Mound” systems protruding above grade
and aerated sewage treatment ponds shall be limited to no more than ten
percent of the required minimum open space and must receive prior, specific
approval from the Planning Commission.



         E.   Storm water management ponds or basins may be
included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land within the
rights-of-way for underground pipelines.  However, land within the
rights-of-way of high tension power lines shall not be included as comprising
part of the minimum required open space.



      6.   Conservation Areas as Open Space.



         A.   The location of open space shall be consistent with
the policies contained in the City of Denison’s Comprehensive Plan, and
with the recommendations contained in this section and the following section
(“Evaluation Criteria”).



         B.   Open space shall be comprised of two types of land;
“Primary Conservation Areas” and “Secondary Conservation Areas.” All
lands within both Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas shall be protected
by a permanent conservation easement prohibiting future development, and
setting other standards safeguarding the site’s special resources from
negative changes.



            (1)   Primary Conservation Areas.  This category
consists of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the
United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to
slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps contained in the county
soil survey published by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service.



            (2)   Secondary Conservation Areas.  Secondary
Conservation Areas comprise at least 35 percent of the Net Developable Area
and shall be designated and permanently protected.  Full density credit
shall be allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable
under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their development
potential is not reduced by this designation.  Such density credit may be
applied to other unconstrained parts of the site.  Secondary Conservation
Areas are determined by specific project design and typically include all or
some of the following kinds of resources:



               a.   A 100-foot deep greenway buffer along
all waterbodies and watercourses, and a 50-foot greenway buffer alongside
wetlands soils classified as “very poorly drained” in the medium
intensity county soil survey of the USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service).  These areas must be conserved as Secondary Conservation Areas but
are considered as Developable Areas for the purpose of calculating yield.



               b.   100-year floodplains.



               c.   Woodlands, individual specimen trees,
or small stands of significant trees.



               d.   Aquifer recharge areas and areas with
highly permeable (“excessively drained”) soil.



               e.   Significant wildlife habitat areas.



               f.   Class I and Class II farmlands.



               g.   Historic, archaeological or cultural
features listed (or eligible to be listed) on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Historic Resources Surveys of the Nebraska State
Historical Society.



               h.   Slopes in excess of 15%.



               i.   Ridgelines and view corridors.



               j.   Land with soils that do not support
residential development.



      7.   Location Standards for Open Space.



         A.   Access to Residential Lots.  Undivided open space
shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within
a conservation subdivision.  To achieve this, the majority of house lots
should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and
access.  Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all
lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the case of
farmland, or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling damage or human
disturbance).  Where the undivided open space is designated as separate,
noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist of less than three (3) acres
in area nor have a length-to-width ratio in excess of 4:1, except such areas
that are specifically designed as village greens, ballfields, upland buffers
to wetlands, waterbodies or watercourses, or trail links.



         B.   Interconnection of Open Spaces.  Protected open
spaces in each new subdivision are encouraged to adjoin each other,
ultimately forming an interconnected network of Primary and Secondary
Conservation Areas across the county.  The only elements of the network that
would necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been
required to be dedicated for public use and typically configured in a linear
fashion as an element of Denison’s long-range open space network through
the Comprehensive Plan.



      8.   Special Processes for Conservation Developments.  The
review and approval process for subdivisions in the RC Overlay District is
the same as that for conventional subdivisions, as set forth in the
Subdivision Ordinance.  Additional provisions and approval processes are set
forth in this section.



         A.   Existing Features Plan.



            (1)   Plans analyzing each site’s special
features are required for all proposed subdivisions.  The Existing Features
Plan shall include at a minimum (1) a contour map based at least upon
topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; (2) the location
of severely constraining elements such as steep slops (over 25%),wetlands,
watercourses, intermittent streams and 100 year floodplains, and all
rights-of-way and easements; (3) soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service medium- intensity maps; and (4) the location
of significant features such as woodlands, treelines, open fields or meadows,
scenic views into or out from property, watershed divides and drainage ways,
fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks
and trails.



            (2)   The Existing Features Plan shall identify
both Primary Conservation Areas and Secondary Conservation Areas, as
described in subsection 6 of this section.  The Existing Features Plan shall
form the basis for the Conceptual Preliminary Plan, which shall show the
tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and greenway lands in new
subdivisions, according to the four-step design process described in
paragraph B below.



         B.   Conceptual Preliminary Plan.  A sketch plan or a
Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall be submitted for all proposed Rural
Conservation subdivisions to the Zoning Administrator before submission of a
formal preliminary plat application.  A Conceptual Preliminary Plan presents
a conceptual layout for greenway and open lands, land lot lines, and street
alignments.  Each Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall follow a four-step
design process, as described below.  Applicants shall be prepared to
demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator that these four design steps were
followed in the preparation of the plan.



            (1)   Step One: Designating the Open Space. 
During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and
secondary as defined above) are identified, using the Existing Features Plan.



            (2)   Step Two: Location of House Sites.  House
sites should generally be located not closer than 100 feet from Primary
Conservation Areas, but may be situated within 50 feet of Secondary
Conservation Areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively
affecting the former.



            (3)   Step Three: Street and Lot Layout.  The
third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access
to each house in the most reasonable and economical way.  When lots and
access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at
least minimizes adverse impacts on both the Primary and Secondary
Conservation Areas.  To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings
and streets traversing existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly
discouraged.  Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize
the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained and to facilitate easy access
to and from homes in different parts of the property (and on adjoining
parcels).  Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes
may be designed with “hammerheads” facilitating three-point turns. 



            (4)   Step Four: Lot Lines.  The fourth step is
simply to draw in the lot line (where applicable).  These are generally
drawn midway between house locations and may include L-shaped “flag lots”
meeting the city’s minimum standards for the same.



            (5)   Review and Comments.  The Zoning
Administrator and the Public Works Director shall return written comments on
the Conceptual Preliminary Plan to the applicant within 30 days of
submittal.  These comments should recommend changes to be made prior to
submittal of a Preliminary Plat application.



      9.   Ownership and Maintenance of Common Open Space. 
Developments in the RC Overlay District shall provide for ownership and
maintenance of common open space.  Common open space within a development
shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods,
either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the City.



         A.   Offer of Dedication.  The City of Denison or
Crawford County shall have the first and last offer of dedication of
undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed.  Dedication
shall take the form of a fee simple ownership.  The City or other public
agency may, but shall not be required to accept undivided open space
provided: (1) such land is accessible to the residents of the county; (2)
there is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership such as title insurance; and (3) the county agrees to
and has access to maintain such lands.  Alternatively, a public agency may
accept an easement, subject to the above conditions.



         B.   Homeowners Association.  The undivided open space
and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners’
association.  The association shall be formed and operated under the
following provisions:



            (1)   The developer shall provide a description of
the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open
space.



            (2)   The association shall be organized by the
developer and shall be operated with financial assistance from the developer,
before the sale of any lots within the development.



            (3)   Membership in the association is automatic
(mandatory) for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors.  The
conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from
developer to homeowners shall be identified.



            (4)   The association shall be responsible for
maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by
liens placed by the county on the association.  The association may place
liens on the homes or house lots of its members who fail to pay their
association dues in a timely manner.  Such liens may require the imposition
of penalty interest charges.



            (5)   The members of the association shall share
equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open
space.  Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws.



            (6)   In the event of a proposed transfer, within
the methods here permitted, of undivided open space land by the homeowners’
association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land
by a public agency, notice of such action shall be given to all property
owners within the development.



            (7)   The homeowners’ association may lease open
space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and
maintenance of open space lands.



         C.   Condominiums.  The undivided open space and
associated facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium
agreements.  Such agreements shall be in conformance with the state
statute.  All undivided open space land shall be held as a “common
element.”



         D.   Transfer of Easements to a Private Conservation
Organization.  An owner may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit
organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and /or
natural resources, provided that:



            (1)   The organization is acceptable to the City,
and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence and
legal non-profit status (example: 501c3 status);



            (2)   The conveyance contains appropriate
provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the
organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions; and



            (3)   A maintenance agreement acceptable to the
commission is entered into by the developer and the organization.



      10.   Maintenance Standards.



         A.   Financial Responsibility.  The ultimate owner of
the open space (typically a homeowners’ association) shall be responsible
for raising all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical
improvements to the open space through annual dues, special assessments,
etc.  The homeowners’ association shall be authorized under its bylaws to
place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of
such dues or assessments.



         B.   Maintenance Enforcement.



            (1)   In the event that the association or any
successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a
development containing undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record,
setting forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain
the undivided open space in reasonable condition.



            (2)   Failure to adequately maintain the undivided
open space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this
section.



            (3)   Should any bill or bills for maintenance of
undivided open space by the City or County be unpaid, a late fee of fifteen
percent shall be added to such bills and a lien shall be filed against the
premises in the same manner as other municipal claims.



      11.   Evaluation Criteria.  In evaluating the layout of lots
and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Planning
Commission and City Council as indicating design appropriate to the site’s
natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purpose of this
section:



         A.   Protection of floodplains, wetlands, and steep
slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction except as may be
approved for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation
amenities.



         B.   Preservation and maintenance of woodlands, existing
fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and sufficient buffer areas to
minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses.



         C.   Maintenance of buffers at least 100 feet in depth
adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs,
lakes and ponds.



         D.   Design around existing treelines between fields or
meadows, and minimal impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres),
especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife
habitat.



         E.   Maintenance of scenic views.



         F.   Avoidance of new construction on prominent hilltops
or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features.



         G.   Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species
listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.



         H.   Design around and preserves sites of historic,
archaeological, or cultural value, including stone walls, barn foundations,
cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds.



         I.   Protection of rural character  and improves public
safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting
directly onto existing public roads.



         J.   Landscaping of common areas if appropriate. 



         K.   Provision of active or passive recreational areas 
in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate
screening from nearby house lots.



         L.   Inclusion of a pedestrian circulation system
providing access between properties, activities, or special features within
the neighborhood open space system.  All roadside footpaths should connect
with off-road trails.



         M.   Provision of open space that is reasonably
contiguous, avoiding fragmented open spaces. 



167.34    HIGHWAY 30 GATEWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT.



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of these design standards for the
City of Denison is to:



         A.   Encourage development design that reflects the
physical character and image of the City of Denison.



         B.   Develop commercial projects that become valued
places within the fabric of the city.



         C.   Set minimum requirements for site design and
development, building design, landscaping, and signage without discouraging
creativity and flexibility in design.



         D.   Permit safe and convenient transportation access
and circulation for motorized and non-motorized vehicles, and for pedestrians.



         E.   Respect the relationship of commercial development
to surrounding neighborhoods.



         F.   The proposed development shall not unduly increase
the public danger of fire or diminish the public safety, and shall be
designed to adequately safeguard the health, safety and general welfare of
the public and of persons residing and working in the development and in the
adjoining or surrounding property.



      2.   Boundaries.  The Highway 30 Gateway Corridor Overlay
District shall run from the intersection of Highway 30 and Highway 59 on the
West side of Denison to the intersection of Highway 30 and Donna Reed Road on
the East side of Denison. For purposes of this Chapter, whenever "Highway 30"
is referenced, it shall mean Highway 30 and any other name by which that road
is known, including, inter alia, 4th Avenue South and Old Lincoln Highway.



      3.   Application.  All proposed developments for which site
plans are required shall conform to these design standards.  Certain
standards, identified in this section as “commercial and office” design
standards, shall apply to only commercial and office development within the
Gateway Corridor Overlay District.



      4.   Site Design:  Relationship to Landforms.



         A.   Buildings shall maintain a minimum buffer of 30
feet from the edge of any Special Flood Hazard Area on the most current Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or from the edge of any wetlands identified by the
National Wetlands Inventory or a site specific inventory of wetlands.



         B.   Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and, to the
maximum degree possible, follow the natural topography of the site. 



         C.   The proposed development shall be designed with a
proper regard to topography, surface drainage, natural drains and streams,
wooded areas, and other natural features. The design of the proposed
improvements shall make adequate provisions for surface and subsurface
drainage, so as not to increase the danger of erosion, flooding, landslide,
or other endangerment of adjoining or surrounding property. Appropriate
construction site erosion and sediment control measures must be
implemented.  Post construction runoff control Best Management Practices
(BMP’s) shall be utilized to the maximum extent practicable.



      5.   Infrastructure.  The proposed development shall be
designed with adequate water mains, provisions for sanitary sewage
facilities, storm sewers (storm sewers to be designed for 5-year storm
calculations) and drains and flood control, in accordance with the ordinances
and regulations of the City, including adopted SUDAS construction design
standards, statutes and regulations of the State, and good engineering
practice to protect the public health and welfare and not overload any
existing public utilities. Storm water drainage shall emphasize on-site storm
water management with off-site runoff to be directed to storm sewers wherever
possible, including the requirement to extend public storm sewer if deemed
necessary.



      6.   Pedestrian Access.



         A.   Commercial and office developments shall provide a
continuous walkway connection at least 5 feet in width from the public
sidewalk or right-of-way to the customer entrances of all principal buildings
on the site.  All developments adjacent to multi-use trails shall provide a
direct connection from the trail to the development’s internal pedestrian
circulation system.  For trails that are proposed in the city’s
comprehensive plan but are not yet constructed, the development plan shall
make provisions for a connection to the trail, and shall be responsible for
constructing the connection when the trail becomes available.



         B.   Multi-building developments shall provide clear and
safe walkways at least 5 feet in width that connect all buildings on the
site.  Buildings not intended for routine customer or pedestrian accesses,
or intended solely for drive-up services, are excluded from this requirement.



         C.   Where the required walkways specified in this
section cross drives, parking aisles, or other vehicular ways, the crosswalks
shall be distinguished from driving surfaces by the use of durable,
low-maintenance surface materials such as concrete or brick pavers; or
scored, colored concrete.  Painted concrete is not acceptable in this
application.



         D.   In parking lots with over 200 stalls, the required
walkways specified in this section shall be located in landscaped medians or
corridors that include trees and groundcovers for at least 50% of their
combined length. 



         E.   Sidewalks no less than 5 feet in width and
separated by curbs from adjacent vehicular circulation ways shall be provided
along the full length of the building along any façade that either includes
a customer entrance or adjoins a customer parking area.



         F.   Pedestrian connections to adjacent developments
shall be provided.  If adjacent properties are undeveloped, the development
plan shall indicate how future connections will be provided.



   Illustrations:







 



      7.   Vehicular Access.



         A.   The proposed development shall have such entrances
and exits upon public streets as are necessary for safety and the general
welfare of the public. The development shall have such interior drives as are
necessary for free movement of emergency vehicles and shall have such
pedestrian walkways as are necessary for safety and general welfare of the
public. The proposed development shall have such entrances and exits upon
adjacent streets and such internal traffic circulation pattern which will not
unduly increase congestion on adjacent or surrounding public streets or
create undue hazards to traffic safety.



         B.   Development plans shall minimize the number of
access points to adjacent arterial streets.  Access from arterial streets
shall be controlled and will be limited to one point of access per 600 linear
feet, or as otherwise determined by the City of Denison.  Developments shall
make maximum use of internal cross-easements and shared access points when
possible.  Cross accesses between adjacent properties shall use traffic
calming techniques to reduce speeds.



         C.   Main driveways and drive aisles shall provide a
continuous system that connects to the main site entrance.



         D.   Commercial developments are encouraged to provide
means of access to residential areas that avoid requiring residents to use
arterial streets for short-distance trips.  Such connections must be
designed to avoid channeling commercial traffic onto residential streets
outside of comprehensively planned, mixed use projects.



         E.   When possible, shared service and delivery access
should be provided between adjacent parcels and buildings.



      8.   Parking.



         A.   Parking shall be grouped into parking blocks that
are defined by pedestrian paths, landscaping, and buildings.



         B.   A maximum of 100 parking stalls may be located in
any one parking block.



         C.   To encourage a pedestrian friendly environment and
to highlight the building façade we recommend all parking be in the side or
rear yard areas.



   Illustrations:







 



      9.   Signs.



         A.   Attached signs shall be designed as an integral
part of the building elevation and integrated into the overall design of the
building.  Attached signs shall be located above the building entrance,
storefront opening, or at other locations that are consistent with and
emphasize the architectural features of a building. 



         B.   A landscaped base area shall be provided for
monument or ground signs appropriate to the mass and height of the sign.  As
a guideline, a base area of 1.5 square feet shall be provided for each square
foot of sign area.  The landscaped area may include trees, shrubs, flowering
perennials, ornamental tall grass, fountains, water features, decorative
stonework, planters, sculpture, and decorative paving. Turf grass, loose
stone, or mulch does not satisfy this requirement. 



         C.   Other sign regulations and requirements are set
forth in Chapter 173, Sign Regulations.



   Illustrations:







 



      10.   Screening.



         A.   The proposed development shall be designed and the
buildings and improvements located in such a manner as not to unduly diminish
or impair the use and enjoyment of adjoining or surrounding property and to
such end shall have such buffers, screen fences and landscaping as may be
proper and shall minimize the adverse effects on such adjoining property from
automobile headlights, illuminations of required perimeter yards, refuse
containers, and impairment of light and air. For the purpose of this section,
the term "use and enjoyment of adjoining property" means the use and
enjoyment presently being made of such adjoining property, unless such
property is vacant. If vacant, the term "use and enjoyment of adjoining
property" means those uses permitted under the zoning district in which such
adjoining property is located.



         B.   Developments shall provide year-round screening of
loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC
equipment, trash collection and processing, and other service functions. 
Screening shall be provided for 75% of the vertical plane of these features,
up to a height of eight feet.  Trash enclosure gates shall furnish a steel
frame with decorative steel or wood covering, or another design acceptable to
the Planning Director.  Chain-link fencing with inlaid wood or metal slats
shall not be considered acceptable.  Screening shall be integrated into the
overall design of buildings and landscaping and fully contain the visual
impact of these service functions from adjacent public streets and
neighboring properties.



         C.   Architectural elements, materials, colors, and
design of screening walls, coverings, and fences shall be consistent with the
predominant materials, colors, and elements of the primary building.



         D.   Other screening requirements are set forth in
Chapter 170, Supplemental Development Regulations and in Chapter 171,
Landscaping and Screening Standards.



      11.   Lighting.



         A.   All lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area, sign or other structure shall be arranged so as to deflect
light away from any adjoining property and from public streets through
fixture type and location.  When lighting is mounted to the underside of
canopies, these lights shall be recessed so that the visible light source is
no lower than the plane of the underside of the canopy.



         B.   The maximum height of lighting standards shall be
35 feet, unless the City grants a specific exception as part of the
application approval process.



         C.   Exterior lighting of buildings shall be limited to
low-level incandescent spotlights, floodlights, and similar illuminating
devices hooded in such a manner that the direct beam of any light sources
will not glare upon adjacent property or public streets. The City may approve
exceptions to these requirements for sports and athletic field lighting,
flagpole lighting, public street lighting, temporary lighting for
seasonal/holiday or special events, and lighting used for public safety. 



      12.   Architectural Guidelines (Commercial and Office
Buildings).



         A.   Mass and Scale for Buildings over 40,000 Square
Feet.



            (1)   Breaks shall be incorporated into the mass
if the building at significant entrances or along walls that front plazas or
other significant pedestrian features.  Methods of breaks may include
towers, pediments, or façade articulations or variations; changes in the
horizontal plane; or enhancements in color and materials, consistent with the
overall design of the building.



            (2)   Primary building facades shall meet one of
the following guidelines:



               a.   Facades greater than 100 feet shall
incorporate projections or recesses in the wall plane with a depth of at
least 3% of the length of the façade and extending for at least 20% of the
length of the façade.  Maximum uninterrupted length of wall shall be 100
feet.



               b.   Facades shall display a repeating
pattern of at least three cycles of either color change, texture change,
material change, or expression of structural bays with an offset of at least
12 inches from the ruling plane of the façade.



               c.   The Planning Director may waive these
guidelines if the applicant demonstrates an alternative building design that,
in his/her opinion provides visual interest and scale to the building.



         B.   Mass and Scale for Buildings over Two Stories. 
Building mass and architectural elements shall differentiate between the
first floor of the building and upper levels of the façade.



   Illustrations:







 



      13.   Architectural Elements (Commercial and Office Buildings).



         A.   Front facades facing a primary street shall have
visible, clearly defined customer entrances that include at least three of
the following elements: canopies or porticos, overhangs, recesses or
projections, arcades, raised cornice parapets over the entrance door,
distinctive roof forms, arches, outdoor patios or plazas, display windows, or
integral planters.



         B.   At least 20% of the surface area of front
commercial facades up to a height of 16 feet shall be transparent.



         C.   Front facades shall utilize variations in color,
horizontal planes, materials, patterns, height, and other techniques to
provide visual interest and scale to buildings.



         D.    Other rear and side facades may use a simplified
expression of the materials and design used on other building elevations.



   Illustrations:







 



      14.   Building Materials (Commercial and Office Buildings).



         A.   Permitted exterior building materials shall be high
quality, durable materials that include, but are not limited to, brick;
native or manufactured stone (Renaissance stone or similar masonry
materials); integrally colored, burnished, textured, or glazed concrete
masonry units; pre-finished metal panel systems; quality metals such as
copper; high quality pre-stressed concrete systems; and drainable (water
managed) EIFS.



   



         B.   The following exterior materials are prohibited:
split shakes, rough-sawn wood; painted concrete block; tilt-up concrete
panels without an architectural finish; field-painted or pre-finished
standard corrugated metal siding; standard single- or double-tee concrete
systems; or barrier type EIFS.



         C.   Materials on all sides of the building shall be
consistent with materials on the front façade.



         D.   These guidelines are not intended to inhibit
creativity and innovation in building design.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission may permit the use of other materials or methods if the applicant
demonstrates that the use of such materials or methods will result in a
building or development project that provides an equal sense of quality and
permanence and that meets or is consistent with the requirements otherwise
stipulated within the Denison Zoning Ordinance.



   Illustrations:







 



      15.   Roof Forms (Commercial and Office Buildings).



         A.   Buildings with flat or slightly sloped roofs to
drain shall incorporate parapets on all facades that face a public street or
residential district.  Variations in parapet height and articulation of
cornice lines may be used to add interest.



         B.   Roof forms shall be designed to express various
building functions and features, such as entrances.



         C.   Visible roof materials shall include clay or
concrete tile, tern metal, architectural grade asphalt shingles,
architectural metals, copper, natural or synthetic slate, or similar durable
materials.



         D.   Mansard or false roofs shall not be used.



   Illustrations:







 



      16.   Site Plan Requirements.  To accomplish the design
standards of this section, a landscaping plan prepared by a registered
landscape architect, nursery person or such other knowledgeable person shall
be provided, along with plans which address erosion control and other
applicable requirements of this chapter and other City regulations.



(Ord. 1504 - Sep. 19 Supp.)



167.35    FP/FW – FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   REMOVED FOR REVIEW



167.36    AV – AVIATION OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   REMOVED FOR REVIEW



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 167.06 of this chapter and have not been codified
herein, but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force
and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
DATE ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE NO.
 
DATE ADOPTED


1375
 
3-16-10
 
 
 
 


1388
 
9-21-10
 
 
 
 


1392
 
11-1-10
 
 
 
 


1415
 
12-6-11
 
 
 
 


1416
 
12-20-11
 
 
 
 


1417
 
2-21-12
 
 
 
 


1428
 
11-20-12
 
 
 
 


1429
 
2-5-13
 
 
 
 


1430
 
4-16-13
 
 
 
 


1437
 
1-21-14
 
 
 
 


1445
 
10-7-14
 
 
 
 


1452
 
6-30-15
 
 
 
 


1475
 
10-3-17
 
 
 
 


1484
 
5-1-18
 
 
 
 


1486
 
5-18-18
 
 
 
 


1487
 
7-3-18
 
 
 
 


1490
 
7-17-18
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




(Chapter 167 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)




 


Notes

7 
†See EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the
zoning map.



CHAPTER 168
ZONING AND PROPERTY
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS



 



168.01  Purpose
 
168.12  Flood Plain Development Permit Required


168.02  Definitions
 
168.13  Application for Permit


168.03  Lands to Which Chapter Applies
 
168.14  Action on Application


168.04  Compliance
 
168.15  Construction and Use to Be as Provided in


168.05  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
 
Application and Plans


168.06  Interpretation
 
168.16  Variances


168.07  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
 
168.17  Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances


168.08  General Flood Plain Management Standards
 
Shall be Based


168.09  Special Floodway Standards
 
168.18  Conditions Attached to Variances


168.10  Special Shallow Flooding Areas Standards
 
168.19  Nonconforming Uses


168.11  Administration
 
168.20  Amendments




 



168.01    PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:



      1.   Restrict Use.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are
dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood or which cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.



      2.   Vulnerable Uses Protected.  Require that uses vulnerable
to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial
improvement.



      3.   Unsuitable Land Purchases.  Protect individuals from
buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood
hazard. 



      4.   Flood Insurance.  Assure that eligibility is maintained
for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the
National Flood Insurance Program. 



168.02    DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



      1.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building
which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all
sides.  Also see “lowest floor.”



      2.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.



      3.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which
the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.  May also be referred to as
“existing structure.” 



      4.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision”
means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain
management regulations.



      5.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or
subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).



      6.   “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for
residential use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated,
formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly
and installation on a building site.  For the purpose of this chapter,
“factory-built home” includes mobile homes, manufactured homes, and
modular homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed
on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for
and ready for highway use.



      7.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or
contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots
for sale or lease.



      8.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the
overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface
waters from any source. 



      9.   “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters
would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. 
For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters
related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.



      10.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (      FIRM   )”
means the official map prepared as part of (but published separately from)
the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 



      11.   “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water as a result of a flood.



      12.   “Flood plain management” means an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting
the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, flood proofing, and flood plain
management regulations. 



      13.   “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural
and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures. 



      14.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream
and those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that
confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.



      15.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood
plain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise
obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow
velocities.



      16.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:



         A.   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing in the National Register;



         B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,



         D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified by either:  (i) an approved state program as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.



      17.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the
following criteria are met:



         A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section 168.08(4)(A); and



         B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted,
dry-walled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as
building access, parking or storage; and



         C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water
heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are
located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and



         D.   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as
defined in this section.



   In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C, and
D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.



      18.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built
home parks) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance
Rate Map.



      19.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.



      20.   “100-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of
which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100
years. 



      21.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:



         A.   Built on a single chassis;



         B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection;



         C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and



         D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.



      22.   “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a
community subject to the “100-year flood.”  This land is identified as
Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AO, and AH on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.



      23.   “Start of construction” includes substantial
improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date.  The actual start means either the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



      24.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on
the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and
other similar uses.



      25.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.



      26.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a
structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:



         A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure either:  (i) before the “start of construction” of the
improvement; or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged”
and is being restored, before the damage occurred.  The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use.  The
term also does not include any alteration of an “historic structure,”
provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an
“historic structure.”



         B.   Any addition which increases the original floor
area of a building by 25 percent or more.  All additions constructed after
the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be added to any
proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor
space would exceed 25 percent.



      27.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community
from the terms of the flood plain management regulations.



      28.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or
other development to be fully compliant with this chapter.



168.03    LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands and uses which
have significant flood hazards.  The Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated May 17, 1982, which were prepared as
part of the Flood Insurance Study, shall be used to identify such flood
hazard areas and all areas shown thereon to be within the boundaries of the
100-year flood shall be considered as having significant flood hazards. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of the 100-year
flood boundary, the location shall be determined on the basis of the 100-year
flood elevation at the particular site in question.  The Flood Insurance
Study is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this chapter for
the purpose of administering flood plain management regulations.



168.04    COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply
to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.



168.05    ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail.  Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only.



168.06    INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State statutes.



168.07    WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes.  This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
designated areas of significant flood hazard will be free from flooding or
flood damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



168.08    GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.



   All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
shall meet the following applicable performance standards.  Where 100-year
flood data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Department
of Natural Resources shall be contacted to determine:  (i) whether the land
involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe;
and (ii) the 100-year flood level.  The applicant will be responsible for
providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination.



      1.   All Development.  All development within the areas of
significant flood hazard shall: 



         A.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.



         B.   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



         C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



         D.   Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal,
State and local governmental agencies including approval when required from
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.



      2.   Residential Buildings.  All new or substantially
improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. 
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no
lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such
elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon.  Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed,
subject to favorable consideration by the City Council, where existing
topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill.  In
such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as
well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. 
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which
will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.



      3.   Nonresidential Buildings.  All new or substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood-proofed to
such a level.  When flood proofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State shall certify that the flood proofing methods used
are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that
the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.  A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are flood-proofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator.



      4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.



         A.   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor”
(not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:



            (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.



            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade.



            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.



   Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access and low damage potential storage.



         B.   New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



         C.   New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



      5.   Factory-Built Homes.



         A.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in
existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum
of one foot above the 100-year flood level.



         B.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in
existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors.



      6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems. 



         A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems
shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or
contamination from the system during flooding.



         B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the system as well as the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. 
Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be
provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot
above the 100-year flood elevation.



         C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.  Water supply treatment facilities other than on-site systems shall
be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot
above the 100-year flood elevation. 



         D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the
system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. 



      7.   Flammable or Explosive Materials.  Storage of materials
and equipment that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal,
or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.  Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or:  (i) not subject to major flood damage and anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within
the time available after flood warning. 



      8.   Levees and Floodwalls.  Flood control structural works
such as levees, floodwalls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from
a 100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall
provide for adequate interior drainage.  In addition, structural flood
control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



      9.   Watercourse Alternations.  Watercourse alterations or
relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



      10.   Subdivision.  Subdivisions (including factory-built
home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.  Development associated with subdivision proposals (including
the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance
standards of this chapter.  Subdivision proposals intended for residential
use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.  Proposals for subdivisions
greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year
flood elevation data for those areas located within the area of significant
flood hazard.



      11.   Accessory Structures.



         A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures
accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:



            (1)   The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.



            (2)   The structure shall be designed to have low
flood damage potential.



            (3)   The structure shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.



            (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures.



            (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as
electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level.



         B.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation
requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.



      12.   Recreational Vehicles.



         A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
requirements of Section 168.08(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.



            (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on
the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and



            (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully
licensed and ready for highway use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.



         B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site
for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of Section 168.08(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring
and elevation of factory-built homes.



      13.   Pipelines.  Pipeline river and stream crossings shall
be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.



168.09    SPECIAL FLOODWAY STANDARDS.



   In addition to the general flood plain standards, uses within the
floodway must meet the following applicable standards.  The floodway is that
portion of the flood plain which must be protected from developmental
encroachment to allow the free flow of floodwaters.  Where floodway data has
been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to define
the floodway.  Where no floodway data has been provided, the Department of
Natural Resources shall be contacted to provide a floodway delineation.  The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determination.



      1.   No use shall be permitted in the floodway that would
result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.  Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.



      2.   All uses within the floodway shall:



         A.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.



         B.   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



         C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



      3.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
any other drainage facility or system.



      4.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems,
if permitted, shall meet the applicable general flood plain standards and
shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to
flood flows.



      5.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.



      6.   Storage of equipment or materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited.  Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable
from the floodway within the time available after flood warning.



      7.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes
and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



      8.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have
some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.



      9.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.



168.10    SPECIAL SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS STANDARDS.



   In addition to the general flood plain standards, uses within shallow
flooding areas must meet the following applicable standards.



      1.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the minimum flood proofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a
minimum of two feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural
grade adjacent to the structure.



      2.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum flood proofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM.



168.11    ADMINISTRATION.



   The Building Inspector shall implement and administer the provisions of
this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.  Duties
and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, the following:



      1.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied. 



      2.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and
local governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.



      3.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures.



      4.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which all new or
substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed.



      5.   Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the
Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



      6.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.



168.12    FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be
secured prior to any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved
and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.



168.13    APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit shall be made on forms
supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information:



      1.   Work To Be Done.  Description of the work to be covered
by the permit for which application is to be made. 



      2.   Location.  Description of the land on which the proposed
work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar
description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done. 



      3.   Use or Occupancy.  Indication of the use or occupancy
for which the proposed work is intended. 



      4.   Flood Elevation.  Elevation of the 100-year flood. 



      5.   Floor Elevation.  Elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
buildings or of the level to which a building is to be flood-proofed. 



      6.   Cost of Improvement.  For buildings being improved or
rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building
prior to the improvements.



      7.   Other.  Such other information as the Administrator
deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of
this chapter. 



168.14    ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination
as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable
standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. 
For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the
specific reasons therefor.  The Administrator shall not issue permits for
variances except as directed by the Council.



168.15    CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS.



   Flood plain development permits, issued on the basis of approved plans
and applications, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement
or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The applicant
shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, flood proofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.



168.16    VARIANCES.



   The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases
such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to
the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. 
Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards:



      1.   Cause.  Variances shall only be granted upon:  (i) a
showing of good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances. 



      2.   Prohibited.  Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood
would result.  Consideration of the effects of any development on flood
levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development
would be allowed for similarly situated lands.



      3.   Required to Afford Relief.  Variances shall only be
granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 



      4.   Notice to Applicant.  In cases where the variance
involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is
ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall be notified in
writing over the signature of the Administrator that:  (i) the issuance of a
variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and (ii) such
construction increases risks to life and property. 



      5.   Approval.  All variances granted shall have the
concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.



168.17    FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES SHALL BE BASED.



   In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Adjustment
shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
chapter and:



      1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.



      2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land
or downstream to the injury of others.



      3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.



      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



      5.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the City.



      6.   The requirements of the facility for a flood plain
location. 



      7.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use. 



      8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



      9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program for the area. 



      10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



      11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 



      12.   The cost of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.



      13.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of
this chapter. 



168.18    CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES.



   Upon consideration of the factors listed in Section 168.17, the Board
of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter.  Such conditions may
include, but not necessarily be limited to: 



      1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply
facilities.



      2.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.



      3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions. 



      4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by
the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical
alternative to achieving the purposes of this chapter. 



      5.   Flood proofing measures.



168.19    NONCONFORMING USES.



      1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which
was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject
to the following conditions: 



         A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.



         B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become
nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



      2.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more
than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.  This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration
to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building or safety
codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall
not preclude its continued designation.



168.20    AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time
to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.  No amendment,
supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior
approval from the Department of Natural Resources.



CHAPTER 169
ZONING AND PROPERTY
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS



 

169.01  Purpose
 
169.07  Performance Standards in Industrial Districts


169.02  Agricultural Uses
 
169.08  Miscellaneous Uses


169.03  Residential Uses
 
169.09  Accessory Uses


169.04  Civic Uses
 
169.10  Outdoor Storage Outside of the I-1 and I-2 Zoning


169.05  Commercial Uses
 
Districts


169.06  Industrial Uses
 
169.11  Temporary Uses



 



169.01    PURPOSE.



   The Supplemental Use Regulations set forth additional standards for
certain uses located within the various zoning districts.  These regulations
recognize that certain use types have characteristics that require additional
controls in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare.  These
regulations complement the use regulations contained in Sections 167.14
through 167.30 of this Zoning Ordinance.



169.02    AGRICULTURAL USES.



   Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user
from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous
approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit
issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute.



      1.   Crop Production in Non-Agricultural Districts.  Crop
production is a permitted interim use in any zoning district.



      2.   Horticulture and Crop Production: Retail Sales.  Retail
operation of garden centers or roadside stands associated with a primary
agricultural use may be permitted in the AG District, subject to the
following requirements:



         A.   Garden Centers.



            (1)   A garden center is a building or premises
used for the retail sale of plant materials or items useful in the growing or
display of lawns, gardens, and plants.



            (2)   Garden centers must conform to all site
development regulations for the zoning district.



            (3)   Any garden center adjacent to a residential
district must maintain a 20-foot landscaped buffer yard, consistent with the
standards established in Section 171.04.



         B.   Roadside Stands.



            (1)   A roadside stand is a facility used on a
temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on
adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands.



            (2)   A roadside stand may be located within a
required front yard but no closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled
roadway.



            (3)   A roadside stand may operate for a maximum
of 180 days in any one year.



      3.   Animal Production: Separation from Residential Uses.



         A.   Animal production use types may not be established
within 500 feet of a pre-existing residential districts, including RR through
RM.



         B.   No feeding or disposal of garbage, rubbish, or
offal associated with animal production shall occur within 500 feet of any
pre-existing residential districts, including RR through RM.



169.03    RESIDENTIAL USES.



      1.   Separation from Confined Animal Feeding Operations
(CAFO’s).  No new residential use shall be established within 1,250 feet
of an existing CAFO, except for the residence of the owner or operator of the
CAFO, employee, or working tenant.



      2.   Downtown and Group Residential in CBD District. 
Downtown and Group Residential uses are permitted in the CBD District only on
floor levels at least ten (10) feet above the primary street entrance. Alley
entrances to buildings are not determinative of whether a residential use is
permitted on a floor level.  A unit or units specifically designed for
occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to
approval by the Board of Adjustment.
                                    (Ord.
1418 - May 12 Supp.)



      3.   Mobile Home Parks in the RM District.  Mobile Home Parks
and mobile home residential use are permitted in the RM District.  Such use
may be configured in a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. 
Following the effective date of this ordinance, no mobile home shall be
located outside of a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision.  All
Mobile Home Parks established after the effective date of this ordinance are
subject to compliance with the following regulations:



         A.   Certification.



            (1)   A certification of compliance with all
ordinances and regulations regarding mobile home licensing, zoning, health,
plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection and any other applicable
requirements shall be required of all Mobile Home Parks.



            (2)   The Building Official is authorized to
perform an annual inspection of any Mobile Home Park to ensure compliance
with these regulations.



            (3)   These regulations do not address the
structural integrity of any units within a Mobile Home Park.  Compliance
with these regulations does not represent city warrant of the structural
integrity of any structure or unit in such a facility. 



   B.    Minimum and Maximum Area.  A Mobile Home Park shall be
considered to be one zoned lot.  The minimum contiguous area of a Mobile
Home Park shall be two acres.



         C.   Density Requirements.



            (1)   The maximum gross density of a Mobile Home
Park shall be 7 units per acre. 



            (2)   The minimum size of an individual mobile
home space shall be 4,000 square feet for single-wide mobile home units and
5,000 square feet for double-wide mobile home units.



            (3)   Each mobile home space shall have a width of
at least 40 feet and a length of at least 75 feet.



   D.    Site Development Standards.



            (1)   Setbacks.  Each Mobile Home Park shall have
a minimum perimeter setback of 30 feet.  No space for a dwelling unit or any
other structure shall be permitted in the required setback.



            (2)   Setback Landscaping.  All area contained
within the required setbacks except sidewalks and private drives shall be
landscaped and screened in conformance with Chapter 171.



            (3)   Impervious Coverage.  Impervious coverage
for a Mobile Home Park shall not exceed 60 percent of the total site area.



            (4)   Open Space.  Each Mobile Home Park shall
provide a minimum of 400 square feet of open recreational space per unit. 
Such space shall be provided at a central location accessible from all parts
of the park by pedestrians.  Required perimeter setbacks or buffers shall
not be credited toward the fulfillment of this requirement.



            (5)   Separation Between Mobile Home Units.  The
minimum separation between a mobile home unit and attached accessory
structure and any other mobile home units and/or accessory structure shall be
20 feet.



            (6)   Separation and Setbacks for Accessory
Buildings.  An accessory building on a mobile home space shall maintain a
minimum rear and side yard setback of five feet.  A minimum distance of ten
feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an unattached accessory
building.



   E.    Street Access and Circulation Requirements.



            (1)   Access to Public Street.  Each Mobile Home
Park must abut and have access to a dedicated public street with a
right-of-way of at least 60 feet.  Direct access to a mobile home space from
a public street is prohibited.



            (2)   Vehicular Circulation.  The Mobile Home
Park must provide interior vehicular circulation on a private internal street
system.  Minimum interior street width shall be 27 feet.  The street system
shall be continuous and connected with other internal and public streets; or
shall have a cul-de-sac with a minimum diameter of 100 feet.  No such
cul-de-sacs may exceed 300 feet in length.



            (3)   Separation Between Units and Circulation
Areas.  The minimum distance between a mobile home unit and any attached
accessory structure and the pavement of an internal street or parking area
shall be ten feet.



            (4)   Sidewalks.  Each Mobile Home Park shall
provide a sidewalk system to connect each mobile home space to common
buildings or community facilities constructed for the use of its residents;
and to the fronting public right of way.  Sidewalk width shall be at least
four feet.



            (5)   Street and Sidewalk Standards.  All
internal streets and sidewalks shall be hard-surfaced.  Electric street
lighting is required along all internal streets.



            (6)   Parking Requirements.  Each Mobile Home
Park must provide at least two off-street parking stalls for each mobile home
space.



   F.    Utilities.



            (1)   All Mobile Home Parks shall provide
individual units and common facilities with an adequate, piped supply of hot
and cold water for both drinking and domestic purposes; and standard
electrical service, providing at least one 120-volt and one 240-volt
electrical service outlet to each mobile home space.



            (2)   Complete water and sewer service shall be
provided within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision
Chapter of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.



            (3)   Properly spaced and operating fire hydrants
shall be provided for proper fire protection within each Mobile Home Park in
accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance.



            (4)   All electric, telephone, gas, and other
utility lines shall be installed underground.



         G.   Foundation Requirements.



            (1)   All mobile homes shall be secured to the
ground by tie-downs and ground anchors that comply with the requirements of
the Iowa Building Code.



            (2)   All mobile homes shall be blocked at a
maximum of ten foot centers around the perimeter of each unit; such blocking
shall provide 16 by 16 inch bearing on the stand.



            (3)   Pads shall be a hard surface capable of
carrying the weight and of sufficient length to support all blocking points
of the mobile home.



            (4)   Each home shall be skirted within 30 days of
its placement in the park.  Skirtingmaterials shall be compatible with the
exterior finish of the mobile home.



         H.   Financial Responsibility:  Each application for a
Mobile Home Park shall include a demonstration by the developer of financial
capability to complete the project; and a construction schedule.



         I.   Completion Schedule:  Construction must begin on
any approved Mobile Home Park within one year of the date of approval by the
Planning Commission and City Council.  Such construction shall be completed
within two years of approval, unless otherwise extended by the Commission.



      4.   Mobile Home Subdivisions in the MH District.



         A.   Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be developed in
accordance with all standards and requirements set forth in the Subdivision
Ordinance of Denison.  Site development regulations shall be the same as
those required in the R-2 Zoning District.  Each mobile home shall be
considered a single-family detached residential unit for the purpose of
determining applicable development regulations.



         B.   Mobile home units within Mobile Home Subdivisions
shall be built in accordance with the minimum design standards of the US
Department of Housing and Urban Development and display a certification of
such compliance.  All units shall be installed on a permanent foundation
with complete removal of wheels and towing packages.



      5.   Two-Family Residential.  Where permitted, two-family
residential development is subject to the following regulations:



         A.   The second dwelling unit shall be located to the
rear of the site and shall be separated from the primary dwelling unit by 25
feet.



         B.   The second dwelling unit shall be served by a
driveway at least ten feet in width, leading from the public ROW adjacent to
the lot.



         C.   Both structures shall meet all other setback
requirements of the zoning district.



169.04    CIVIC USES.



      1.   Clubs.  Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall
maintain a buffer yard of not less than fifteen feet along the common
boundary with such residential use.



      2.   Day Care Centers (General).



         A.   Each day care center (general) must be validly
licensed by the State of Iowa.



         B.   Each facility shall provide a minimum of 50 square
feet of outdoor play area per child, fully enclosed by fence or wall that is
at least 42 inches but not more than 72 inches in height.  Play areas shall
be easily accessible from the main facility and be free of hazards, including
potential traffic hazards.



         C.   Special Use Permit applications for General Day
Care Centers shall specify the number and projected ages of children to be
cared for at the facility, and the number of projected full- and part-time
staff.



      3.   Group Care Facilities and Group Homes.



         A.   Each group care facility or group home must be
validly licensed by either the State of Iowa or the appropriate governmental
agency.



         B.   Group homes are permitted in the CBD District only
on levels above street level except that a facility specifically designed for
occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to
approval as a Conditional Use by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



169.05    COMMERCIAL USES.



      1.   Auto Service, Repair, Equipment Repair, Travel Center,
Truck Stop, RV Storage, and Body Repair Uses.



         A.   No business engaged in automobile display, sales,
service, repair, paint, or bodywork shall display on its premises any
inoperable automobiles other than automobiles currently being painted or
repaired for return to customers within 30 days, automobiles awaiting
painting or repair within 30 days, or painted or repaired automobiles
awaiting pickup by customers within 30 days.  Any other inoperable
automobiles on the premises, including any automobiles stored for the purpose
of salvage of material or parts, must be stored inside a completely enclosed
building or behind an approved barrier sufficient to shield the visibility of
such automobiles from the public roads.  Nothing in this section relieves
such a business from compliance with other applicable provisions of this Code
of Ordinances.



         B.   Any spray painting must take place within
structures designed for that purpose and be approved by the Building Official.



         C.   All entrances and exits serving a gasoline or
diesel service station, convenience store offering fuel sales, or automobile
repair shop shall be at least 150 feet from a school, public park, religious
assembly use, hospital, or residential use, as measured along any public
street.  Such access shall be at least 40 feet away from the right-of-way
line of any intersection.



         D.   All fuel pumps shall be set back at least fifteen
feet from any street line.



      2.   Auto Washing Facilities.



         A.   Each conveyor operated auto washing facility shall
provide on-site stacking space for five vehicles per washing lane on the
approach side of the washing structure and on-site stacking space for two
vehicles on the exit side.



         B.   Each self-service auto washing facility shall
provide stacking space for three automobiles per bay on the approach side and
one space per bay on the exit side of the building.



      3.   Automobile, RV, and Equipment Rental and Sales.



         A.   All outdoor display areas for rental and sales
facilities shall be hard-surfaced, unless screened from casual view as
provided by Chapter 171.



         B.   Body repair services are permitted as an accessory
use to automobile rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair
services shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building.



      4.   Bed and Breakfasts.



         A.   Bed and breakfasts permitted in the CBD District
must provide any sleeping facility only on levels above street level except
that units specifically designed and reserved for occupancy by handicapped
people may be located on the street level.



         B.   Bed and breakfasts shall meet the off-street
parking requirements as specified in Chapter 172.  Tandem parking is
allowed; however, not more than two (2) cars per tandem space shall be
allowed.



         C.   Signage shall be limited to that permitted for home
occupations as specified in subsection 1 of Section 169.09.



         D.   Additional uses of the premises, such as
“tearoom”, “coffee house”, or “conference center” require
application for Special Use Permit in any zone and must comply with all other
applicable requirements of the Denison City Code and secure all applicable
permits.



         E.   Tearooms shall be considered food establishments
associated with and attached to bed and breakfasts and shall be fully
contained on the same lot or a contiguous lot as the establishments with
which they are associated.



         F.   Off-street parking requirements for tearooms shall
be as follows:  Sufficient off-street parking must be provided based on the
seating capacity of the tearoom so that there is one parking spot for every
four (4) person seating capacity.  Tandem parking is allowed; however, not
more than two (2) vehicles per tandem space shall be allowed.



         G.   All tearooms shall comply with all provisions of
the Iowa Code and with any regulations affecting the operations of bed and
breakfasts, including but not limited to Iowa Code Chapters 137C and 137F and
all regulations adopted pursuant thereto.



(Ord. 1381 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



      5.   Campgrounds.



         A.   Minimum Size.  Each campground established after
the effective date of this chapter shall have a minimum size of one acre.



         B.   Setbacks.  All campgrounds shall maintain a
50-foot front yard setback and a 25-foot buffer yard from all other property
lines.



         C.   Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage
disposal, and water and toilet facilities in compliance with all City
ordinances; or, alternately, be limited to use by self-contained campers,
providing their own on-board water and disposal systems.



      6.   Construction Sales and Service.  Retail home improvement
stores and centers may include outdoor storage of materials and must comply
with the following conditions:



         A.   Architectural design and materials shall be
consistent with the current or projected character of the surrounding area.



         B.   All outside storage or display of merchandise or
other materials or equipment shall be screened from view at eye level from a
public street or adjacent property.



         C.   All storage buildings with overhead doors, drive
openings, or open bays and all loading areas shall be fully screened from
view at eye level from a public street or adjacent property.



         D.   Minimum screening shall be consistent with
screening standards set forth in Section 171.06.



         E.   All areas not occupied by buildings or landscaping
shall be paved with concrete or asphalt, or surfaced with gravel or similar
treatment to reduce dust.



      7.   Convenience Storage.  When permitted outside of the I-2
District, convenience storage facilities shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:



         A.   Activities within the facility shall be limited to
the rental of storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the
facility.



         B.   All driveways within the facility shall provide a
paved surface with a minimum width of 25 feet.



         C.   All storage must be within enclosed buildings and
shall not include the storage of hazardous materials.



         D.   No storage buildings may open into required front
yards.



         E.   Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards of
30 feet adjacent to any public right-of-way and 20 feet adjacent to other
property lines, unless greater setbacks are required by Chapter 171.



      8.   Kennels.



         A.   The minimum lot size shall be two acres.



         B.   No building or dog runs shall be located nearer
than 100 feet from any property line and 500 feet to the property line of any
residential use or district.



         C.   All kennel facilities shall be screened around such
facilities or at property lines to prevent distracting or exciting animals. 
Screening shall be of a type provided by Section 171.06, establishing
landscape and screening standards.



      9.   Restricted (Adult Entertainment) Businesses.  Adult
entertainment businesses shall be subject to the following restrictions, and
no person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment
business contrary to said restrictions:



         A.   No adult entertainment business shall be open for
business between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m.



         B.   A new adult entertainment business shall not be
allowed within 1,000 feet of an existing adult entertainment business.



         C.   A new adult entertainment business shall not be
located within 500 feet of any residentially zoned district or 1,000 feet of
a preexisting school, public park, or place of worship.



         D.   No such nonconforming use shall be permitted to
expand in size or scope and the rights granted in this chapter shall
terminate upon cessation of business for the term of six months.



         E.   Measurement of Distances.  For the purpose of this
chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the main entrance of such adult
entertainment business to the point on the property line of such other
business, school, church, public park or areas zoned for residential use
which is closest to the said main entrance of such adult entertainment
business.



         F.   No adult entertainment business shall be conducted
in any manner that permits the observation of models or any material
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening
from any public way or from any property not licensed as an adult use. No
operator of an adult entertainment business or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, owner, or employee of such business shall
engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any
activity or conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited by this code
or any laws of the state or the United States.



         G.   No part of the interior of the adult entertainment
business shall be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or
other public or semipublic area.



         H.   An adult entertainment business shall post a sign
at the entrance of the premises, which shall state the nature of the business
and shall state that no one under the age of eighteen years is allowed on the
premises. The sign shall comply with the city's sign regulations. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit the owner from establishing an
older age limitation for coming on the premises.



         I.   Nuisance Operation.  Any adult entertainment
business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting
a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions,
proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof,
in the manner prescribed by law, and shall take such other steps and shall
apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief
as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person
from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business
contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



169.06    INDUSTRIAL USES.



      1.   Resource Extraction.  Resource extraction, where
permitted, is subject to the following additional requirements:



         A.   Erosion Control.  A resource extraction use may
not increase the amount of storm run-off onto adjacent properties as
determined by review of the Zoning Administrator.  Erosion control
facilities, including retention and sediment basins, are required of each
facility, if necessary, to meet this standard.



         B.   Surface Drainage.  The surface of the use may not
result in the collection or ponding of water, unless specifically permitted
as part of a Special Use Permit.



         C.   Storage of Topsoil.  Topsoil shall be collected
and stored for redistribution following the end of the operation.



         D.   Elimination of Hazards.  Excavation shall not
result in a hazard to any person or property.  The following measures are
required:



            (1)   Restoration of slopes to a gradient not
exceeding 33% as soon as possible.



            (2)   Installation of perimeter safety screening
and/or fencing.



            (3)   Installation of visual screening adjacent to
any property within a residential or public use district consistent with
bufferyard standards contained in Chapter 171.  Resource extraction uses in
the AG District shall be subject to the same bufferyard requirements as those
in the I-2 District.



         E.   Restoration of Landscape.  The topography and soil
of the resource extraction site shall be restored and stabilized within nine
months of completion of the operation in accordance with specifications set
forth in the approved Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan for the site,
including Best Management Practices that may otherwise be used to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.  Alternatively, the site may be
used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the City Council with
the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the Department of Natural
Resources.  Adequate surety, in the form of a performance bond, to cover the
cost of restoration of the site shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of permit application.



      2.   Salvage Services and Long-term Vehicle Storage and
Dismantling.



         A.   Screening.



            (1)   The perimeter of each new facility shall be
fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls.  Minimum
height of this enclosure shall be eight feet.  Any such enclosure shall be
constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards.



            (2)   Each existing salvage services facility
shall be screened as provided above within one year of the effective date of
this ordinance.



            (3)   The above requirement shall also apply to
uses adjacent to residential zoning districts or residential uses that
include the long-term storage and dismantling of vehicles.



         B.   Storage of materials within any salvage services
facility may not be higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or
wall.



         C.   No new salvage services use may be established
within 500 feet of the nearest property line of a pre-existing residential
zoning district or of any pre-established civic use. 



169.07    PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses
permitted within an industrial zoning district:



      1.   Physical Appearance.  All operations shall be carried on
within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in
operable condition may be stored outside.  Normal daily inorganic wastes may
be stored outside in containers, provided that such containers are not
visible form the street.



      2.   Fire Hazard.  Except in Heavy Industrial Zones, no
operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gases, corrosive
materials, strong acids or bases, liquids, or inherent fire hazards.  This
prohibition shall not apply to the normal use of heating or motor fuels and
welding gases when handled in accordance with the regulations of Crawford
County and the City of Denison.




(Ord. 1406 - June 11 Supp.)




      3.   Sewage and Wastes.  No operation shall discharge into a
sewer, drainage way, or the ground any material, which is radioactive,
poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer
pipes and installations.



      4.   Storage of Chemical Products.  If allowed by Special Use
Permit, any above or below ground storage of liquid petroleum products or
chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall not exceed 150,000 gallons
when stored on one lot less than one acre.  Such storage shall not exceed
25,000 gallons in any one tank.  Storage of liquid petroleum products or
chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of 25,000 gallons shall
be located at least 50 feet from any structure intended for human habitation
and at least 200 feet from any Residential, Office, or Commercial zoning
district.



169.08    MISCELLANEOUS USES.



      1.   Landfills.



         A.   Compliance with Codes.  Each landfill must comply
with all relevant city, county, State, or Federal codes and statutes.



         B.   Prevention of Hazards.  No facility shall present
a hazard to surrounding residents or properties.



         C.   Drainage and Water Supply.  No landfill may modify
or prevent the flow of major natural drainage ways within the jurisdiction of
the City of Denison.  Landfills shall not produce a measurable increase in
pollution in any public water-based recreational facility or in any waterway
or well that is a part of a public or private water supply.



         D.   Minimum Separation from Residential Uses.  No
non-putrescible landfill may be established within 300 feet of a developed
residential or public use.  No landfill involving the disposal of
putrescible or septic wastes shall be established within one-fourth mile of
any residential, public, or commercial zoning district; or any     State
of Federal Highway.



         E.   Restoration of Site.  The site of any landfill
must be restored, stabilized, planted, and seeded within six months after the
end of the operation.  Dissipation of waste products must be accomplished in
a manner approved by the State of Iowa’s Department of Natural Resources.



         F.   Toxic Waste.  The disposal of hazardous, toxic, or
radioactive wastes as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
shall be prohibited within the City of Denison and its extra-territorial
jurisdiction.



      2.   Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS).



         A.   The distance from all lot lines or any building or
power line to any tower support base of a WECS shall be equal to the sum of
the tower height and the diameter of the rotor.  A reduction of this
requirement may be granted as part of a Special Use Permit approval if the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, after recommendation by the Planning Commission,
finds that the reduction is consistent with public health, safety, and
welfare. 



         B.   The distance between the tower support bases of any
two WECS shall be the minimum of five rotor lengths, determined by the size
of the largest rotor.  A reduction of this requirement may be granted as
part of a Special Use Permit approval if the City Council, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that the reduction does not
impede the operation of either WECS.



         C.   Any tower or rotor shall maintain a distance of at
least 100 horizontal feet from any structure, power line, or antenna located
on another property.



         D.   The WECS operation shall not interfere with radio,
television, computer, or other electronic operations on adjacent properties.



         E.   A fence eight feet high with a locking gate shall
be placed around any WECS tower base; or the tower climbing apparatus shall
begin no lower than twelve feet above ground.



         F.   The height of the WECS may exceed the height
restrictions of the base district by up to 50%.  The bottom tip of any rotor
must be at least 10 feet above any area accessible to pedestrians.



169.09    ACCESSORY USES.



      1.   Home-Based Businesses/Home Occupations.  Home-based
businesses and home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in
residential units and must register and obtain a permit from the office of
the Building Inspector on an annual basis, subject to the following
conditions:



         A.   External Effects.



            (1)   There shall be no change in the exterior
appearance of the building or premises housing the home occupation other than
signage permitted within this section.



            (2)   No noise, odors, bright lights, electronic
interference, storage or other external effects attributable to the home
occupation shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public right of
way.



            (3)   The home occupation shall be carried on
entirely within the principal residential structure or within an accessory
structure which does not exceed 15 feet in height and in which not more than
600 square feet in area is used for the home occupation.  Any such use of
the accessory structure must comply with the International Building Code as
adopted by the City of Denison, Iowa.



(Ord. 1420 - Oct. 12 Supp.)



            (4)   Mechanical or electrical equipment
supporting the home occupation, other than that which is designed to
facilitate heating or cooling of the home,  shall be limited to that which
is self-contained within the structure and normally used for office, domestic
or household purposes. 



            (5)   No home occupation shall discharge into any
sewer, drainageway, or the ground any material which is radioactive,
poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer
pipes and installations.



         B.   Employees.  The home occupation shall employ no
more than two full-time employees on site other than the residents of the
dwelling unit, provided that one off-street parking space is made available
and used by a non-resident employee.



         C.   Extent of Use.  For all residential and
agricultural zoning districts, 25% of the floor area of the dwelling may be
devoted to the home occupation, exclusive of any detached accessory buildings
used for the home occupation.



         D.   Signage. Each home-based business shall be
permitted to have one non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed six (6) square
feet in area.




(Ord. 1403 - June 11 Supp.)




         E.   Prohibited Home-Based Businesses/Home
Occupations.  The following activities are prohibited as home-based
businesses, even if they meet the other requirements set forth in this
section:



            (1)   Animal hospitals.



            (2)   General retail sales.



            (3)   Restaurants.



            (4)   Repair shops or service establishments that
service major motorized vehicles, small engines, and related items.



            (5)   Stables or kennels.



            (6)   Welding, vehicle body repair, or rebuilding
or dismantling of vehicles.



      2.   Permitted Accessory Uses:  Residential Uses. 
Residential uses may include the following accessory uses, activities, and
structures on the same lot.



         A.   Private garages and parking for the residency use.



         B.   Recreational activities and uses by residents.



         C.   Home occupations, subject to the provisions of this
ordinance.



         D.   Non-commercial convenience services for the primary
use of residents of multi-family uses or mobile home parks, including
laundromats, clubhouses, and post offices.



         E.   Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such
sales at any one location are limited to one sale of no more than three
consecutive days duration in a month, and three sales during any twelve month
period.



      3.   Permitted Accessory Uses: Civic Use Types.  Guidance
services and health care use types are permitted in the I-1 Limited
Industrial zoning districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial
use.



      4.   Permitted Accessory Uses: Other Use Types.  Other use
types may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on
the same lot:



         A.   Parking for the principal use.



         B.   Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for
sale in a principal commercial use, provided such manufacturing is totally
contained within the structure housing the principal use.



         C.   Services operated for the sole benefit of employees
of the principal use.



      5.   Permitted Accessory Uses: Agricultural Use Types.



         A.   Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the
regulations set forth in 169.02 2 B.



         B.   Other uses and activities necessarily and
customarily associated with the purpose and functions of agricultural uses. 



         C.   Buildings that directly serve and are required for
the conduct of crop and animal production, are exempt from requirements for
building permits and inspections.  Structures that house other uses are
subject to the requirements of this ordinance, even if located on property
zoned or primarily zoned or used for agricultural purposes.



169.10    OUTDOOR STORAGE OUTSIDE OF THE I-1 AND I-2 ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the I-1
Limited Industrial and I-2 General Industrial zoning district, except as
provided in this section.



      1.   Agricultural Use Types.  Outdoor storage is permitted
only where incidental to agricultural uses.



      2.   Residential Uses and Property.  Except as otherwise
provided by this ordinance, any goods, equipment, materials, machinery, and
parts thereof stored on any residentially zoned property must be stored in
completely enclosed buildings or in spaces screened by fencing and/or
evergreen shrubbery.



      3.   Civic Use Types.  Outdoor storage is permitted only
where incidental to maintenance facilities, or in completely enclosed
buildings or in spaces screened by fencing and/or evergreen shrubbery.



      4.   Commercial Use Types. 



         A.   Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to
agricultural sales and service, auto rentals and sales, construction sales
and service, equipment sales and service, stables and kennels, and surplus
sales.



         B.   Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to
auto services, equipment repair, long-term vehicle storage, and body repair,
provided that such storage is completely screened at property lines by an
opaque barrier, as set forth in Section 171.06.  This provision shall apply
to any auto services, equipment repair, or body repair use established after
the effective date of this ordinance.



      5.   Industrial and Miscellaneous Use Types.



         A.   Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental
to industrial uses within the AG and I-1 zoning districts.  Any such outdoor
storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in Section 171.06.



         B.   Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to
landfills.



169.11    TEMPORARY USES.



      1.   Purpose.  These provisions are intended to permit
occasional, temporary uses and activities, when consistent with the
objectives of the Unified Land Development Ordinance and compatible with
surrounding uses.  They are further intended to prevent temporary uses from
assuming the character of permanent uses.



      2.   Temporary Use Types.  The following temporary uses are
permitted, subject to the regulations contained within these sections:



         A.   Model homes or apartments, if contained within the
development to which they pertain.



         B.   Development Sales Offices.  Such offices may
remain in place until 90% of the lots or units within the development are
sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured
home/structure.



         C.   Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits.



         D.   Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals,
or other transient events, provided that events are located on property owned
by the sponsoring non-profit organization, or are located within an AG, C-1,
C-2, CBD, I-1, or I-2 zoning district.  Such uses shall not exceed three
weeks in duration.



         E.   Outdoor art shows and exhibits.



         F.   Seasonal sales, including Christmas tree or other
holiday-related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not
located in a residential zoning district.



         G.   Construction site offices, if located on the
construction site itself.



         H.   Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales
operate no more than three days in the same week and five days in the same
month; and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts.



         I.   Construction Batch Plants in the I-1 District
provided that:



            (1)   No plant may be located within 600 feet of a
developed residential use, park, or school.



            (2)   The facility is located no more than one
mile from its job site.  The Zoning Administrator may extend this distance
to two miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plant-related
vehicles.



            (3)   Hours of operation do not exceed 12 hours
per day.



            (4)   The duration of the plant's operation does
not exceed 180 days.



         J.   Additional temporary uses that the Zoning
Administrator determines to be similar to the previously described uses in
this section.



      3.   Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses.



         A.   Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or
other evidence of the use upon its completion or removal.



         B.   The Zoning Administrator may establish other
conditions that he/she deems necessary to ensure compatibility with
surrounding land uses.



(Chapter 169 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 170
ZONING AND PROPERTY
SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



 

170.01  Purpose
 
170.05  Accessory Buildings and Garages


170.02  Required Street Frontage
 
170.06  Height Exceptions


170.03  Lot Size Exceptions
 
170.07  Fence Regulations


170.04  Setback Adjustments
 
170.08  Appeals



 



170.01    PURPOSE.



   The Supplemental Site Development Regulations establish basic
requirements for developable lots, including frontage requirements.  They
recognize the existence of special conditions that cannot comply literally
with the site development regulations set out for each zoning district. 
Therefore, these regulations qualify or modify the district regulations of
this ordinance and provide for specific areas of exception.



170.02    REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE.



   Except as permitted below, any lot used in whole or part for
residential purposes shall provide a minimum frontage of 20 feet along at
least one public street, or shall possess an exclusive, uninterrupted private
easement of access or right of way of at least 20 feet wide to a public
street.  There shall not be more than one single-family housing unit for
such frontage or easement.  A common easement of access at least 40 feet in
width may be provided for two or more single-family units or for one or more
duplex, two-family, townhouse, or multiple-family housing units.



170.03    LOT SIZE EXCEPTIONS.



   In any district permitting residential use types, a single-family use
type may be located on any lot or plot of official record but nonconforming
in size as of the effective date of this ordinance, regardless of its area or
width.



170.04    SETBACK ADJUSTMENTS.



      1.   Lots Adjoining Alleys.  In calculating the depth of a
required side or rear yard setback for a lot adjoining a dedicated public
alley, one-half of the alley may be credited as a portion of the yard. 
However, no residential structure may be nearer than five feet to the near
side of the alley.



      2.   Encroachments on Required Yards.  Every part of a
required yard shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade upward,
except as specified herein.



         A.   Architectural projections, including roofs that
cover porches, enclosed porches, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves,
flues and chimneys, and ornamental features may project two feet into a
required yard.



         B.   Terraces, patios, uncovered decks, and ornamental
features that have no structural element more than three feet above or below
the adjacent ground level may project six feet into a required front yard.
However, all such projections must be set back at least three feet from an
adjacent side lot line; or 15 feet from any street property line.



         C.   Fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and
balconies opening to fire towers may project a maximum of 3 feet into
required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the light and ventilation
of adjacent buildings.



         D.   For buildings constructed upon a front property
line, a cornice may project into public right-of-way, unless such property is
constructed on a State or Federal Highway.  Maximum projection is the
smaller of four feet or five percent of the right-of-way width.



         E.   In commercial districts, a canopy may extend into a
required front yard, provided that the canopy is set back at least five feet
from the front property line, covers less than fifteen percent of the area of
the required front yard, and has a vertical clearance of at least eight feet
six inches.



         F.   Swimming pools shall be subject to the same
location and setback requirements as accessory buildings.



         G.   Lamp posts with a maximum height of ten (10) feet,
and flag poles up to maximum height of base district may be located within
required yards, provided they are set back at least five (5) feet from
property lines.  The spread of a flag when fully extended shall not extend
onto public right-of-way.



         H.   Garage Setbacks:  Any garage that fronts on a
public street must be set back at least 20 feet from such street, regardless
of the setback requirement within the zoning district.  This shall not be
interpreted to waive a larger required minimum setback required by the zoning
district.



      3.   Setbacks on Arterial Streets. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this ordinance, the City may require a setback for all buildings
built or altered, or off-street parking areas developed along a State or
Federally designated highway that exceeds those normally required for the
zoning district.  Lots of record under five acres in size; lots of record
duly platted and approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or
where a properly dedicated and accepted frontage road right-of-way exists are
exempt from these provisions and are instead subject to the setback
requirements of their respective zoning district.



      4.   Setback Adjustments. 



         A.   Setbacks on Built-Up Blockfaces.  These provisions
apply if thirty percent or more of the buildings on that blockface have front
yard setbacks different from those required for the specific district.



            (1)   If a building is to be built on a parcel of
land within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front
yard shall be the mean front yard setbacks of the adjacent buildings.



            (2)   If a building is to be built on a parcel of
land within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, the minimum
front yard shall be the front yard setback of the adjacent building.



            (3)   If a building is to be built on a parcel of
land not within 100 feet of an existing building on either side, then the
minimum front yard shall be the mean front yard setback of all existing
buildings on the blockface.



            (4)   No setback adjustment pursuant to this
section shall create a required front yard setback more than five feet
greater than that otherwise required by the applicable zoning district.



         B.   Corner Lots.



            (1)   Required setbacks shall not reduce the
buildable width of any corner lot to less than 25 feet.  Appropriate setback
adjustments shall be allowed to maintain this minimum width.



            (2)   No setback adjustment shall permit
encroachment into the vision clearance triangle.



      5.   Double Frontage Lots.  Residentially zoned double
frontage lots on a major street, and with no access to that street may have a
25-foot minimum front yard setback along said street.  All other double
frontage lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent street.



      6.   Adjustment of Setbacks and Lot Area for Partial Takings.



         A.   If a portion of a lot is conveyed to the state, the
city, or any other political subdivision of the state through condemnation or
under threat of condemnation, and the conveyance results in a structure or
use of a structure upon the remaining lot becoming nonconforming or more
nonconforming with a required yard or minimum lot area, then notwithstanding
the limitations set forth in Chapter 174, if such structure is thereafter
damaged to any extent or is totally destroyed by any means, the structure may
be repaired, restored, or rebuilt to its prior condition, if all of the
following conditions are satisfied:



            (1)   The nonconformity was created by the
conveyance through condemnation or under threat of condemnation;



            (2)   Appropriate relief is obtained from the
board of adjustment for any nonconformity with the applicable zoning
requirements, to the extent that such nonconformity preexisted such
condemnation or conveyance;



            (3)   The repair, restoration or rebuilding of the
structure does not create any additional nonconformity of the structure
beyond that originally created by such conveyance or allowed by any relief
granted by the board of adjustment;



            (4)   The repair, restoration, or rebuilding is
commenced within six months of such damage under authority of a building
permit and is diligently pursued to completion; and,



            (5)   One of the following conditions are
satisfied:



               a.   The acquisition document for such
conveyance contains language stating substantially as follows:  "The
provisions of Section _______ of the City of Denison Zoning Ordinance shall
apply to this acquisition"; or



               b.   The zoning enforcement officer
determines that the circumstances of such conveyance affirmatively support a
finding that any resulting nonconformities with the required yards or minimum
lot area were not considered in determining the compensation paid for such
conveyance.



         B.   If a portion of a lot is conveyed to the state, the
city, or any other political subdivision of the state through condemnation or
under threat of condemnation, and the conveyance results in a single-family
dwelling upon the remaining lot becoming nonconforming or more nonconforming
with a required yard or minimum lot area, then the remaining lot shall be
treated the same as a lot of record existing as of the effective date of this
ordinance, for the purposes of applying the provisions in Section 170.03
regarding the construction of a single family detached dwelling.



         C.   Any adjustment to the minimum lot area made under
authority of this section shall automatically lapse in the event the lot is
joined with other adjoining land under common ownership that collectively
satisfy the applicable minimum lot area.



         D.   Any adjustment to a required yard made under
authority of this section shall automatically lapse in the event the lot is
joined with other adjoining land under common ownership that collectively
satisfy the applicable minimum required yard.



      7.   Satellite Antennas.



         A.   Antennas with a surface area over 6.3 square feet
which are accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive and transmit
electromagnetic signals, or to receive signals from satellites, shall not be
located within any front yard of the primary use.



         B.   Antennas with a surface area of over 6.3 square
feet are subject to the following additional regulations:



            (1)   Such antennas shall be located no less than
ten feet from the property line of an adjacent property line.



            (2)   The maximum height shall be 15 feet and the
maximum diameter shall be 11 feet.



            (3)   Each antenna shall be screened by a six foot
high wood or masonry fence, or by natural plants or trees of equal minimum
height.



      8.   Vision Clearance Zones.  Except in the CBD District, no
structure or obstruction, including fences, walls, or landscape materials,
shall be built to a height of between 24 inches and 10 feet above the
established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance
zone.  The vision clearance zone shall be a triangle defined by:



         A.   20 feet back from the intersection of curb lines
and right-of-way edges of alleys.



         B.   75 feet from the intersection of the centerlines of
intersecting local streets.



         C.   90 feet from the intersection of the centerlines of
intersecting collector or arterial streets.



170.05    ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND GARAGES.



      1.   Setbacks and Setback Flexibility.  Accessory buildings
are subject to all site development regulations of its zoning district,
except as provided below:



         A.   Side Yards.  An accessory building may be located
a minimum of five feet from the side lot line of the property if it is
located in an area from six feet behind the rear building line of the
principal building to the rear property line and is under 15 feet in
height.  An additional one foot setback is required for every two feet above
15 feet in height, up to the minimum requirements of the zoning district.



(Ord. 1390 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



         B.   Front Yards.  No accessory building may be located
between the front building line of the principal building and the front
property line.



         C.   Rear Yard.  The minimum rear yard setback for
accessory buildings shall be 5 feet.  Double-frontage lots shall require
front-yard setbacks along both street frontages as required by the individual
zoning district. No accessory building shall be located within any easement
or right-of-way along the rear property line.



         D.   Street Yards.  No accessory building shall be
located within 20 feet from any street right-of-way line.



         E.   Garage Setbacks.  Any garage that fronts on a
public street must be set back at least 20 feet from such street, regardless
of the setback requirement within the zoning district.  This shall not be
interpreted to waive a larger required minimum setback required by the zoning
district.



      2.   Maximum Size of Residential Accessory Buildings.  The
maximum size of a detached garage for a single-family detached, single-family
attached, or duplex residential uses shall not exceed the larger of 720
square feet, or 25% of the building coverage of the main residential
structure.  A detached garage may exceed these maximums subject to approval
of a Special Use Permit.



      3.   Height of Accessory Buildings.  In residential
districts, the maximum height shall be 16 feet for any accessory building. 
Maximum height for a detached garage and/or other accessory building in an AG
or RR District shall be 20 feet.



      4.   Architectural Requirements for Detached Garages.



         A.   Exterior building materials and architectural
designs used for detached garages for single-family detached, single-family
attached or duplex residential structures shall be comparable to, or similar
to, or architecturally harmonious with, the existing main residential
structure.



         B.   Exterior materials shall be non-reflective and
shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable to existing residential
structures in the immediate area.  Permanent siding shall be, or simulate,
wood, wood shingles, brick, masonry, or tile.  The roof shall be pitched
with a minimum vertical rise of 3 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal
run.  Roof construction shall be of non-reflective materials which either
are or simulate the appearance of asphalt, wood shingles, tile, or rock.



      5.   Other Requirements for Accessory Buildings:  Physical
Separation, Effects on Other Properties, Hazards, and Sequencing of
Construction.



         A.   Separation from Other Buildings.  No accessory
building shall be placed within five feet of any other building on its own
property.



         B.   Attached Accessory Buildings.  Any accessory
building physically attached to the principal building shall be considered
part of the principal building and subject to the development regulations of
its zoning district, except as modified in this section.



         C.   Effect on Adjacent Properties.  If an adjacent lot
is built upon, the accessory building must be entirely to the rear of the
line of any principal building on such adjacent lot.



         D.   Hazards.  Any accessory use that creates a
potential fire hazard shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any
residential structure.  Such uses include but are not limited to detached
fireplaces, barbecue ovens, or storage of flammable materials.



         E.   No accessory building shall be built upon any lot
until construction of the principal residence has begun.



(Ord. 1496 - May 19 Supp.)



170.06    HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.



   These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning
district in certain situations.



      1.   Vertical Projections.



         A.   Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical
equipment, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic
receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not exceeding 25
percent of total roof area, flag poles, stage towers or scenery lofts, and
water towers may be built to any height in accordance with existing and
future ordinances.



         B.   Any such equipment or vertical projections attached
to a building and exceeding the height limit shall be screened to prevent
visibility from public right-of-way or adjacent property using materials or
design features that are consistent with the overall design of the main
building. 



         C.   No such projection may be built which in the event
of failure could constitute a hazard or fall onto either public right-of-way
or property, or another private property



      2    Civic Buildings.  Buildings housing civic use types may
be built to a maximum height of 60 feet.  Such buildings located in
residential districts shall be set back one foot in addition to required
setbacks from each property line for each foot of height over the maximum
height of the zoning district.



      3.   Special Use Permit Approvals.  The City Council,
following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may grant an
exception from the height limit for a zoning district for a Special Use as
part of its approval of that use.  The limit or extent of this exception
shall be a specific part of the Special Use Permit.



      4.   Coverage and Landscaping Requirements.  Individual lots
in an innovative development are exempt from maximum building and impervious
coverage limitations and street yard landscaping requirements established for
the zoning district.  However, the subdivision as a whole, including
streets, walks, and access ways, must comply with the building and impervious
coverage regulations for its zoning district.



170.07    FENCE REGULATIONS.



      1.   Location Restriction.



         A.   Unless otherwise provided by this ordinance or
other sections of the Denison Code of Ordinances, no fence shall be built on
any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines.



         B.   No fence shall be built by a private party on
public land without the specific prior approval of the City.  Removal of any
such fence shall be at the expense of its owner.



      2.   Applicability.  The regulations contained in this
section apply to all fences with a height above grade of 30 inches and over.



      3.   Sight Obstruction at Street Intersections.  No fence or
hedge permitted or required by this section or other sections of the Denison
Code of Ordinances shall be built to a height of more than two feet above the
established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance zone.



      4.   Facing.  The finished surfaces of any fence shall face
toward adjacent properties and street frontage.



      5.   Effect on Adjacent Properties and Drainage.  Fences
shall be erected and maintained so as to avoid limiting or obstructing the
flow of water in natural drainage courses, or drainage ways created within
easements.



      6.   Fence Construction on Utility Easements.  Any fence
erected on a tract of land subject to an easement for the construction,
maintenance, operations, or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm
sewer, gas line, electric power, telephone, or other utility poles, or other
cables or lines shall be designed and constructed to be readily removable to
permit the use of the easement.  Such fences shall be subject to removal by
request whenever necessary to permit access.  The cost of removal or
replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the fence.



      7.   Residential Fences.  Fences constructed within
residential districts or on land used for residential purposes are subject to
the following provisions.



         A.   Height.  The maximum height of a fence shall be 72
inches.  This height limit does not apply to supports, posts, or attached
ornaments. The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard
shall be six feet. The maximum height of a fence in a front yard shall be
four (4) feet.



         B.   Setbacks.  All residential fences in front yards
shall be a minimum of two feet behind adjacent sidewalks.



         C.   Materials.  Fences shall be constructed of wood,
PVC / resin, stone or masonry materials, or ornamental metals only.
Notwithstanding the preceding, chain-link fences shall be permitted in rear
yards, side yards, and street side yards, but shall not be erected or
constructed in front yards. Wood fences shall utilize standard building
lumber only. Barbed wire and/or electrified fences are not permitted, and are
defined as any fence that includes in its material barbs, blades, razors,
electric current or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade
an individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence. Wire mesh fences
may be permitted to enclose tennis courts and game and recreation areas on
public land and residential lots.



         D.   No fence shall be erected on a lot unless the lot
owner receives a building permit to erect the fence. Prior to the issuance of
a building permit to erect the fence, the applicant shall pay to the City
Clerk a fee in the amount provided by the Denison Schedule of Civil Penalties
and Fees in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. No building permit shall
be issued unless the application satisfies, in addition to all other
requirements of the city code, one of the following requirements:



            (1)   Contains the written consent of the lot
owners owning property adjacent to the area where the applicant proposes to
erect the fence; or,



            (2)   Attaches a copy of a land survey conducted
by a certified land surveyor which surveys the area where the applicant
proposes to erect the fence.



(Ord. 1495 - May 19 Supp.)



      8.   Civic, Office, Commercial, and Industrial Fences. 
Fences constructed in commercial and industrial districts are subject to the
following special provisions:



         A.   The maximum height of a fence for any permitted use
in any non-residential zoning district shall be eight feet.



         B.   Civic Uses in Residential Districts.  The maximum
height of fences installed as part of primary and secondary educational
facilities, day care, and park and recreation use types, or any other use
that provides secured outdoor space for the use of children within
residential zoning districts shall be eight feet.



         C.   The Board of Adjustments may approve greater fence
heights on a case-by-case basis if it concludes that such permission furthers
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City.



         D.   Barbed wire shall not be used in the construction
of any fence outside of the I-2 General Industrial Zoning District.  Barbed
wire may be used in the construction of fencing in an industrial district
provided that the bottom strand of the barbed wire shall be at least six feet
above ground level.  Electrified fences are not permitted within the
jurisdiction of the City.



170.08    APPEALS.



   Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the
provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, as set
forth in Section 174.09.



(Chapter 170 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 171
ZONING AND PROPERTY
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS



 

171.01  Purpose
 
171.06  Screening Standards


171.02  Applicability
 
171.07  Parking Lot Landscaping


171.03  Landscaping Requirements
 
171.08  Tree Plantings


171.04  Landscaping Materials and Installation Standards
 
171.09  General Provisions


171.05  Bufferyard Provisions
 



 



171.01    PURPOSE.



   The Landscaping and Screening Regulations provide additional guidance
on the development of sites within Denison by addressing landscaping and
screening requirements.  They are designed to improve the appearance of the
community, buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another and
conserve the value of properties within the City and its extra-territorial
jurisdiction.  The landscape and screening provisions are further intended
to expedite development approval by including predictable, uniform standards
for landscaping.



171.02    APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new development on
each lot or site upon application for a building permit, except for the
following:



      1.   Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use
or structure following a casualty loss.



      2.   Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing
uses or structures which do not substantially change the location of
structures, parking, or other site improvements.



      3.   Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures
which increase floor area or impervious coverage area by less than 20 percent
of the building established on the site on the effective date of this
ordinance.  Where such cumulative additions or enlargements are 20 percent
or greater, these provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new
development occurs.



171.03    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and
shall extend to a minimum depth inward on private property as set forth in
the development regulations and summarized in Table 171.1.



171.04    LANDSCAPING MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS.



      1.   Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant
Materials.  Plantings shall be used in required landscaped areas or
bufferyards consistent with the Official List of Recommended and Prohibited
Plant Materials, provided through the office of the Zoning Administrator. 
All plant materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this
section.



      2.   Use of Inorganic Landscaping Materials.  No artificial
trees, shrubs, plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum
requirements for landscaping.  Inorganic materials, such as stone or
decorative pavers, may be used provided that such material does not comprise
more than 35% of the minimum required landscaped area.  Other concrete
and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum required
landscaped area, except for driveways and walkways.




Table 171.1 - Required Landscape Depth Adjacent of Street Property Lines




 



COLUMN 1
Zoning District
 
COLUMN 2
Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Property Lines


AG
 
35 feet


RR
 
25 feet


R1-50,60,70
 
20 feet


R-2
 
20 feet


R-3
 
15 feet


R-4
 
15 feet


R-5
 
30 feet


C-1
 
10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet deep.


C-2
 
10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet deep.


CBD
 
No Requirement


BP
 
25 feet


I-1
 
10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet deep.


I-2
 
No Requirement




 



171.05    BUFFERYARD PROVISIONS.



   These provisions apply when a use is established in a more intensive
zoning district (District A) that is adjacent to a less intensive zoning
district (District B).  The owner, developer, or operator of the use within
District A shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot
or site, as set forth in this section.  Bufferyard requirements apply only
to those districts indicated in Table 171.2.  Bufferyards are not required
of single-family, 2-family, duplex, or townhouse use types in the more
intensive zoning district.



      1.   The bufferyard dimensions set forth in Table 171.2 apply
to zoning districts which share a common lot line or are adjacent but
separated by an intervening alley.




Table 171.2 - Bufferyard Requirements (in feet)




 

 
District B (Less Intensive Adjacent District)
 
 




District A
(More Intensive District)Note 2
 
AG, RR
(Note 1)
 
R-1, R-2, R-3
(Note 1)
 
R-4
(Note 1)


R-4
 
20
 
20
 
---


CBD
 
---
 
---
 
---


C-1
 
15
 
20
 
20


C-2, BP
 
25
 
25
 
20


I-1
 
40
 
40
 
30


I-2
 
100
 
100
 
100




 



   Note 1:  Applies only to residential uses or preliminary plats
previously established in the zoning district.



   Note 2:  Buffer requirements do not apply to single-family, duplex, or
townhouse residential uses established in District A.



      2.   When a street separates adjacent zoning districts
requiring a bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall be one-half the
required bufferyard set forth in Table 171.2.



      3.   Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped and
free of paved areas, access ways, storage, or other disturbances.



171.06    SCREENING STANDARDS.



      1.   Application.  Screening is required between adjacent
zoning districts indicated in Table 171.2 when one or more of the following
conditions in the more intensive zoning district is directly visible from and
faces toward the boundary of the less intensive zoning district:



         A.   Outdoor storage areas or storage tanks, unless
otherwise screened.



         B.   Loading docks, refuse collection points, and other
service areas.



         C.   Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing
process.



         D.   Major on-site traffic circulation areas or truck
and/or trailer parking.



         E.   Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental
effects.



         F.   Bailing or stockpiling of cardboard or other
shipping or packaging materials.



         G.   Surface parking lots with 150 or more stalls
directly adjacent to less intensive districts.



      2.   Opaque Barrier.  A six-foot opaque barrier shall be
provided which visually screens the conditions listed in subsection 1 of this
section from less intensive uses as follows:



         A.   A solid wood, PVC, and/or masonry fence or wall at
least six feet in height.



         B.   A landscaping screen, using evergreen or deciduous
materials, capable of providing a substantially opaque, hedge-like barrier
and attaining a minimum height of six feet within three years of planting.



         C.   A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of
three to one, rising no less than six feet above the existing grade of the
lot line separating the zoning districts.



         D.   Any combination of these methods that achieves a
cumulative height of six feet.



      3.   Screening Effect on Drainage.  Screening shall not
adversely affect surface water drainage.



      4.   Permitted Interruptions of Screening.  Screening may be
interrupted to provide access drives to service areas or for loading purposes
to buildings.  Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed 20% of the
length of the required screened area.



171.07    PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.



      1.   Landscape and Screening Requirements.  Unless otherwise
noted, each unenclosed parking facility with a paved surface of 6,000 square
feet or more shall comply with the following regulations:



         A.   Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a
minimum landscaped buffer of ten feet along any street property line.



         B.   Each parking facility that abuts a residential
district shall provide a ten-foot landscaped buffer along its common property
line with the residential district.



         C.   Any parking facility which abuts property in a
residential district shall provide a fence, wall, landscape screen, or earth
berm not less than four feet in height for the length of the common
boundary.  A grade change, terrace, or other site feature which blocks the
sight line of headlights into a residential property may satisfy this
requirement, subject to the determination of the Zoning Administrator.



         D.   Each unenclosed parking facility of over 6,000
square feet within any street yard shall provide interior landscaped area
equal to no less than 5 percent of the total paved area of the parking
facility.  Parking facilities within the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be
exempt from this requirement.



         E.   Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the
satisfaction of overall landscaping requirements set forth in this section.



         F.   Landscaping or screening installed in any required
landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from the off-street parking
facility to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk.  Landscaping
shall further not obstruct any views among parking spaces and circulation
ways, or visibility between vehicles and pedestrians.



171.08    TREE PLANTINGS.



      1.   In any landscaped area for commercial uses only required
by the minimum depth requirements, the bufferyard requirements, or the
parking lot interior landscaping requirements, one tree of an approved
species with a minimum caliper size of two inches shall be planted and
maintained for each 500 square feet of required landscaped area.  Existing
trees approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this
requirement.



      2.   Any tree of an approved species planted or maintained
with a caliper of three inches or above shall count as 1.5 trees toward the
satisfaction of the requirements of this section.  An approved existing tree
with a caliper of eight inches or above preserved on a site shall count as
2.00 trees toward the satisfaction of the requirements of this section.



171.09    GENERAL PROVISIONS.



      1.   Time of Application.  The provisions contained in this
chapter shall be applied for each individual lot or site when an application
for a building permit on such lot is made.  A landscape plan, prepared by a
qualified nurseryman or landscape architect shall be submitted with each
application for a building permit.  Such plan shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



      2.   Maintenance of Required Landscaping.



         A.   Upon installation of required landscape materials,
each owner shall take appropriate actions to ensure their continued health
and maintenance.  Required landscaping that does not remain healthy shall be
replaced consistent with this chapter and the approved landscaping plan for
the project.



         B.   Underground irrigation shall be provided for all
required landscaped areas in multi-family, commercial, or office developments.



      3.   Obstruction of View.  Landscaping or screening installed
in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway
approach, street, alley, or sidewalk, and shall be consistent with the
provisions of the City’s Vision Clearance Zone regulations. 



      4.   Earth Berm Locations.  All earth berm locations shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to determine how the berms shall relate
to drainage and public utilities.



      5.   Exceptions.  A development may continue to comply with
the bufferyard and screening requirements in effect at the time of issuance
of its original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is
subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district which would otherwise
require compliance with bufferyard or screening provisions.



(Chapter 171 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 172
ZONING AND PROPERTY
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



 

172.01  Purpose
 
172.05  Parking for People With Disabilities


172.02  General Applications
 
172.06  Off-Street Parking Design Standards


172.03  Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
 
172.07  Off-Street Loading


172.04  Residential Front Lot Parking
 
172.08  Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Services



 



172.01    PURPOSE.



   The Off-Street Parking Regulations require that developments provide
parking in proportion to the need created by each use.  The regulations
further establish standards for the functional design of parking
facilities.  These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a
functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on
neighboring properties.



172.02    GENERAL APPLICATIONS.



      1.   Applicability.  Off-street parking shall be provided for
any new building constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing
buildings; or for enlargements of existing structures.



      2.   Exemptions.  Any use within the CBD Downtown Denison
District is exempt from the off-street parking requirements.  Any off-street
parking facility constructed in the CBD District after the effective date of
this ordinance must comply with the design standards set forth in this
chapter.



172.03    SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accord with the
minimum requirements set forth in Table 172.1.



      1.   Computation.



         A.   When a computation of required parking results in a
fraction of 0.5 or greater, the requirement shall be rounded up to the next
whole number.  Any parking computation for any use other than single-family
residential and requiring such a calculation shall have a minimum requirement
of three parking stalls



         B.   Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements
are based on gross floor area. 



         C.   When parking requirements are computed on the basis
of capacity, capacity shall be determined by the building code or other
official determinations of occupancy in effect for the City at the time the
use is established.



         D.   Tandem parking spaces shall not be permitted except
for single-family residences, mobile homes, or parking facilities when an
attendant is on duty during the hours when the facility is being used.




Table 172.1 - Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements




 



Agricultural Use Types
 


Horticulture
 
1 space per 1,000 square feet of sales area.


Crop/Animal Production
 
No requirement.


Residential Use Types
 


Single-Family Residential
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Duplex Residential
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Multi-Family Residential
 
1.5 spaces per efficiency or 1-BR unit; 2 spaces per 2-BR unit; 2.5 spaces
for 3 or more BR unit


Downtown Residential
 
No requirement


Group Residential or Boarding House
 
1 space for each resident.


Mobile Home Residential
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit.


Retirement Residence
 
1.5 space per independent living unit; 0.5 spaces per assisted living unit;


Civic Use Types
 


Administration
 
1 space for 300 square feet of gross floor area.


Cemetery
 
No requirement.


Clubs
 
1 space per 4-person capacity in largest assembly area.


College/University
 
1 space per three full-time students.


Convalescent Services
 
1 space for 4 beds.


Cultural Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.


Day Care Services
 
1 space per 5 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.


Group Care Facility
 
1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.


Group Home
 
1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.


Guidance Services
 
1 space per 300 square feet.


Health Care
 
1 space per 300 square feet + 1 space per employee of largest shift.


Hospitals
 
1 space per 2 beds + 1 space per employee of the largest shift.


Maintenance Facilities
 
See Schedule A.


Parks and Recreation
 
Established by an approved site master plan.


Postal Facilities
 
See Schedule A.


Primary Education
 
1 space per employee of largest shift + 10 stalls for visitors.


Public Assembly
 
1 space per 4 person capacity.


Religious Assembly
 
1 space per 4 person capacity in largest assembly area.


Safety Services
 
1 space per employee of maximum shift + 1 stall per 1,000 sq. ft.


Secondary Education
 
1 space per employee of max shift + 1 space for each 3 11th and 12th grade
students.


Utilities
 
1 space per employee of maximum shift




 




Table 172.1 - Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements




 



Commercial Use Types
 


Agricultural Sales/Service
 
See Schedule A.


Auto and Equipment Rental and Sales, Equipment Repair
 
See Schedule A.


Auto Service *
 
4 times service capacity.


Bed and Breakfast
 
1 space per rentable bedroom (see Section 28.5 d.)


Body Repair *
 
5 spaces per repair stall.


Business Support Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Campground
 
1 space per camping unit.


Cocktail Lounge
 
1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area.


Commercial Recreation
 
1 space per 4 person capacity.  For bowling alleys, 4 spaces per lane.


Communication Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Construction Sales
 
See Schedule A.


Consumer Services
 
1 space per 200 square feet.


Convenience Storage
 
1 space per 20 storage units.


Equipment Sales/Service
 
See Schedule A.


Food Sales (All Types)
 
1 space per 200 square feet.


Funeral Service
 
1 space per 5 seats in principal auditorium.


General Retail Services
 
1 space per 200 square feet.


Liquor Sales
 
1 space per 200 square feet.


Lodging, Bed and Breakfast
 
1 space per unit.


Personal Improvement
 
1 space per 200 square feet.


Personal Services
 
1 space per 250 square feet.


Pet Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Restaurants (Drive-in)
 
1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area.


Restaurants (General)
 
1 space per 3 person capacity in dining area.


Stables/Kennels
 
1 space per employee + 1 stall per 5,000 sq. ft. of site area.


Surplus Sales
 
See Schedule A.


Trade Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Travel Centers
 
1 space per 200 square feet in building + 1 space for each fueling station


Veterinary Services
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Truck Stop
 
1 space per 200 square feet in building + 1 space for each fueling station




 



* Auto Service and Body Repair subject to other restrictions applicable under
this ordinance.




Table 172.1 - Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements




 



Office Use Types
 


Corporate Offices
 
1 space per 250 square feet.


General Offices
 
1 space per 250 square feet.


Financial Services
 
1 space per 250 square feet.


Medical Offices
 
Greater of 1 space per 250 square feet, or 5 spaces per staff doctor or
dentist on duty.


Miscellaneous Use Types
 


Broadcasting Tower
 
See Schedule A.


Non-Putrescible Landfill
 
See Schedule A.


All Landfills
 
See Schedule A.


Industrial Use Types
 


Agricultural Industries
 
See Schedule A.


Light Industry
 
See Schedule A.


General Industry
 
See Schedule A.


Heavy Industry
 
See Schedule A.


Railroad Facilities
 
See Schedule A.


Resource Extraction
 
1 space per employee on largest shift.


Salvage Services
 
See Schedule A.


Construction Yards
 
See Schedule A.


Warehousing
 
See Schedule A.




 



 



Schedule A
 


This schedule sets forth minimum off-street parking requirements for uses
with elements that have different functions and operating characteristics


Function of Element
 
Requirement


Office or Administration
 
1 space per 300 square feet.


Indoor Sales, Display or Service Area
 
1 space per 500 square feet.


Outdoor Sales, Display or Service Area
 
1 space per 2,000 square feet.


Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing
 
1 space per 1,000 square feet.


Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing
 
1 space per 5,000 square feet.




 



172.04    RESIDENTIAL FRONT LOT PARKING.



      1.   Front Yard Parking.  Parking in front yards shall be
subject to the following:



         A.   Parking is prohibited within the setback between
the street and the residence except on a single drive constructed in
accordance with the requirements of subsection E below.



         B.   In cases where the side or rear setback area is
accessible via an alley, no front yard driveway shall be permitted other than
leading directly to a garage.  If the side or rear setback area is
accessible via an alley, the required parking area shall directly access the
alley.



         C.   (Repealed by Ord. 1379 - Nov. 10 Supp.)



         D.   On corner lots, driveways shall be located as far
as possible from the intersection, but in any event not closer than 50 feet
from the back of curb or 25 feet from the property line, whichever is more
restrictive.



         E.   Surface.



            (1)   All parking spaces shall be constructed of a
dustless, hard surface of concrete, asphalt, or comparable material.



            (2)   Stone, rock, dirt, sand, or grass shall not
be permitted as surfacing for parking spaces.



            (3)   All driveway aprons adjacent to a street
constructed after November 7, 2008, shall be surfaced with concrete.  All
existing driveway aprons enlarged or modified after that date shall be
surfaced with asphalt or concrete.



         F.   Maximum Grade.  No driveway providing access to
off-street parking shall have a grade greater than 10 percent within the
public right of way.



         G.   Occupancy.  All required parking areas must be
completed prior to occupancy of any newly constructed structure.



         H.   Calculations of Amounts of Required and Allowed
Parking.



            (1)   Required parking spaces are not allowed
within the first 20 feet of the front lot line or side street lot line.



            (2)   In all R-1 zones, no parking shall be
permitted in the area in front of the principal structure bounded on the left
by the a line originating from the left corner of the inhabited portion of
the principal structure and proceeding parallel to the principal structure to
the front lot line and on the right by a line originating from the right
corner of the inhabited portion of the principal structure and proceeding
parallel to the principal structure to the front lot line.  Provided,
however, every lot shall be permitted a parking space accommodating two
vehicles not to exceed a total of 400 square feet.



            (3)   These restrictions shall not apply to
schools, parks, churches or other nonresidential properties owned by
government subdivisions located in R-1 zones.



            (4)   Temporary Parking.



               a.   Contractor and other commercial
vehicles may be temporarily parked on a non-paved surface provided that the
vehicle is being used in connection with construction, maintenance or similar
work at the residence.



               b.   Temporary parking cannot exceed 24
hours.



      2.   Sidewalks.  No vehicle shall be parked so as to encroach
on or block a sidewalk.



      3.   Non-residential Parking.  Off-street parking for
non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use, or
within 300 feet of that use if the parking site is within a zoning district
that permits the off-street parking use type.  Control of ownership or use
rights to the remote off-street parking must be demonstrated as a condition
of permission.



172.05    PARKING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.



      1.   Each off-street parking facility shall provide the number
of parking spaces set forth in Table 172.2, designed and designated for use
by people with disabilities.  Every eighth parking space shall be
van-accessible.  Design criteria and dimensions shall be in accordance with
Federal Register, Volume 56, No 144.  Parking facilities for single-family,
duplex, two-family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt from this
requirement.



      2.   Spaces designated for people with disabilities shall have
a minimum width of 12 feet.  Each handicapped space shall provide a barrier
free route to an accessible building entrance, which shall not require users
to walk or wheel behind parked cars.  Such spaces shall be designated with
an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by the
handicapped.  All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with the
standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act.



   Table 172.2 - Accessible Parking Requirements



 

Number of Stalls
 
Number of  Required Accessible Spaces
 
Number of Stalls
 
Number of  Required Accessible Spaces


1-25 
 
1
 
201-300
 
7


26-50 
 
2
 
301-400
 
8


51-75
 
3
 
401-500
 
9


76-100
 
4
 
501-1,000
 
2% of total


101-150
 
5
 
1,001 and over
 
20, plus 1 for each 100 stalls over 1,000


151-200
 
6
 
 



 



172.06    OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS.



      1.   Dimensions.



         A.   Standard parking stalls shall be 9 feet wide and 18
feet long.



         B.   Where parking stalls are located adjacent to
landscaped areas, the paved depth of such stalls may be decreased by two feet
to provide for a vehicle overhang area.  The vehicle overhang area may not
encroach into a required landscaped area or public sidewalk or right-of-way.









 



      2.   Pavement and Drainage.



         A.   All off-street parking facilities, including
approaches and maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt,
asphaltic concrete, or brick and shall be maintained with materials
sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material except as provided below:



            (1)   Sites within the AG and RR Districts are
exempt from this requirement.



            (2)   In residential areas, all parking spaces and
driveways used for parking shall be paved, including driveways that lead to
paved parking spaces.



         B.   Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and
built to prevent the free flow of water onto adjacent properties.  Parking
lot design which discharges water onto public right-of-way is subject to
review and approval by the City Engineer.



      3.   Landscape and Screening Requirements.  Landscape
requirements for off-street parking facilities are set forth in Section
171.07.



      4.   Entrances and Exits.



         A.   Adequate access to each parking facility shall be
provided by means of clearly defined and limited driveways or access
points.  Such driveways shall be designed to direct non-residential traffic
away from residential areas.



         B.   Parking facilities other than driveways for
single-family, duplex, two-family, or mobile home residential uses must
permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward position.



      5.   Design and Pedestrian Access.



         A.   Parking lots providing over 200 stalls should be
divided into smaller parking fields not exceeding 100 stalls to reduce the
visual impact of large parking expanses.  Divisions should be made with
landscape strips, peninsulas, or grade changes.



         B.   Commercial or office parking lots shall be designed
to separate pedestrians from vehicles to the maximum degree possible and to
provide protected pedestrian paths within parking areas which lead to store,
building, or shopping center entrances.



         C.   Sidewalks and walkways in commercial developments
should link to the City’s sidewalk and trail system where available, and
shall provide a safe pedestrian route from adjacent public sidewalks and
trails.



      6.   Safety Features.



         A.   Parking facilities shall be designed to provide
visibility of and between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or
entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or
hazardous areas.



         B.   Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord
with accepted standards of traffic engineering and safety.



      7.   Maintenance.  All parking facilities shall be maintained
to assure the continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. 
Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris,
and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing
proper care of landscaped areas.



      8.   Adjustment for Special Uses and Planned Mixed Use
Projects.



         A.   For uses subject to a Special Use Permit approval,
the Planning Commission may adjust the minimum requirements of this chapter,
in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to
adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the minimum requirements
of this chapter.



         B.   In mixed-use projects, different uses may have
complementary parking requirements.  This can result in a parking
requirement that is less than the sum of parking required for each use and
added separately. The Planning Commission may authorize an adjustment to the
total parking requirement for separate uses located as part of a common
development, or for separate uses located on adjacent sites and served by
common parking facilities.  All parking facilities subject to the mixed-use
adjustment must be located in a common facility, equally accessible and
usable to all served uses.



172.07    OFF-STREET LOADING.



      1.   Loading Requirement.  In any district with every
building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten
thousand square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing,
storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market,
hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly
requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at
least one off-street loading space plus one additional such loading space for
each twenty thousand square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor
area, so used, in excess of ten thousand square feet.



      2.   Design Standards.



         A.   Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide
by 40 feet long, with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.



         B.   Paving of loading spaces and access areas shall be
permanent, durable, and free of dust.



         C.   Off-street loading areas are subject to the
landscaping and buffering requirements for parking facilities set forth in
this chapter.



172.08    STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICES.



      1.   Commercial establishments providing drive-in or
drive-through services shall provide minimum on-site stacking distance as
provided by Table 172.3.



   Table 172.3 - Off-Street Stacking Requirements



 

Type of Operation
 
Minimum Stacking Space




Financial Services with Drive-Up Tellers
 
4 vehicles per window or kiosk


Financial Services with Drive-Up ATM
 
3 vehicles per ATM station


Self-service or automatic car wash
 
Entrance: 4 vehicles per bayExit: 1 vehicle per bay


Fast food restaurant*
 
Without menu boards: 3 vehicles in front of service windowsWith separate menu
boards and service windows: 4 vehicles behind the menu board plus 4 behind
the first service windows.


Photo processing, dry cleaning, or other drive-up personal services
 
2 vehicles per service window


Gas stations
 
2 vehicles per gas dispenser pump


Gated parking lot, community entrance, or overhead door
 
1 vehicle per gate or door on local streets.2 vehicles per gate or door on
collector streets.




 



   Note:  Minimum vehicle lane shall be 12 feet.  Vehicle length = 20
feet.



   * May be increased based on Site Plan review.



      2.   All drive-through services must provide adequate
alternative runaround access for vehicles not in a drive-through queue.



(Chapter 172 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 173
ZONING AND PROPERTY
SIGN REGULATIONS



 



173.01  Purpose
 
173.08  Method of Measurement for Regulators


173.02  Definition of Terms
 
173.09  Maximum Permitted Sign Area


173.03  General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations
 
173.10  Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts


173.04  Basic Design Elements for Signs
 
173.11  Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions and


173.05  Other Design Elements
 
Location


173.06  Compliance and Amortization of Nonconforming
 
173.12  Auxiliary Design Elements


Signs
 
173.13  Sign Master Plan for Large Projects


173.07  General Permit Procedures
 




 



173.01    PURPOSE.



   The Sign Regulations provide standards for communicating information in
the environment of the City of Denison and its jurisdiction.  The
regulations recognize the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare;
to maintain the city's attractive appearance; to provide for adequate
business identification, advertising, and communication of information; and
to encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations.  The approach taken
by the Denison sign regulations is to establish an overall maximum square
footage for all signage on a premise.  These maximum signage square footages
are established in Table 173.1 for all zoning districts.  The types of signs
permitted in each zoning district are identified in Table 173.2.  The number
of separate signs, their individual maximum sizes, and setback requirements
are established for each zoning district in Table 173.3.  Finally,
regulations governing auxiliary sign design elements, such as lighting, are
established in Table 173.4.



173.02    DEFINITION OF TERMS.



   The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this
chapter that are not otherwise defined in the Denison Code of Ordinances or
in this Zoning Ordinance.



      1.   Abandoned Sign:  A sign, including sign face and
supporting structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession,
commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or
which contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six
months.



      2.   Attached Sign:  A sign that is structurally connected to
a building or depends upon that building for support.



      3.   Auxiliary Design Elements:  Terms that describe
secondary characteristics of a sign, including its method of illumination and
other features within the bounds of its basic shape.



      4.   Awning and Awning Sign:  A temporary or movable shelter
supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of
non-rigid materials, except for a supporting framework.  An awning sign is a
message printed on such a shelter.



      5.   Banner:  Material with a printed message or graphic
secured or mounted from a structure in such a way as to allow wind movement.



      6.   Building Marker:  An historic or commemorative plaque,
or a building name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface.



      7.   Business Center Identification Sign:  A sign that
identifies a building or group of commercial buildings in single ownership or
control, sharing parking and access.



      8.   Canopy (or arcade) Sign:  A sign that is attached or
made an integral part of a canopy.



      9.   Clearance:  The distance from the bottom of a sign face
elevated above grade and the grade below.



      10.   Detached Sign:  A sign that is self-supporting and
structurally independent from any building.



      11.   Directional Sign:  A sign that serves only to designate
the location or direction of any area or place.



      12.   Double-Faced Sign:  A sign consisting of no more than
two parallel or near parallel faces supported by a single structure.  The
angle created by the two faces of a double-faced sign shall not exceed 15
degrees.



      13.   Electronic Information Signs: Signs which use an array
of electrically illuminated lights, generally controlled by a computer or
other electronic programming device, to display information or supporting
graphics.  Information may include news, events, or information about
businesses or attractions.  Signs whose information is limited to time and
temperature are not considered electronic information signs.



      14.   Flag Sign:  Signs that are emblazoned on a flag and are
intended to be displayed in a free-flowing manner.  Flags of the United
States, the State of Iowa, and any institution in the Iowa university system
shall not be considered flag signs for the purpose of this chapter.



      15.   Flashing Sign:  A sign that has a lighting source or
lighting element that periodically illuminates or is not maintained
stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when the sign
is in use, usually in a manner as to draw the attention of the viewer.  This
definition specifically excludes electronic information signs.



      16.   Frontage:  The length of a property line of any one
premises abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court.



      17.   Ground Sign:  A detached on-premise sign built on a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than 3 feet.



      18.   Illumination:  Lighting sources installed for the
primary purpose of lighting a specific sign or group of signs.



      19.   Marquee:  A permanent roofed structure attached to and
supported by a building and extending over public right-of-way.









 



      20.   Maximum Permitted Sign Area:  The maximum permitted
combined area of all signs allowed on a specific property.



      21.   Monument Sign:  An on-premise freestanding sign with
the appearance of a solid base.



      22.   Moving Sign:  A sign that conveys its message through
rotating, changing, or animated elements.



      23.   Nonconforming Sign:  A sign that was legally erected
prior to the adoption of this chapter but which violates the regulations of
this chapter.



      24.   Obsolete Signs:  Signs that identify a business or
occupant that is no longer in operation at the premises.



      25.   Outdoor Advertising Signs (Billboards):  A panel for
the display of information relating to a business, product, event, or other
subject of advertising or publicity.  Outdoor advertising signs may
advertise on-premise or off-premise businesses or products, but are not
included in the definition of premise identification signs.  New outdoor
advertising signs are not permitted within the city limits of the City of
Denison.



      26.   Pole Sign:  An on-premise sign built on a freestanding
frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance greater than 3 feet.



      27.   Portable Sign:  Any sign supported by frames or posts
rigidly attached to bases not permanently attached to the ground or a
building and capable of being moved from place to place.



      28.   Premise Identification Sign:  A sign which pertains to
the use of a premises and which contains information about the owner or
operator of that use; the type of business being conducted or the principal
brand name of a commodity sold on the premises; and other information
relative to the conduct of the use.



      29.   Premises:  A tract of one or more lots or sites that
are contiguous and under common ownership or control.



      30.   Projecting Signs:  A sign other than a wall sign that
is attached to and projects from a building face.



      31.   Residential Sign:  A small detached or attached sign
located on a residential premise, conveying a message communicated by the
owner of the property.









 



      32.   Roof Sign:  Any sign or part of sign erected upon,
against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or
cornice of a building.



         A.   Integral Roof Sign:  A roof sign positioned
between an eave line and the peak or highest point on a roof, substantially
parallel to the face of a building.



         B.   Above-peak Roof Sign:  A roof sign positioned
above the peak of a roof or above a parapet or cornice.



      33.   Sign:  A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building,
vehicle, structure, or parcel of land which is intended to convey information
about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate,
or political idea.



      34.   Sign Type:  A functional description of the use of an
individual sign.  Includes owner identification, advertising, directional,
electronic message, and temporary.



      35.   Street Facade:  Any separate external face of a
building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, oriented to and
facing a public street, private way, or court.  Separate faces oriented in
the same direction or within 45 degrees of one another are considered part of
the same street facade.



      36.   Temporary Signs: Any sign designed or fabricated of
materials that advertise or communicate messages that change frequently or
that become outdated; are made of materials of relatively low durability; are
intended to be removed or replaced within a period of six months or less; or
are portable.  Temporary signs generally fall into two categories: temporary
civic signs and temporary commercial signs.



      37.   Wall Sign:  A sign attached to and parallel with the
side of a building.



      38.   Window Sign:  A sign painted on or installed inside a
window for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises.



      39.   Zone Lot:  A parcel of land in single ownership that is
large enough to meet the minimum zoning requirements of its zoning district
and can provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by the
site development regulations.



173.03    GENERAL SIGN AND STREET GRAPHICS REGULATIONS.



      1.   Compliance.  Each sign or part of a sign erected within
the zoning jurisdiction of the City must comply with the provisions of this
chapter, other relevant provisions of the City of Denison's Code of
Ordinances, and applicable building codes.



      2.   Resolution of Conflicting Regulations.  This chapter is
not meant to repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the
City of Denison's Code of Ordinances.  In cases of conflicts between Code
sections, State or Federal Regulations, the more restrictive regulations
shall apply.



      3.   Prohibited Signs.  The following signs are prohibited in
all zoning districts.



         A.   Obsolete Signs.  Signs that advertise an activity,
business, product or service no longer conducted on the premises on which the
sign is located.



         B.   Signs or sign structures which resemble, imitate,
simulate, or conflict with traffic control signs or devices included in the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which otherwise mislead or confuse
persons traveling on public streets, which create a traffic hazard, or which
violate any of the provisions of any other applicable State statutes.



         C.   Banners, balloons, posters.  Signs which contain
or consist of banners, balloons, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, or other similarly moving devices, except as specifically provided
in this chapter.  These devices when not part of any sign shall also be
prohibited.



         D.   Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing
the clear view of pedestrians or vehicles, or which obscure official signs or
signals.



         E.   No signs shall be permitted in the public
right-of-way or on public property, other than governmental signs and
temporary civic signs contingent upon authorization from the Building
Official.



         F.   Flashing Signs.  No flashing, blinking, or
rotation lights shall be permitted for either permanent or temporary signs.



         G.   Moving Signs.  No sign shall be permitted any part
of which moves by any mechanical means.



         H.   Painted Wall Signs. Off-premise signs painted on
building walls unless specifically approved as an element of a Special Permit
Use.



         I.   Above-peak roof signs.



      4.   Exempt Signs.  The following signs are permitted in any
zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this chapter.



         A.   Public Signs.  Signs of a noncommercial nature and
in the public interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in
the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical
interest and other similar signs, including signs designating hospitals,
libraries, schools and other institutions or places of public interest or
concern.



         B.   Integral Signs.  Signs for churches or temples, or
names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative
tablets and other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or other
building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of
construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are
attached.



         C.   Window Signs.  Such signs that are displayed
inside of a window or within a building, provided, however, that neon window
signs shall be permitted only in those districts where neon signs are
permitted.



         D.   Works of graphic art painted or applied to building
walls that contain no advertising or business identification messages.



         E.   Residential signs under 6 square feet in size.



         F.   Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs
under 50 square feet.



         G.   Signs not visible from a public right-of-way,
private way, or court or from a property other than that on which the sign is
installed.



      5.   Temporary Signs.



         A.   Permit Required.  All temporary commercial signs
shall obtain a temporary sign permit from the City prior to any repair,
alteration, relocation, or maintenance of such a sign.



         B.   Size and Time Limitations of Temporary Signs.  The
location of both temporary civic and temporary commercial signs shall comply
with the following regulations:



            (1)   The total amount of temporary banner signage
permitted on any premise shall be the smaller of 5% of the area of all street
facades or 100 square feet.  Street facades include any building facades
visible from and oriented to public streets.



            (2)   The maximum size of detached temporary signs
or portable signs shall be 50 square feet in area.  Temporary commercial
signs shall be no smaller than 8 square feet.



            (3)   A temporary sign permit shall be in effect
for a period of 30 days on two separate occasions from the date of issuance. 



         C.   Location Requirements for Temporary Signs.



            (1)   Temporary signs shall not be attached to any
sign pole or light pole on public or private property; or public utility
poles or trees on either public or private property.



            (2)   Temporary commercial signs are prohibited in
any public right-of-way or property, including streets, sidewalks, parks, and
public facilities.



            (3)   Temporary signs shall not be located within
the vision clearance triangle defined by subsection 8 of Section  170.04.



            (4)   Temporary signs shall not interfere with any
public right-of-way, driveway or access way, or any means of access or egress
to any building.



            (5)   Any attached temporary sign shall be
attached only to vertical facades of the primary building and shall not be
attached to roofs, roof extensions, cornices, overhangs, or other building
extensions.



            (6)   Detached temporary signs cannot be placed on
public property.



         D.   Condition of Temporary Signs.



            (1)   All temporary signs shall be maintained in
sound condition.  Any sign that exhibits deterioration of structure or
materials may be removed subject to the provisions of this section.



            (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall order the
removal of any sign not in compliance with any provisions of this section. 
If the owner of the premise on which such sign is located, or the owner of
the sign if unlawfully located on public property, fails to remove such sign,
the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to remove the sign.  Any costs
of removal of a sign on private property shall be assessed to the owner of
the property.  Any such removal shall also result in the immediate
cancellation of any outstanding temporary sign permit.



      6.   Vision-Clearance Area.  No sign may project into or be
placed within a vision-clearance area defined by subsection 8 of Section
170.04.



      7.   Maintenance.  All signs shall be maintained in a good
state of repair, including, but not limited to, the structural components,
the lighting, if any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or
structure, and the surface features.



173.04    BASIC DESIGN ELEMENTS FOR SIGNS.



      1.   Wall Signs and Graphics. Wall signs and graphics are
subject to the following general regulations.



         A.   A wall sign shall not extend more than 18 inches
from the wall to which it is attached.



         B.   A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the
wall to which it is attached, except where attached to another wall sign, it
may extend to provide for the attachment.



         C.   A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's
roof line.



         D.   A wall sign in the CBD District attached to a
building on its front property line may encroach upon public right-of-way by
no more than 18 inches.  Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of
eight feet, six inches.



         E.   For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas
pursuant to this chapter, signs painted on the walls of buildings shall be
considered wall signs.



         F.   Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall
signs when calculating total permitted sign area.



      2.   Projecting Signs and Graphics.  Projecting signs and
graphics are subject to the following general regulations.



         A.   The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall
be as follows:



            (1)   3 feet over public sidewalks less than 12
feet wide;



            (2)   5 feet over public sidewalks 12 feet wide or
more, or over private property.



         B.   Within the CBD District, a projecting sign may come
within five feet from the vertical plane of the inside curb line.



         C.   Each projecting sign must maintain at least the
following vertical clearances:



            (1)   12 feet over sidewalks; except that a canopy
may reduce its vertical clearance to 7 feet, 6 inches;



            (2)   15 feet outside of parking areas or
driveways, but within three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the
right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection;



            (3)   15 feet over parking lots;



            (4)   18 feet over driveways.



         D.   No projecting sign extending three feet or more
from a property line may be located within 25 feet of any other projecting
sign extending three feet or more from a property line.



         E.   Projecting signs must minimize visible support
structure, including guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other
similar external support structure.



      3.   Pole Signs.  Pole signs, where permitted, are subject to
the following general regulations:



         A.   Each pole sign must maintain at least the following
vertical clearances:



            (1)   8 feet, 6 inches over sidewalks;



            (2)   10 feet outside of parking areas or
driveways, but within three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the
right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection.



            (3)   14 feet over parking lots;



            (4)   18 feet over driveways.



      4.   Awning Signs.  Awning signs, where permitted are subject
to the following regulations:



         A.   The copy area of an awning sign shall not exceed
25% of the total face area of the awning.  The combined area of all
front-facing awning panels shall not exceed 35% of the total wall area.



         B.   Awnings shall not extend above the eave or parapet
of the building facade and shall be a minimum of seven feet six inches above
the sidewalk or grade, whichever is higher.  Awnings shall not extend over
any area utilized by motor vehicles.



         C.   Awnings may project no more than nine feet from the
facade of the wall to which they are mounted.  Any extension beyond six feet
shall have plans stamped by a licensed architect or professional engineer,
certifying the ability of the wall and associated structures to carry all
imposed loads.



      5.   Electronic Information Signs.  Electronic information
signs, where permitted, are subject to the following regulations:



         A.   Electronic information signs shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from any right-of-way line and shall not be located within
an arc with a 75-foot radius formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines of
a corner lot or lots.



         B.   No electronic information sign shall be located
within 500 feet of another electronic information sign, measured from the
points of the two signs nearest each other.



         C.   No electronic information sign shall be programmed
in a way that suggests or resembles a traffic control device, such as a
traffic signal.



173.05    OTHER DESIGN ELEMENTS.



      1.   Illumination.  Lighting, when installed, must be
positioned in such a manner that light is not directed onto an adjoining
property or onto a public street or highway.



      2.   Marquees and Marquee Signs.  Signs placed on, attached
to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and
clearance regulations of projecting signs.



      3.   Permanent Banners. 



         A.   A banner sign projecting from a building may not
exceed the wall height of the building.



         B.   Maximum projection for any banner is five feet from
the building with a minimum clearance of ten feet.



         C.   Flag signs and banner signs count against the sign
area permitted a premise.



      4.   Clocks.  For the purposes of this chapter, clocks are
not considered a moving sign.



173.06    COMPLIANCE AND AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



      1.   Conformance Required.  Except as may be hereinafter
specified, no sign shall be erected, placed, maintained, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered which does not comply with all of the
regulations established by this chapter.



      2.   Maintenance.  All signs shall be maintained in a good
state of repair, including, but not limited to, the structural components,
the lighting, if any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or
structure, and the surface features.



      3.   Nonconformance and Amortization of Premise Identification
Signs.  Where a sign exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of the ordinance codified in this chapter that could not be built under the
terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, use, height,
setback, or other characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot,
such sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:



         A.   No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity; however, reasonable repairs and
alterations may be permitted.



         B.   Should such a sign be destroyed by any means to an
extent of fifty percent or more of its replacement cost at time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.



         C.   Within any zoning district, all premise
identification signs or other signage that pertains to the premises on which
such sign is located, shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter,
unless otherwise provided, within fifteen years after the effective date of
this chapter.  This amortization provision does not apply to outdoor
advertising signs, provided that such signs remain in continuous use.  Any
nonconforming outdoor advertising sign that remains unused for a continuous
period of 180 days shall forfeit its right to continue as a nonconforming use.



173.07    GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES.



      1.   Applicability.



         A.   A sign permit, approved by the Building Official,
shall be required before the erection, construction, alteration, placing, or
locating of all signs conforming with this chapter, except for temporary
civic signs.



         B.   A permit shall not be required for repainting
without changing permanent wording, composition, or colors; or nonstructural
repairs.



      2.   Plans Submittal.  A copy of plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the Building Official for each sign regulated by this
chapter.  Such plans shall show sufficient details about size of the sign,
location and materials to be used and such other data as may be required for
the Building Official to determine compliance with this chapter.  When
requested by the Building Official, the applicant shall furnish a
certification of the structural integrity of the sign and its installation by
a registered professional engineer with specialization in structures.



      3.   Appeals.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the
decision of the Building Official to approve or disapprove a sign permit, as
provided by this chapter, may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment
as provided by Chapter 174 of this Zoning Ordinance.



      4.   Application Fees.  Each application for a sign permit
shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be established by
the City Council from time to time by resolution.



173.08    METHOD OF MEASUREMENT FOR REGULATORS.



      1.   Sign Area.



         A.   Sign area includes the entire area within the
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure
essential for support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of
the building.



         B.   The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the
largest face only.



         C.   The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and
architectural sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme
limits of the copy only.



         D.   In the case of individual letters mounted to a
wall, only the total area of the letters themselves is included within the
sign area.



      2.   Height.  The height of a sign is measured from the
average grade level below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign
structure.



      3.   Setback.  The setback of a sign is measured from the
property line to the line projected to the ground plane of the nearest
portion of the sign.



173.09    MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA.



      1.   Each premises is permitted a maximum square footage of
overall signage.  The owner is free, subject to the sign regulations of this
chapter, to determine how to allocate their permitted total signage footage
on the premises to the various permitted sign types.  Table 173.1 sets forth
the maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of
Denison.



      2.   Maximum permitted sign area for a premises is set forth
in Table 173.1 as a numerical limit or as a function of the frontage of the
premises on a street or private way.  For properties with frontage on more
than one street or private way, the total frontage shall be calculated as the
longest frontage plus one-half the length of all additional frontages.



   Table 173.1 - Permitted Signs by Maximum Permitted Area and District



   The Maximum Permitted Area for all signs on premises excluding
directional signs, building marker signs, and US, State, or University flags
shall not exceed the lesser of the following:



 

Zoning District
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-50
R1-60
R1-70
R-2
R-3
R-4
RM
 
C-1
Note 4
 
C-2
Note 4
 
HC-1
Note 4
 
CBD
Note 4
 
BP
 
I-1
I-2


Square Feet of Signage per Linear Foot of Frontage
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
1.5
 
3.0
 
3.0
 
1.5
 
1.0
 
2.0


Maximum Total Square Feet
 
Note 1
 
Note 2
 
Note 3
 
200
 
800
Note 5
 
800
Note 5
 
400
 
400
 
800



 



   Note 1:  200 square feet for civic or commercial uses, 3 square feet
for residential uses, including home occupations.



   Note 2:  50 square feet for project identification signs or civic
uses, 3 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations.



   Note 3:  32 square feet for civic uses, 50 square feet for project
identification signs for multi-family or mobile home developments and for
non-residential uses when permitted, 3 square feet for residential uses,
including home occupations.



   Note 4:  Maximum limits apply to non-residential premises only.  On
premises with primary residential use, 50 square feet for project
identification signs for multi-family developments, 6 square feet for
residential uses, including home occupations.



   Note 5:  One Business Center Identification Sign with a maximum area
of 100 square feet is permitted in addition to the Maximum Total Square Feet
established here, subject to the regulations set forth by Table 173.3.



173.10    PERMITTED SIGN TYPES BY ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Table 173.2 sets forth the sign types permitted within each zoning
district of the City of Denison.




Table 173.2 - Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts




 

Sign Types
 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-50
R1-60
R1-70
R-2
 
R-3RM
 
R-4
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
HC-1
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2




Detached Signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Residential
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
N
 
N
 
N


Premise Identification
 
P
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Directional
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Ground
 
P
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Pole
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P


Attached Signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Awning
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Banner
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Building Marker
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

P

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Canopy
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Premise Identification
 
P
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Incidental
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Marquee
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Projecting
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Roof, Integral
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Roof, Above Peak
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Wall
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Window
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Miscellaneous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Flag Sign
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Outdoor Advertising (Billboards)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



P:  Permitted for All Uses      P(C):  Permitted for Civic
Uses      N:  Not Permitted



173.11    PERMITTED SIGNS BY NUMBERS, DIMENSIONS AND LOCATION.



   Table 173.3 sets forth the maximum permitted numbers of signs per
premises; the maximum permitted dimensions of each sign; and the required
setbacks for detached signs.




Table 173.3 - Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions and Location




   Each individual sign shall comply with the regulations for maximum
quantity, maximum size, minimum setbacks, and height limits shown in this
table:



 

Zoning District
 
AG
 
RR
R1-50
R1-60
R1-70
R-2
R-3
R-4
RM
 
C-1
 
C-2
Note 1,2,3
 
HC-1
Note 1,2,3
 
CBD
Note 1
 
BP
Note 1,2,3
 
I-1
I-2
Note 2,3




Detached Signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Number Permitted Per Premises
 
1
 
1
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
1
 
NA
 
NA


Per Feet of Frontage of Property
 
NA
 
NA
 
1 per 300
 
1 per 200
 
1 per 200
 
NA
 
1 per 300
 
1 per 300


Maximum Size(sq. ft.)
 
100 Note 4
 
x
 
75
 
150
 
150
 
100
 
150
 
150


Maximum Height (feet) of Structure Above Ground Pole Signs Monument or Ground
Signs
 
 

 

NA

15
 
 

 

NA

6
 
 

 

25

15
 
 

 

35

15
 
 

 

35

15
 
 

 

NA

15
 
 

 

NA

15
 
 

 

35

15


Front Yard Setback (feet)
 
25
 
5
 
10
 
5
 
5
 
0
 
5
 
0


Side Yard Setback (feet)
 
10
 
10
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
0
 
5
 
0


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Attached Signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Maximum Size* (sq. ft.)
 
100
 
x
 
150
 
300
 
300
 
NA
 
300
 
300


% of Street Facade
 
NA
 
 
 
20%
 
25%
 
25%
 
20%
 
20%
 
25%




 



   x See Table 173.1 for maximum sign sizes.



   Note 1:  In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises
used for a business center may have one detached center identification sign,
subject to the following conditions:



      1.  The maximum area for a center identification sign shall be
100 square feet.



      2.  No center identification sign shall be within 300 feet of
any other center identification sign or within 150 feet of any other detached
sign on the same or adjacent premises.



      3.  The sign shall display no more than the name and location of
the business center.



      4.  Each sign shall be subject to all other regulations for
detached signs or graphics set forth in this section.



   Note 2: One non-illuminated directional sign with a maximum size of 12
square feet is permitted at each major entrance to the development.  Such
sign shall be a monument or ground sign with a maximum height of four feet.



   Note 3: The maximum permitted height for an oversized outdoor
advertising sign in areas defined by Section 173.13 shall be 35 feet.



173.12    AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS.



   Table 173.4 sets forth auxiliary design elements permitted within each
zoning district of the City of Denison.




Table 173.4 – Auxiliary Design Elements




 

 
AG
 
RR
 
R1-50
R1-60
R1-70
R-2
 
R-3RM
 
R-4
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
HC-1
 
CBD
 
BP
 
I-1
 
I-2




Design Element
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Illumination
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Indirect
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Direct
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Internal
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Neon
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
N
 
P
 
P


Flashing
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Flame
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Bare Bulb
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electronic Information
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Moving
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Rotating
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N




 



P:  Permitted for All Uses      P(C):  Permitted for Civic
Uses      N:  Not Permitted



173.13    SIGN MASTER PLAN FOR LARGE PROJECTS.



   For projects with an overall site area in excess of 6 acres, an
applicant may submit a Sign Master Plan, detailing the size, location, and
design of all signs on the site.  The Sign Master Plan may adjust the strict
application of these standards, but must clarify the exact nature of the
adjustments.  Such a Sign Master Plan shall be approved by the City Council
after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.  This review
follows the same process as review of a PUD District.



(Chapter 173 - Ord. 1482 - May 18 Supp.)



CHAPTER 174
ZONING AND PROPERTY
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



 



174.01  Penalty
 
174.14  Non-conforming Uses and Structures; Statement of


174.02  Enforcement
 
Intent


174.03  Amendment Procedure
 
174.15  Non-conforming Uses in Any R District


174.04  Application for Change of Zoning District Boundaries
 
174.16  Non-conforming Uses in Any Other District


174.05  Conditions on Rezoning
 
174.17  Non-conforming Uses; Required Repairs and


174.06  Site Plan Review Procedure
 
Unauthorized Nonconformities


174.07  Board of Adjustment Established; Composition; Terms
 
174.18  Zoning Enforcement Officer Powers and Duties


174.08  Board of Adjustment Meetings
 
174.19  Occupancy Permits


174.09  Board of Adjustment Appeals
 
174.20  Land Disturbance, Building and Occupancy Permits Issuance


174.10  Board of Adjustment Powers and Duties
 
174.21  Plat Required


174.11  Board of Adjustment Special Permits
 
174.22  Planned Unit Development Administrative Amendments


174.12  Abandonment of Variances, Exceptions and Special Permits
 


174.13  Board of Adjustment Decisions; Review of Use Variance
 




 



174.01    PENALTY.



   Any person who fails to perform an act required by the Zoning and
Property Chapters or who commits an act prohibited by the Zoning and Property
Chapters shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable by fine or shall
be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided
for in this Code of Ordinances.



174.02    ENFORCEMENT.



   If any building, structure or sign is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building,
structure, sign or land is used in violation of the Zoning and Property
Chapters, the City of Denison, in addition to other remedies, shall institute
any proper legal action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of the building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises.



174.03    AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.



   The regulations imposed and the districts created by the Zoning and
Property Chapters may be amended from time to time by the City Council but no
such amendments shall be made without public hearing before the Council and
after a report has been made upon the amendment by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.  At least seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
City.  In case the Commission does not approve the change, or in the case of
a protest filed with the Council against a change in district boundaries
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of
the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent
thereto and within 200 feet of the boundaries thereof, such amendment shall
not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the
members of the Council.



174.04    APPLICATION FOR CHANGE OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Any person may submit to the Council an application requesting a change
in the zoning district boundaries as shown on the Official Zoning District
Map.  Such application shall be filed with the zoning enforcement officer
accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the Council and shall contain the
following information:



      1.   The legal description and local address of the property.



      2.   The present zoning classification and the zoning
classification requested for the property.



      3.   The existing use and proposed use of the property.



      4.   The names and addresses of all the owners of all property
within 200 feet of the property for which the change is requested.



      5.   A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the
present zoning classification is no longer valid.



      6.   A plat showing the locations, dimensions and use of the
applicant’s property and all property within 200 feet thereof, including
streets, alleys, railroads and other physical features.



   All fees shall be deposited to the General Revenue Fund of the City. 
Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund
the fee to the applicant.



174.05    CONDITIONS ON REZONING.



   As a part of an ordinance changing land from one zoning district to
another zoning district or an ordinance approving a site development plan,
the Council may impose conditions on a property owner which are in addition
to existing regulations if the additional conditions have been agreed to in
writing by the property owner before the public hearing required under this
chapter or any adjournment of the hearing.  The conditions must be
reasonable and imposed to satisfy public needs which are directly caused by
the requested change.



174.06    SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.



      1.   Purpose.  The site plan review procedure provides for
the administrative review, in addition to plan review required by other
sections of the Denison Code of Ordinances, of projects that have potentially
significant effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land
uses on adjacent properties.  The procedure provides for review and
evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation of
unfavorable effects on surrounding property.



      2.   Administration.  The Zoning Administrator shall review,
evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to this procedure. 
An applicant may appeal a denial of any application to the Planning
Commission and, if substantial satisfaction is not gained from such review,
to the City Council.



      3.   Uses Requiring Site Plan Review.  All uses indicated as
subject to site plan review in Tables 167.1 through 167.6 are subject to the
provisions of this section, unless otherwise subject to a special use permit
procedure for specific zoning districts.



      4.   Application Requirements.  An application for a site
plan review may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the owners'
authorized agent with the Zoning Administrator.  The application shall
include the following information:



         A.   Name and address of the applicant.



         B.   Owner, address, and legal description of the
property



         C.   A description of the nature and operating
characteristics of the proposed use.



         D.   A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit
adequate review and dimensioned as necessary, showing the following
information:



            (1)   The date, scale, north point, title, name of
owner, and name of person preparing the site plan.



            (2)   The location and dimensions of boundary
lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed
buildings and site improvements.



            (3)   The location, size, and use of proposed and
existing structures on the site.



            (4)   The location of all proposed site
improvements, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular
access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening,
landscaping, and lighting.



            (5)   Location of any major site feature,
including drainage and contours at no greater than five foot intervals.



            (6)   Any other information that may be required
for review by the Zoning Administrator.



      5.   Erosion and Sediment Control.  No clearing, grading, or
construction work shall be done in any district until the necessary erosion
and sediment control measures, if necessary (site land disturbance exceeds 1
acre) in accordance with an approved construction site Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan, have been provided to comply with the soil loss
limit regulations adopted by the Crawford County Soil Conservation District
on August 30, 1972.



      6.   Requirement of Erosion and Sediment Control Measures. 
When an application for a site plan review is filed, the Zoning Officer shall
review the proposed construction and determine whether erosion and sediment
control measures are necessary to comply with the soil loss limit regulations
referred to in subsection 5 above.  If the Zoning Officer determines that
erosion and sediment control measures are necessary, said officer shall
attach a written statement of the necessary measures to the site plan
review.  No clearing, grading, or construction work shall be done pursuant
to a site plan until erosion and sediment control measures have been provided
in compliance with the site plan review.  The Zoning Officer may consult
with and obtain the recommendations of the City Engineer or the Crawford
County Soil Conservation District with respect to erosion and sediment
control measures and may delay issuance of site plan approval and a land
disturbance permit for a reasonable time for that purpose.



      7.   Storm Water Management Plan.  Prior to the development
of one acre or more (43,560 square feet), the Zoning Officer shall first
review the proposed construction to ensure that the construction includes a
connection to an existing, adequate storm sewer system.  In the absence of
an existing, adequate storm sewer system, the Zoning Officer shall require
adequate provision for storm water management prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit.  Storm water management may include retention facilities
and/or payment to the City by the applicant of a fee for future storm sewer
outside of the applicant’s property.  The Zoning Officer shall consult
with the City Engineer prior to approving storm water management plans which
do not connect to an existing, adequate storm sewer.



      8.   Administrative Action and Appeal.  The Zoning
Administrator must act upon each complete application within ten working days
of filing.  An applicant may appeal a denial to the Planning Commission
within ten days of the action.  The Planning Commission shall consider the
appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the appeal.  An
applicant may appeal a denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council
within ten days of the Commission’s action.  The City Council shall
consider the appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the
appeal.



      9.   Review and Evaluation.



         A.   The Zoning Administrator (or the Planning
Commission and City Council in cases of appeal) shall review and approve the
site plan based on the criteria established in Table 174.1 and conformance
with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations.



         B.   The Zoning Administrator (or the Planning
Commission and City Council in cases of appeal) shall make the following
findings before approval of the site plan:



            (1)   The proposed development, together with any
necessary modifications, is compatible with the criteria established in Table
174.1.



            (2)   Any required modifications to the site plan
are reasonable and are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially
unfavorable effects.



            (3)   The site plan conforms to the Zoning
Regulations.



      10.   Modification of Site Plan.  The Zoning Administrator
(or the Planning Commission and City Council in cases of appeal) may require
modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval.  Required
modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations and may
include, but not be limited to, additional landscaping or screening;
installation of erosion control measures; improvement of access or
circulation; rearrangement of structures on the site; or other modifications
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, community
character, property values, and/or aesthetics.



      11.   Term and Modification of Approval.



         A.   A site plan approval shall become void two years
after the date of approval, unless the applicant receives a building permit
and diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this period.



         B.   The Zoning Administrator may approve an application
to modify a previously approved site plan if he/she determines that the
modification does not affect findings related to the criteria set forth in
Table 174.1.



         C.   The Zoning Administrator may revoke a site plan
approval if he/she determines that the development is not complying with the
terms and conditions of the approval. Such revocation may be appealed to the
Planning Commission and City Council.



      12.   Approval to Run With Land.  An approval pursuant to
this section shall run with the land until the expiration date of such
approval.




Table 174.1 – Site Plan Review Criteria




 



SITE PLAN REVIEW CRITERION


Land Use Compatibility
 


Development Density
 
Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses
if not separated by major natural or artificial features.


Height and Scale
 


Height and Bulk
 
Development should minimize differences in height and building size from
surrounding structures.  Differences should be justified by urban design
considerations.


Setbacks
 
Development should respect pre-existing setbacks in surrounding area. 
Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics.


Building Coverage
 
Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development if
possible.  Higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or site
amenities.


Site Development
 


Frontage
 
Project frontage along a street should be similar to lot width.


Parking and Internal Circulation
 
Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts between
pedestrians and vehicles.All structures must be accessible to public safety
vehicles.Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways. 
Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public
access points.


Landscaping
 
Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street
landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where
required by surrounding land uses.  Parts of site with sensitive
environmental features or natural drainageways should be preserved.


Building Design
 


 
Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with
surrounding areas or highly visible locations


Operating Characteristics
 


  Traffic Capacity
 
Project should not obstruct traffic on adjacent streets.  Compensating
improvements will be required to mitigate impact on street system operations.


External Traffic Effects
 
Project design should direct non-residential traffic away from residential
areas.


Operating Hours
 
Projects with long operating hours must minimize effects on surrounding
residential areas.


Outside Storage
 
Outside storage areas must be screened from surrounding streets and less
intensive land uses.


Public Facilities
 


Sanitary Waste Disposal
 
Developments within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer must connect to sewer
system.  Individual disposal systems, if permitted, shall not adversely
affect public health, safety, or welfare.Sanitary sewer must have adequate
capacity to serve development.


Storm Water Management
 
Development should handle storm water adequately to prevent overloading of
public storm water management system and be consistent with any applicable
City Storm Water Ordinance. Development should not inhibit or have negative
effect upon development of other properties in regards to storm water
handling or conveyance. Development should not increase probability of
erosion, flooding, landslides, or other run-off related effects and should be
guided by a sufficient Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, or Storm
Water Pollution and Prevention Plan (SWPPP), if applicable, consistent with
the Iowa Construction Site Erosion Control Manual and be in accordance, where
applicable, to the Iowa Statewide Urban Design and Specifications (SUDAS).


Utilities
 
Project must be served by utilities.Rural estate subdivisions should be
located in designated areas which can accommodate utility and infrastructure
installation consistent with the need to protect the environment and public
health.


Comprehensive Plan
 


 
Projects should be consistent with the City of Denison’s Comprehensive
Development Plan.




 



174.07    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; TERMS.



   A Board of Adjustment is established, which shall consist of five
members. The terms of office of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall
be as provided by statute.  Members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
appointed by the City Council and shall be residents of the City of Denison,
Iowa.  A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be persons
representing the public at large and shall not be involved in the business of
purchasing or selling real estate.




(Ord. 1405 - June 11 Supp.)




174.08    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT MEETINGS.



   The meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such chair, or
in his or her absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board
and shall be a public record. The presence of four members shall be necessary
to constitute a quorum.



174.09    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPEALS.



      1.   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City
affected by any decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or of any other
administrative officer in the enforcement of the Zoning and Property Chapters
or of the state zoning laws. Each appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time as provided by the rules of the Board. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
and any other officer whose decision is the subject of the appeal shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from is taken.



      2.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the
Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that,
because of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and on due cause shown.



      3.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on
the appeal, shall give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the
parties in interest, and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At
the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Before
an appeal is filed with the Board of Adjustment, the appellant shall pay a
fee to the City Clerk in the amount specified by the City of Denison Schedule
of Civil Penalties and Fees in the appendix of the City Code.



174.10    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Adjustment shall have the power and duty to:



      1.   Hear and decide appeals taken pursuant to Section 174.09.



      2.   Grant a variance in the regulations of the Zoning and
Property Chapters that will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the regulations will
result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the chapters shall
be observed and substantial justice done. To establish unnecessary hardship a
property owner must show all of the following elements:



         A.   The land in question cannot yield a reasonable
return from any use permitted by the regulations of the district in which the
land is located. Failure to yield a reasonable return may only be shown by
proof that the owner has been deprived of all beneficial or productive use of
the land in question. It is not sufficient merely to show that the value of
the land has been depreciated by the regulations or that a variance would
permit the owner to maintain a more profitable use.



         B.   The plight of the owner is due to unique
circumstances not of the owner's own making, which unique circumstances must
relate specifically to the land in question and not to general conditions in
the neighborhood.



         C.   The use to be authorized by the variance will not
alter the essential character of the locality of the land in question.



   In granting any variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation subject to enforcement under
Sections 174.01 and 174.02. No appeal for a use variance shall be considered
by the Board unless a proposed amendment to rezone the subject property to a
district classification permitting such use has been considered and denied by
the City Council within the preceding year, provided that this requirement
shall not apply to appeals for area variances.



      3.   Grant a variation from the terms of Section 167.35,
Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District, that will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement will result
in unnecessary hardship. Any such variance granted must meet the following
applicable standards, in addition to the general standards for variances set
forth in subsection 2 of this section.



         A.   No variance shall be granted for any development
within the FW district which would result in a significant increase in the
100-year flood level.



         B.   Variances shall only be granted upon:



            (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the appellant;



            (3)   A determination that the granting of the
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of nuisances, or
victimization of the public;



            (4)   A determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and



            (5)   A showing that the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources has been notified of the requested variance.



      4.   Permit the exceptions in this subsection to the district
regulations set forth in the Zoning and Property Chapters, provided all
exceptions shall by their design, construction and operation adequately
safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of adjoining and
surrounding property; shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property; shall not unduly increase congestion in the public
streets; shall not increase public danger of fire and safety; and shall not
diminish or impair established property values in surrounding areas. However,
nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as authorizing the Board to
grant an exception to any separation requirement, such power being expressly
denied the Board. Any exception to a separation requirement granted for a
structure for which a building permit has not been issued shall be null and
void. In granting any exception, the Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with these chapters. The Board of
Adjustment may permit:



         A.   Exceptions to any setback, area, length, width,
height, yard, size or projection limitation or to the minimum required number
of off-street parking or loading spaces; provided such an exception may be
granted only where:



            (1)   Such exception does not exceed 50 percent of
the particular limitation or number in question; or



            (2)   Such exception is from a yard requirement to
permit an addition to an existing legal non-conforming building and such
addition extends no further into the required yard than the existing building;



            (3)   The exception relates entirely to a use
classified by applicable district regulations as either a principal permitted
use, a permitted accessory use, or a permitted sign, or to off-street parking
or loading areas accessory to such a permitted use;



            (4)   The exception is reasonably necessary due to
practical difficulties related to the land in question;



            (5)   Such practical difficulties cannot be
overcome by any feasible alternative means other than an exception; and



            (6)   The exception is in harmony with the
essential character of the neighborhood of the land in question.



         B.   Use of property for off-street parking areas
accessory to permitted residential district uses where such parking areas do
not immediately adjoin the permitted residential district use.



         C.   Exceptions to the minimum lot width requirement,
where such lot meets the lot width at the building line and satisfies the
following conditions:



            (1)   The development pattern of the lot is in
harmony with the development pattern of the neighborhood in which it is
located;



            (2)   The development has unique terrain, views or
vegetation; and



            (3)   The development is consistent with the
density of the adjoining lots.



         D.   Exceptions to the minimum design standards for
single-family detached dwellings where the design of the dwelling is
consistent with the design of existing dwellings in the neighborhood of the
land in question, or the exception is necessary to permit the construction of
a dwelling upon a lot of unusual shape or topography.



         E.   Exceptions to the time period within which a use
may be resumed after a temporary discontinuance of that use, where:



            (1)   The discontinuance of the use was due to
unique circumstances not of the owner's own making.



            (2)   The use to be authorized by the exception is
in harmony with the essential character of the neighborhood of the land in
question.



      5.   Hear and decide applications for special permits in
accordance with Section 174.11 of this chapter.



174.11    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT SPECIAL PERMITS.



      1.   Uses Allowed by Special Permit.  In accordance with
subsection 2 of Section 167.12, the Board of Adjustment may, by special
permit after public hearing, authorize the location of buildings and uses in
districts as indicated in Tables 167.1 through 167.6, provided, however, that
no such special permit shall be granted authorizing any building or use in a
FW district.



      2.   Application.  Application for a special permit under the
terms of this section shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the
feasibility of the proposed request and its effect on surrounding property
and shall include a site plan defining the areas to be developed for
structures; the areas to be developed for parking; the locations of sidewalks
and driveways and the points of ingress and egress, including access streets
where required; the location and heights of walls; the location and type of
landscaping; and the location, size, and number of signs. The application
shall further demonstrate compliance with the general and specific standards
for approval of a special permit under subsection 3 of this section.



      3.   Review.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the power
and duty to approve a special permit for a proposed use if it finds that the
applicant has demonstrated that the design, construction and manner of
operation of the proposed use will substantially conform to the standards set
forth below:



         A.   General. Any structure or use of land to be allowed
by a special permit shall by its design, construction and operation
adequately safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
adjoining and surrounding property; shall not unduly increase congestion in
the public streets; shall not increase public danger of fire and safety; and
shall not diminish or impair established property values in surrounding
areas, and shall have no significant detrimental impact on the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties.



         B.   Bulk Standards. Any deviation from the district
bulk standards applicable to uses allowed by the district regulations must be
reasonably necessary due to practical difficulties related to the land or
type of use in question; and, such practical difficulties cannot be overcome
by any feasible alternative means.



         C.   Residential Setback. Adequate setbacks shall be
provided to protect adjacent residentially zoned property from
non-residential and institutional uses.



         D.   Architectural Character. New buildings and
alterations to existing buildings located in or adjacent to existing
developed areas shall be compatible with the existing architectural character
of such areas. Compatibility may be achieved through techniques such as the
repetition of roof lines, the use of similar proportions in building mass and
outdoor spaces, similar relationships to the street, similar window and door
patterns, and/or the use of building materials that have color shades and
textures similar to those existing in the immediate area of the proposed
development. Brick and stone masonry shall be considered compatible with wood
framing and other materials.



         E.   Building Mass. New buildings and alterations to
existing buildings shall be either similar in size and height, or if larger,
shall be articulated, setback or subdivided into massing that is proportional
to the mass and scale of other structures on the same block and adjoining
blocks. Articulation may be achieved through variation of roof lines,
setbacks, patterns of door and window placement, and the use of
characteristic entry features. To the maximum extent feasible, the height,
setback and width of new buildings and alterations to existing buildings
should be similar to those of existing buildings on the same block. Taller
buildings or portions of buildings should be located interior to the site.
Buildings at the ends of blocks should be of similar height to buildings on
the adjoining blocks.



         F.   Parking. No parking should be permitted in a
required front yard of an "R" district unless shown to be compatible with the
adjoining land use. Parking lots containing more than eight parking spaces
should comply with the adopted landscape standards applicable to commercial
development in the C-1 district, unless a higher standard is applicable under
the site plan regulations.



      4.   Conditions and Safeguards.  In granting any special
permit under the terms of this section, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the special permit is granted, shall result in revocation of the
special permit.



      5.   Change in Use or Site Plan.  If a special permit is
granted under the terms of this section, any change thereafter in the
approved use or site plan shall be resubmitted and considered in the same
manner as the original proposal.



174.12    ABANDONMENT OF VARIANCES, EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL PERMITS.



      1.   Uses of land, structures and uses of structures which
would otherwise be prohibited under the Zoning and Property Chapters but have
been allowed by the granting of an exception or variance or have been allowed
as a special permit may continue until such exception, variance or special
permit lapses as provided in this section.



      2.   If any such use of land or of a structure is not
commenced within two years of the allowance of the variance, exception or
conditional use, whichever is later, or is discontinued for a period of one
year, such variance, exception or conditional use shall lapse, and any
subsequent use of such land or structure shall conform to the district
regulations for the district in which such land or structure is located.



      3.   In the event the construction of any such structure is
not commenced within two years of the issuance of the variance, exception or
special permit for such structure, whichever is later, and diligently pursued
to completion, such variance, exception or special permit shall lapse, and
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the district regulations for
the district in which such land is located. If any such structure is
destroyed by any means to an extent of 60 percent or more of its replacement
cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed; any such
variance, exception or special permit for such structure shall lapse; and any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the district regulations for the
district in which such land is located.



174.13    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT DECISIONS; REVIEW OF USE VARIANCE.



      1.   In exercising the powers mentioned in Section 174.10, the
Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of law, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determinations as it believes proper, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The concurring vote of four of the
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter; provided, however, that the action of the Board shall not
become effective until it has filed a written decision in the board office
describing the action taken, the vote of each member participating therein
and the reasons for such action, specifying the manner in which the applicant
either satisfied or failed to satisfy each of the applicable standards,
conditions or elements set forth in Section 174.10. Decisions shall be filed
promptly following the Board's action and shall be open to public inspection.



      2.   Every variation and exception granted or denied by the
Board shall be supported by a written testimony or evidence submitted in
connection therewith.



      3.   If any application for a variance or exception shall have
been denied by the Board of Adjustment, no new application for the same
relief shall be considered for two years by the Board unless the Board shall
find that conditions have changed.



      4.   Any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau
of the City or any persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board may present to a court of record a petition for writ of certiorari,
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board. All decisions of the Board, except decisions granting
use variances or a variance from any separation requirement shall be final
immediately upon filing. Each decision granting a use variance or a variance
from any separation requirement shall be referred to the City Council for
review pursuant to I.C. §414.7. The City Council shall review such decision
within 30 days after the decision is filed. After such review, the Council
may remand the decision to the Board for further study. If the City Council
does not act to review the decision within 30 days after it is filed, the
decision shall become effective on the 31st day. If the City Council declines
to remand a decision, that decision shall become final on the date of the
Council's action. If the City Council remands a decision to the Board, the
effective date of the decision is delayed for 30 days from the date of remand.



      5.   Upon remand of a decision from the City Council, the
matter shall be placed on the agenda for further study at the first Board
meeting after such Council action. If, for any reason, the Board does not
hold a regularly scheduled meeting during such 30-day period, it shall be
required to hold a special meeting and consider an act upon the remanded
decision within such 30-day period. At such meeting the Board shall act to
either affirm its earlier decision or grant a rehearing. A rehearing shall be
treated in the same manner as an appeal pursuant to Section 174.09, except
that no fee shall be payable. If the Board grants a rehearing, its initial
decision shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. The Board decision on
rehearing is not reviewable by the City Council and shall be final upon
filing.



174.14    NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES; STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   Within the various districts established by the Zoning and Property
Chapters or amendments that may be adopted, there exist structures and uses
of land and structures which were lawful prior to the effective date of the
ordinance from which said chapters derived but which would be prohibited
under these chapters. It is the intent of this section to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. Such uses are declared by this section to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of
this section that such nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded
or extended.



174.15    NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY R DISTRICT.



      1.   Nonconforming Uses of Land.  The lawful use of land upon
which no building or structure is erected or constructed which becomes
nonconforming under the terms of the ordinance from which the Zoning and
Property Chapters derived or as they may be amended may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following:



         A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at
the effective date of the ordinance adopting or amending said chapters.



         B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole
or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel, which was not occupied
by such use at the effective date of the ordinance adopting or amending said
chapters.



         C.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for
any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such
land shall conform to the district regulations for the district in which such
land is located.



      2.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures.  If a lawful use of a
structure or of a structure and land in combination exists at the effective
date of the ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning and Property Chapters
that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of said chapters,
the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following:



         A.   No existing structure devoted entirely or in part
to a use not permitted by said chapters in the district in which it is
located, except when required by law, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless the use is changed to a
use permitted in the district in which such structure is located.



         B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout
any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such
use on the effective date of the ordinance adopting or amending said
chapters. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
building.



         C.   If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use
of a similar nature within the same or a more restricted classification.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to
a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use.



         D.   If a nonconforming use of a structure or structure
and land in combination is abandoned, the use of such shall thereafter
conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. A use
shall be deemed abandoned if while such use has been discontinued the owner
of the property makes any change to the property inconsistent with the
resumption of such use. Changes inconsistent with the resumption of a use
include, but are not limited to:  placing the property to another use; or
combining two or more dwelling units under one water, gas or electric meter;
creating an opening between two dwelling units.



         E.   If a nonconforming use of a structure or structure
and land in combination is discontinued for more than one year for any
reason, the use of such shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the
district in which it is located.



         F.   Any structure devoted to a use made nonconforming
by said chapters that is destroyed by any means to an extent of fifty percent
or more of its assessed value at the time of destruction, exclusive of the
foundations, shall not be reconstructed and used as before such happening. 
If the structure be less than fifty percent destroyed above the foundation,
it may be reconstructed and used as before, provided it is done within six
months of such happening and is build of like or similar materials.  Where
nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination,
removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming
status of the land.



         G.   Notwithstanding paragraph F above, if the
nonconforming structure is a single family residence, is located in a
Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) or Highway Commercial (C-2) zone, and prior to
the destruction of the structure, the structure had an assessed valuation in
excess of $50,000, the nonconforming structure may be reconstructed in
compliance with the following requirements.  The reconstructed structure
must conform with all setback requirements for single family residences in a
Single Family Low-Density District zone.  The reconstructed structure may
not be altered or enlarged in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
Reconstruction must commence within six months of destruction and must be
completed within twelve months of destruction.  An extension of the twelve
month completion time may be granted by the City Manager for good cause shown.



      3.   Nonconforming Structures, Including Signs. Where a
structure other than a sign exists at the effective date of the ordinance
adopting or amending said chapters that could not be built under the terms of
the chapters because of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following:



         A.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its nonconformity.



         B.   If such structure is destroyed by any means to an
extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with this
chapter.  Any single-family semidetached or two-family dwelling which was a
conforming structure on the effective date of this ordinance may be
structurally altered, and if destroyed may be reconstructed and used as
before, provided such reconstruction is commenced within six months of such
destruction and diligently pursued to completion.



174.16    NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY OTHER DISTRICT.



      1.   Nonconforming Uses of Land. The regulations governing
nonconforming uses of land in any R district as described in subsection 1 of
Section 174.15 shall also apply to this section.



      2.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures.  If a lawful use of a
structure or of a structure and land in combination exists at the effective
date of the ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning and Property Chapters
that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of said chapters,
the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following:



         A.   Within the FW district, no existing structure
devoted entirely or in part to a use not permitted by said chapters in the
district in which it is located, except when required by law, shall be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless the
use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such structure is
located.



         B.   Any structure in any district other than an R or FW
district devoted to a use made nonconforming by said chapters may be
structurally altered or enlarged in conformity with the lot area, lot
coverage, frontage, yard, height, and parking requirements of the district in
which located, provided such construction shall be limited to buildings on
land owned of record by the owner of the land devoted to the nonconforming
use prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section
derives. Such structural alteration or enlargement shall not authorize the
substitution of a nonconforming use that is less restrictive than the one to
which the structure was devoted on the effective date of the ordinance from
which this section derives.



         C.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout
any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such
use on the effective date of the ordinance adopting or amending said
chapters. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
building.



         D.   If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use
of a similar nature within the same or a more restricted classification.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to
a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use.



         E.   If a nonconforming use of a structure or structure
and land in combination is abandoned, the use of such shall thereafter
conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. A use
shall be deemed abandoned if while such use has been discontinued the owner
of the property makes any change to the property inconsistent with the
resumption of such use. Changes inconsistent with the resumption of a use
include, but are not limited to: placing the property to another use;
combining two or more dwelling units under one water, gas or electric meter;
or creating an opening between two dwelling units.



         F.   If a nonconforming use of a structure or structure
and land in combination is discontinued for more than one year for any reason
whatsoever, the use of such shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in
the district in which it is located.



      3.   Nonconforming Structures. The regulations governing
nonconforming structures in any R district, as described in subsection 3 of
Section 174.15 shall also apply to this section.



174.17    NONCONFORMING USES; REQUIRED REPAIRS AND UNAUTHORIZED
NONCONFORMITIES.



      1.   Nothing in these Zoning and Property Chapters shall be
deemed to prevent the restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official.



      2.   Any use of land, use of structures or structures, in
existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which these Zoning and
Property Chapters derive which was not an authorized nonconformity under
previous zoning ordinances shall not be authorized to continue its
nonconforming status pursuant to said chapters or amendments to said chapters.



174.18    ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall exercise the following powers and
duties:



      1.   Exercise all enforcement powers under Sections 174.01 and
174.02, including but not limited to the investigation of complaints of
zoning violations, issuance of notices and municipal infraction citations to
violators, and the preparation and submission to the legal department of
reports of those zoning violations which continue unabated after exhaustion
of reasonable administrative remedies toward their abatement, for such legal
action as the facts of each report may require.



      2.   In all cases in which the City commences court action,
cooperate with the City attorney by performing such additional investigative
work as the City attorney shall require.



      3.   Attend the meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Zoning Board of Adjustment as requested by those bodies, investigate
and review all cases presented to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and advise
that body on those cases upon request.



      4.   If the City, after analysis of the report, institutes
legal proceedings, cooperate fully with the City attorney in the perfecting
of such proceedings.



      5.   The Zoning Enforcement Officer may provide a written
determination regarding the application of the Zoning and Property Chapters
and related land use regulations to a specific site to any person requesting
such information upon receipt of a fee in the amount set in the schedule of
fees adopted by the City Council by resolution.



174.19    OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



      1.   Required for Land and Buildings.  No land shall be
occupied or used and no building erected or structurally altered shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a
Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance is issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of the
Zoning and Property Chapters and the City's building and health ordinances.



      2.   Required for Change of Use.  No change of use shall be
made in any building or part thereof erected or structurally altered under
the purview of this zoning code without a permit being issued therefor by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. No permit shall be issued to make a change unless
the changes are in conformity with the Zoning and Property Chapters.



      3.   Permit Fee.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and compliance, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee in
the amount provided by the Denison Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in
the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances . Where applicable, such sums shall
be paid to the City Clerk upon application for a building permit.



      4.   Fee Exemption for Federal Property.  Application for a
certificate of occupancy and compliance for property wholly owned by the
federal government may be made without paying the fee described in subsection
3 above.



      5.   Nonconforming Uses. 



         A.   Nothing in the occupancy permit regulations shall
prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use as authorized, unless
discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or property.



         B.   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all
nonconforming uses. Application for certificate of occupancy for
nonconforming uses shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
accompanied by affidavits of proof that such nonconforming use was not
established in violation of the Zoning and Property Chapters or any
requirements otherwise stipulated or ordered by the Zoning Administrator.



      6.   Time Limits; Records.  Certificates for occupancy and
compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a
building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the lawful erection
or alteration of the building is completed and to the satisfaction and
approval of the Zoning Administrator, with respect to the rules and
regulations of this zoning code and any requirements otherwise stipulated or
ordered by the Zoning Administrator. A record of all certificates shall be
kept on file in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the building affected.



174.20    LAND DISTURBANCE, BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS ISSUANCE.



   No excavation for or the erection or alteration of any building shall
be undertaken before a land disturbance permit, if applicable, and/or a
building permit have been issued, and no building or premises shall be
occupied until the certificate of occupancy and compliance permit is issued
for said construction project.



174.21    PLAT REQUIRED.



   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon; the size, shape and location of the building to be erected; and
other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the
Zoning and Property Chapters. A record of applications and plats shall be
kept in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



174.22    PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATIVE AMENDMENTS.



      1.   Definition.  The term “substantial compliance”, as
used in this section, shall have the following meanings, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.  Substantial compliance
includes, but is not limited to, a change:



         A.   Which does not increase the density of developments
or the number of dwelling units, e.g., substituting two single-family units
for a duplex, or two duplexes for a fourplex.



         B.   Affecting the off-street parking arrangement, e.g.,
changing the angle of parking or adding or eliminating garages, as long as
any such change conforms to Chapter 172.



         C.   In the orientation of a building, as long as no
yard dimension shown on the original plan is reduced by more than ten percent.



         D.   To increase open space, setbacks or landscaping
materials.



         E.   In plant material.



         F.   To permit drive-up telephones, walk-up telephones
or telephone booths, erected by a public service corporation, provided the
location is approved by the Planning Director and the City engineer to ensure
the facility does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation on
the property, on adjoining property or on the public streets. Such facility
shall be exempt from the bulk regulations and the development plan.



      2.   Procedures for Changing a Planned Unit Development
Preliminary or Final Development Plan.



         A.   This subsection applies only to Section 167.32,
Planned Unit Development District, as specifically referenced in subsection
10 of Section 167.32.



         B.   A preliminary or final development plan may be
changed upon approval by the Zoning Administrator, if the Zoning
Administrator determines that the change is in substantial compliance with
the development plan as originally approved. Such approval shall be in
writing and shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator. An applicant may
request such a change by submitting the following:



            (1)   A letter from the owner of the development
authorizing the change.



            (2)   A copy of the overall development plan
clearly showing the change.



            (3)   Three copies of the revised development
plan. If the change is to a final development plan, the revised plan shall
provide clear illustration of the proposed changes for review by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may use his/her discretion in
requiring other evidentiary or planning measures with subsections 7 and 8 of
Section 167.32.



         C.   All changes to a preliminary or final development
plan not deemed to be in substantial compliance with the development plan as
originally approved shall be made in accordance with the procedures in effect
at the time of initial approval.



(Chapter 174 - Ord. 1374 – May 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 175
AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



 

175.01  Definitions
 
175.08  Board of Adjustment Procedures


175.02  Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations
 
175.09  Powers of Board of Adjustment


175.03  Use Restrictions
 
175.10  Vote on Variations or Orders


175.04  Lighting
 
175.11  Judicial Review


175.05  Variances
 
175.12  Administrative Agency


175.06  Board of Adjustment Established
 
175.13  Conflicting Regulations


175.07  Board of Adjustment
 
175.14  Penalties



 



175.01    DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



      1.   “Airport” means the Denison Municipal Airport. 



      2.   “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an
airport’s usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level, which
elevation is established to be 1,276 feet.



      3.   “Hazard to air navigation” means an obstruction
determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient
utilization of the navigable air space.



      4.   “Airport primary surface” means a surface
longitudinally centered on a runway.  When the runway has a specially
prepared hard surface, the primary surface of the runway will be that width
prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most
precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway.  The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the nearest point on the runway centerline.



      5.   “Airspace height” means for the purpose of
determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless
otherwise specified.



      6.   “Control zone” means airspace extending upward from
the surface of the earth which may include one or more airports and is
normally a circular area of five (5) statute miles in radius, with extensions
where necessary to include instrument approach and departure paths. 



      7.   “Instrument runway” means a runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area
type navigation equipment, for which an instrument approach procedure has
been approved or planned. 



      8.   “Minimum descent altitude” means the lowest altitude
expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on
final approach or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a
standard instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is
provided. 



      9.   “Minimum en route altitude” means the altitude in
effect between radio fixes which assures acceptable navigational signal
coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 



      10.   “Minimum obstruction clearance altitude” means the
specified altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airways
routes, or route segments which meets obstruction clearance requirements for
the entire route segment and which assures acceptable navigational signal
coverage only within twenty-two (22) miles of a VOR.



      11.   “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared
for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.



      12.   “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for
the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no
straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation
indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, military services approved
military airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the
FAA by competent authority. 



175.02    AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which are depicted on the Municipal
Airport Height Zoning Map.  A structure located in more than one zone of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitations.  The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows:



      1.   Horizontal Zone.  The land lying under a horizontal
plane 150 feet above the established elevations, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end
of the primary surface of runways 12 and 30 and connecting the adjacent arcs
by lines tangent to those arcs. 



      2.   Conical Zone.  The land lying under a surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of
20 feet to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.  No structure shall
penetrate the conical surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.



      3.   Approach Zone.  The land lying under the surface
longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending
outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. 



         A.   The inner edge of the approach surface is:



            (1)   250 feet wide for runways 6 and 24. 



            (2)   500 feet wide for runways 12 and 30. 



         B.   The outer edge of the approach zone is: 



            (1)   1,250 feet for runways 6 and 24.



            (2)   1,500 feet for runway 12.



            (3)   3,500 feet for runway 30.



         C.   The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance
of:



            (1)   5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to 1 for runways
12, 6, and 24.



            (2)   10,000 feet at a slope of 34 to 1 for runway
30.



   No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as
depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.



      4.   Transitional Zone.  The land lying under those surfaces
extending outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the
runway centerline extended at a slope of seven to one from the sides of the
primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces.  No structures
shall exceed the transitional surface, as depicted on the Municipal Airport
Height Zoning Map.



      5.   Increase in Elevation of Structures.  No structure shall
be erected in Crawford County that raises the published minimum descent
altitude for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be
erected that causes the minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en
route altitude to be increased on any Federal airway in the County. 
Further, no such structure shall be erected which interferes with the
operation of any airport or landing strip or constitutes a hazard to air
navigation.  For communications stations and towers see also the
restrictions contained in the Crawford County Zoning Ordinances, Zone A-1,
Special Exception, Uses and Structures, paragraph 7, which provisions shall
continue to be applicable.



175.03    USE RESTRICTIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of 175.02, no use may be made of
land or water within the City or County in such a manner as to interfere with
the operation of any airborne aircraft.  The following special requirements
shall apply to each permitted use:



      1.   Lighting.  All lights or illumination used in
conjunction with streets, parking, signs or use of land and structures shall
be arranged and operated in such a manner that it is not misleading or
dangerous to aircraft operating from the Municipal Airport or in the vicinity
thereof. 



      2.   Visual Hazards.  No operation from any use shall produce
smoke, glare, or other visual hazards within three statute miles of any
usable runway of the Municipal Airport.



      3.   Electronic Interference.  No operation from any use in
the City or County shall produce electronic interference with navigation
signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft. 



175.04    LIGHTING.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of 175.03, the owner of any structure
over two hundred (200) feet above ground level must install on the structure
lighting in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory
Circular 70-7460-1D and amendments.  Additionally, any structure constructed
after the effective date of this chapter (May 14, 1984) and exceeding 949
feet above ground level, must install on that structure high intensity white
obstruction lights in accordance with Chapter 6 of FAA Advisory Circular
7460-1D and amendments.  Any permit or variance granted may be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or growth in question to
permit the City or County at its own expense to install, operate, and
maintain thereto such markers or lights as may be necessary to indicate to
pilots the presence of an airspace hazard.



175.05    VARIANCES.



   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or to permit the growth of any tree, or to otherwise use property in
violation of any section of this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for variance from such regulations.  No application for variance
to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to Municipal
Airport Manager for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a
variance.  If the Municipal Airport Manager does not respond to the Board of
Adjustment within 15 days from receipt of the copy of the application, the
Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.  In the absence
or unavailability of the Denison Municipal Airport Manager, the application
shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the Denison Municipal Airport
Commission for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of the variance.



175.06    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:



      1.   Appeals.  To hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Airport Zoning Commission
in the enforcement of this chapter.



      2.   Special Exemptions.  To hear and decide special
exemptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment
under such regulations may be required to pass. 



      3.   Variances.  To hear and decide specific variances. 



175.07    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of two members selected by the
Council, two members selected by the County Board of Supervisors; and, one
additional member to act as Chairperson and to be selected by a majority vote
of the members selected by the Council and the County Board of Supervisors. 
Members are removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written
charges, after a public hearing.  Vacancies are filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which
the member was selected.  The terms of the members are for five years and
are staggered.



175.08    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES.



   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in
harmony with the provisions of this chapter.  Meetings of the Board shall be
held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine.  The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the
acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.  All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the
public.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations,
and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the
offices of the Clerk and County Auditor, and on due cause shown.



175.09    POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers established in the Code
of Iowa, Section 414.12.



175.10    VOTE ON VARIATIONS OR ORDERS.



   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision,
or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant, on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect variations of this chapter.



175.11    JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may appeal to the court of record as provided in the Code
of Iowa, Section 414.15.



175.12    ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.



   It is the duty of the Airport Zoning Commission to administer the
regulations prescribed herein.  Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Building Inspector upon a form furnished by the Building
Inspector.  Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the
Airport Zoning Commission shall be promptly considered and granted or
denied.  Application for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be
forthwith transmitted by the Building Inspector.



175.13    CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable
to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to height of
structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.



175.14    PENALTIES.



   A violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a violation of this Code of
Ordinances.  Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



CHAPTER 176
CORE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS



 

176.01  Core Overlay District
 
176.05 General Regulations


176.02  Intent
 
176.06  Submittal Requirements


176.03  Definitions
 
176.07  Design Standards


176.04  Applicability
 
 



 



176.01    CORE OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   Whereas the City of Denison contains a central vicinity that retains a
development pattern and architectural character consistent with the
community's early development, and; Whereas this vicinity is uniquely
equipped to deliver a mix of land uses, services, and historic and cultural
amenities to residents and visitors, and; Whereas these characteristics of
the vicinity have been determined to be of great value to Denison and worthy
of preservation; Now, therefore the Core Overlay District is hereby created.



176.02    INTENT.



   It is the intent of the Core Overlay District to provide regulations
supplemental to those associated with the underlying base district in the
vicinity of downtown Denison. It is further the intent of this district to:



   1.   Preserve the architectural and spatial character of the area.



   2.   Preserve historic architectural details on existing structures.



   3.   Preserve scenic views from and to the district and enhance
travel corridors leading to the district.



   4.   Ensure that new construction and facade improvements are
consistent in type, quality, and appearance with the predominance of existing
structures in the area.



   5.   Provide for new construction and facade improvements that are
attractive to citizens and visitors, are an asset to the community
economically, and are designed and built for maximum longevity.



176.03    DEFINITIONS 



   Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:



   1.   "Brick" means a masonry unit of clay and/or shale, formed into
a rectangular prism while plastic and hardened by firing in a kiln.



   2.   "Bond" means any of various arrangements of masonry units
having a regular, recognizable, usually overlapping pattern to increase the
strength and enhance the appearance of the construction.



   3.   "Commercial Use" means commercial uses include the sale,
rental, service, and distribution of goods; and the provision of services
other than those classified under the other use types; further defined under
Section 166.07.



   4.   "Cornice" means a continuous, molded projection that crowns a
wall or divides it horizontally for compositional purposes.



   5.   "Downtown Residential" means the use of upper levels above
street level of a building within the Central Business District of the City
of Denison for single- or multi-family residential uses, as described in
Section 166.04(6).



   6.   "Dormer" means a projecting structure built out from a sloping
roof, usually housing a vertical window or ventilating louver.



   7.   "Facade Element" means any structural or accessory element to a
façade including, but not limited to, signage, awnings, lighting, masonry,
windows, doors, parapets and accent materials.



   8.   "Masonry" means the laying up of substantial materials, such as
brick, manufactured stone, or stone, in units upon each other and a
foundation, usually using mortar as a bonding agent.



   9.   "Multi-family Residential Use" means the use of a site for
three or more dwelling units within one building not otherwise defined as
townhouse units, as defined in Section 166.04(5).



   10.   "Natural Materials" means brick, stone, wood, or manufactured
stone.



   11.   "Parapet" means a low, protective wall at the edge of a
terrace, balcony, or roof, especially that part of an exterior wall,
firewall, or party wall that rises above the roof.



   12.   "Porch" means an exterior appendage to a building, forming a
covered approach or vestibule to a doorway.



   13.   "Portico" means a porch having a roof supported by columns,
often leading to the entrance of a building.



   14.   "Stone" means rock or a piece of rock quarried or manufactured
stone and worked into a specific size and shape for a particular purpose.



   15.   "Transom" means a crosspiece separating a doorway from a
window or fanlight above it.



   16.   "Transom Window" means a window above the transom of a
doorway. Also called transom, or transom light.



176.04    APPLICABILITY.



   The standards of the Core Overlay District are applicable to all new
uses and structures, to all façade improvements of existing structures, and
to all expansions of existing structures, excluding all single- and 2-family
homes, abutting the named streets as follows:



      2nd Avenue South -South 12th Street to South 15th Street



      1st Avenue South - South 12th Street to South 15th Street



      Broadway -100 feet west of 11th Street to 15th Street



      1st Avenue North - Exchange Street to North 14th Street



      2nd Avenue North - Avenue C to North Main Street



      Exchange Street



      South 12th Street - 2nd Avenue South to Broadway



      Avenue C - Intersection of North 7th Street & North 9th Street to
1st Avenue North



      Main Street - 2nd Avenue South to 2nd Avenue North



      South 14th Street - 2nd Avenue South to 2nd Avenue North



      15th Street - 2nd Avenue South to 1st Avenue North



      Center Street



   and shall include the following described real estate, to-wit:



 



BLOCK NUMBER
 
LOT(S)


Sixteen (16)
 
Lots 7 and 8


Sixteen (16)
 
PR Lot 5 and Street adjacent to same


Forty (40)
 
1 through 9


Forty (40)
 
Property locally known as 306 North 7th Street


Forty-one (41)
 
6 through 16


Forty-two (42)
 
Parcels A, B and C


Forty-two (42)
 
15 through 23


Forty-three (43)
 
1 through 6


Fifty-eight (58)
 
1 through 12


Fifty-nine (59)
 
1 through 8


Sixty (60)
 
1 through 6


Sixty (60)
 
21 through 31


Sixty-nine (69)
 
Parcels B and C


Sixty-nine and one-half (69½)
 
 


Seventy (70)
 
1


Seventy-one (71)
 
1 through 10


Seventy-two (72)
 
1 through 13


Seventy-three (73)
 
1 through 22


Eighty-four (84)
 
1 through 19


Eighty-five (85)
 
1 through 14


Eighty-six (86)
 
1 through 16


Eighty-seven (87)
 
1 through 8


One Hundred Five (105)
 
1 through 14


One Hundred Six (106)
 
1 through 12


One Hundred Seven (107)
 
1 through 16




 



176.05    GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   All of the standards applicable to uses of land and structures in the
Core Overlay District are additional and supplemental to the regulations of
the underlying base district. All requirements of both the base district and
the Core Overlay District shall be met. Where regulations appear to conflict,
the standards of the Core Overlay District shall supersede.



176.06    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. 



   In addition to the materials required to be submitted for a standard
zoning and/or building permit outlined in Section 174.04 and 155.04,
applicants seeking approval of projects subject to the Core Overlay District
standards shall submit to the City Building Inspector the following:



      1.   A written description of the proposed project noting the
following:



         A.   Type of construction (new or renovation).



         B.   Materials proposed to be used and the façade area
of each, as well as the total area of each façade to be built or modified.



         C.   Notable existing architectural details to be
preserved, and notable architectural details to be removed or covered (if
any).



      2.   A scaled drawing submitted by engineer or general
contractor of building façade to be built or proposed to be modified,
showing:



         A.   Dimensions of the façade in total, and dimensions
of window and door openings.



         B.   Architectural details as proposed after project
completion.



      3.   In the event clarification is needed, the Planning
Commission may assist City of Denison staff in reviewing applications subject
to the Core Overlay District standards.  The Commission shall consider an
application at a special called meeting following application submittal and
shall advise City staff as to whether the project as proposed satisfies the
Core Overlay District standards.



176.07    DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The following standards are applicable to all commercial and
multi-family dwelling uses and structures in the Core Overlay District with
respect to Section 176.04, Applicability, above.



      1.   Awnings.  The application of awnings to building
façades is encouraged.  Awnings shall not extend across multiple
storefronts and/or multiple buildings. Awnings shall be constructed of
durable, protective, and water repellant material.  However, solid plastic,
exposed aluminum or chrome finishes, or fiberglass awnings are not permitted.
Backlighting or interior illumination of awnings is not permitted.



      2.   Signs.  Signs shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, while
providing for adequate identification of the business. Light cast onto signs
shall be directed downward from fixtures that are architecturally compatible
with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building.
Professional, concealed backlighting may be permitted behind dimensional
signs formed of individually mounted letters or design elements.



         A.   Interior window signs, whether lighted or
unlighted, (such as neon signs and permanently painted window signs) are
permitted, so long as they cover no more than 30% of the surface area of
first story windows.



         B.   Projecting signs shall not be greater than 12
square feet in area nor project more than three feet from the building face,
and shall not extend above the first story of the building. No less than 10
feet of clearance shall be provided between the sidewalk elevation and the
lowest point of a projecting sign.



         C.   Signs shall not block or obliterate design details,
windows, or cornices of the building upon which they are placed.



      3.   Building Height.  New development and redevelopment
shall complement the existing pattern of building heights. In no case shall
buildings exceed four stories and 45 feet in height.



      4.   Setbacks.  New construction and infill buildings must
maintain the alignment of façades along the sidewalk edge and fill the
entire gap between existing buildings, or where impractical, shall have zero
setback from their lot lines and/or neighboring rights-of-ways.  In no case
shall on-site parking be placed between the front façade and the
sidewalk/street.



      5.   Roofs and Parapets.  Sloped roofs are prohibited unless
the roof form is concealed by a parapet or false front. Exceptions may be
granted by the Board of Adjustments if the sloped roof is used on top of a
multi-story building to help reduce the overall height of the façade and
define the residential character of the upper floors.  Provided however,
that sloped roofs may be used as architectural accents on buildings that
otherwise have flat roofs.  In addition, buildings that are located within
one block of the boundary of the CBD district and which have been constructed
with sloping roofs as of the date of enactment of this ordinance (October 21,
2014) shall not be deemed to be non-conforming uses and may be repaired,
replaced and reconstructed without limitation.



      6.   Utility Areas and Mechanical Equipment Screening. 
Utility areas and mechanical equipment should be designed so that they do not
detract from the aesthetic appeal of the vicinity.



         A.   All exterior trash and storage areas, service
yards, loading areas, air conditioning and mechanical units must be screened
so as to be invisible from adjacent public ways using the same materials,
color, and/or style as the principal building.  All roof equipment shall be
screened so as a minimum of 75% be invisible from adjacent public streets. 
This provision excludes public alley ways.



      7.   Façade Width.  Continuous lengths of street-level
building façade shall not exceed 30 feet without interruption by one or more
of the following features:



         A.   Entrances



         B.   Window bays



         C.   Recesses or projections in the façade plane of at
least 12 inches



         D.   Divisions or breaks in materials or contrasting
color changes



      8.   Windows and Doors.  For new buildings a minimum of 30%
of the ground level façade and sides of buildings adjacent to public ways
shall be transparent. Windows on upper floors shall be vertically oriented.
Arched tops, columns framing the openings, and decorative lintels are
encouraged to compliment the architectural character of structures in the
vicinity.



         A.   On existing buildings, original windows and doors
shall not be boarded, shuttered, or enclosed, or their opening dimensions
altered. Original materials or details, where still present, encouraged to be
preserved or, if necessary, replaced with similar materials and details that
complement the architectural character of the structure.



      9.   Materials and Detailing.  Whereas brick and stone are
durable, historic, classic materials that serve as the primary façade
materials on a predominance of structures in the district, fired clay brick
and natural stone or manufactured stone (subject to paragraph 10) shall cover
at least 75% of the front façade area and 50% of side façade areas adjacent
to public ways (except alleys) on newly constructed buildings.  Façade area
shall be calculated excluding the area of windows and doors. Brick and stone
veneers are not preferred, but will be permitted so long as the color of the
masonry is integral to the material. Tile, stone, metal, cement boards and
4x8 stucco finish cement board, and Exterior Insulation and Finish System
(EIFS) are acceptable accent materials.



         A.   New and existing brick and stone masonry
construction shall not be painted unless previously painted.  Murals of
artistic value painted upon the side facades of buildings are permitted upon
review and approval by Council appointed "designated board" or position. 
The color of new masonry exteriors shall be integral to the material.



         B.   Existing masonry facades and architectural details,
such as cornices, transom and display windows, architectural columns,
framing, accents, and masonry detailing, shall not be removed or covered
except that the Board of Appeals and Adjustments  may provide exceptions
when doing so is necessary for the public safety.  These architectural
details are strongly encouraged on new structures.



      10.   Exceptions.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may
exempt an applicant from particular provisions of these design standards if
it can be demonstrated that alternatives to the provision(s) result in a
design that equally satisfies the intent of the Core Overlay District.




(Ch. 176 - Ord. 1447 - Nov. 14 Supp.)




CHAPTER 180
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



 

180.01  Definitions
 
180.07  Procedure for Approval of Final Plat


180.02  Pre-Application
 
180.08  Minimum Standards of Design and Development


180.03  Information Required on Preliminary Plat
 
180.09  Modification and Waiver of Minimum Standards


180.04  Procedure For Approval of Preliminary Plat
 
180.10  Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits


180.05  Review by City Engineer
 
180.11  Fees


180.06  Information Required on Final Plat
 
180.12  Adoption of Restrictions



 



180.01    DEFINITIONS.



   Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:



      1.   “Building line” means a line on a plat between which
line and a street, alley, or private place no building or structure may be
erected.



      2.   “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City
of Denison, Iowa.



      3.   “Commission” means the City Planning and Zoning
Commission.



      4.   “Developer” means the person, firm, or corporation
subdividing land.



      5.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other
parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.



      6.   “Metes and bounds” means the method used to describe
a tract of land so that it can be recorded in the County Recorder’s office,
as contracted with the description of a part of a properly approved and
recorded subdivision plat by the lot and block number.



      7.   “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the
subdivider’s plan of the subdivision is presented and which the subdivider
submits for approval and intends in final form to record.



      8.   “Street widths” means the horizontal distance between
property lines.



      9.   “Subdivision” means:  (i) the division of any tract
or parcel of land into three or more lots, sites, or parcels; (ii)
establishment or dedication of a road, highway, street, or alley through a
tract of land; (iii) re-subdivision of land heretofore divided or platted
into lots, sites, or parcels; provided, however, the sale or exchange of
small parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners, where such
sale or exchange does not create additional lots and where such lots are
already improved, developed, and owned by different persons, shall not be
considered as a subdivision of land.



      10.   “Erosion Control Plan” means the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan, or Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP),
to be performed by a civil engineer, landscape architect, or otherwise
qualified individual and to be consistent with the construction Best
Management Practices included in the Iowa Statewide Urban Designs and
Specifications (SUDAS) program and the Iowa Construction Site Sediment and
Erosion Control Manual and submitted for final subdivision plat approval to
be reviewed, upon submittal and prior to final approval, by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1372 – Jan. 10 Supp.)



180.02    PRE-APPLICATION.



      1.   Required Plans and Data.  Prior to submission of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the Commission and submit
the following data:



      2.   General subdivision information which shall describe or
outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as
necessary to supplement the drawings required below.  This information may
include data on existing covenants, land, characteristics and available
community facilities and utilities; and information describing the
subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width
and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, and other
public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street
improvements.



      3.   Location map which shall show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it, including development name and location; main traffic arteries;
public transportation lines; shopping centers; elementary and high schools;
parks and playgrounds; principal places of employment; other community
features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches; title;
scale; north arrow; and date.



      4.   Sketch plan on topographic survey which shall show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features
in relation to existing conditions.  The sketch plan may be a free-hand
pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey.  In any
event, the sketch plan shall include either the existing topographic data
listed in Section 180.03 below or such of these data as the Commission
determines is necessary for its consideration of the proposed sketch plan.



180.03    INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   In seeking to subdivide land into lots and/or to dedicate streets,
alleys, or other lands for public use, the owner shall submit four copies of
a preliminary plat to the Commission before submission of a final plat.  The
preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to 1 inch or larger,
and shall show or be accompanied by the following:



      1.   The dimensions and location of the property to be platted.



      2.   The location of property lines, buildings, watercourses,
tree masses and other existing features affecting the plat.



      3.   The location and width of proposed and existing streets,
alleys and lots included in the plat; also similar facts regarding streets
and alleys in property immediately adjacent.



      4.   The location and size of existing public sewers, gas and
water mains within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto.



      5.   The names and location of all adjoining subdivisions.



      6.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be
recorded and the name of the subdivider.



      7.   Contours at intervals of five feet or less.



      8.   The scale, date, and north point.



      9.   Complete engineering data covering cross sections,
profiles and proposed grades for the improvements required, all to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.



      10.   The plat shall be accompanied by a written and signed
statement in which the subdivider sets forth the proposed restrictions,
easements, buildings lines, public improvements, etc., within the area of the
plat.  The plat must meet all requirements of the zoning regulations for the
district in which it is located and shall be in general conformity with the
Comprehensive Development Plan.



      11.   The plat shall be plainly marked “Preliminary Plat.”



180.04    PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   Four copies of the preliminary plat, one copy of an attorney’s title
opinion addressed to the Commission, together with three copies of the
owner’s statement, shall be filed with the Commission, and there shall
forthwith be referred one copy of the plat and a copy of the owner’s
statement to the City Engineer.  The City Engineer shall examine said plat
as to its compliance with the laws and ordinances of the City, the existing
street system, and good engineering practices, and shall submit findings in
duplicate to the Commission, together with the copy of the plat received. 
When the Engineer’s report is received by the Commission, it shall as soon
as possible consider said report and pass upon the plat.  It shall then set
forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification, or
disapproval.  In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its
reasons therefor.  The Commission shall forthwith submit all four copies of
the preliminary plat, together with a copy of the owner’s statement, a copy
of the Engineer’s report and a signed copy of its recommendations to the
Council.  The Council shall then take action upon the preliminary plat,
certifying its approval or disapproval.  In case of disapproval, it shall
give its reasons therefor.  If approved and all four copies duly certified,
one copy shall be delivered to the Commission, one to the City Engineer, one
to the City Clerk and the fourth shall be returned to the owner or
subdivider.  The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council does not
constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but shall be authorization to
proceed with the preparation of the final plat.



180.05    REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER.



   When a preliminary plat has been approved, the developer shall submit
to the City Engineer one copy of the preliminary plat and a Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan including all applicable Best Management Practices
to be provided by the developer in the subdivision.  After reviewing the
preliminary plat and the proposed Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan, the City Engineer may recommend any changes in or additions to the
proposed erosion and sediment control measures which are necessary to comply
with the soil loss limit regulations referred to in Subsection 180.08(17) of
this chapter. The final plat shall not be approved by the Commission or by
the Council until either:  (i) recommendations as to the proposed erosion
and sediment control measures have been received from the City Engineer; or
(ii) thirty days have passed after the submission of the preliminary plat and
the statement of proposed erosion and sediment control measures to the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 1372 – Jan. 10 Supp.)



180.06    INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT.



   The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to 1 inch or
larger and shall show or be accompanied by the following:



      1.   The boundaries of the property and lines of all proposed
streets and alleys, with their widths and names, and the lines and dimensions
of any other portions intended to be dedicated to the public use.



      2.   All lot lines, and an identification system for all lots
and blocks, with figures showing their dimensions.



      3.   Building lines and easements for any rights-of-way
provided for public use, services, or utilities, with figures showing their
dimensions, unless the subdivider desires to describe the easements for
public use, services, or utilities in the owner’s statement of the plat.



      4.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for
locating lots, tracts, or parcels of ground, streets, alleys and easements,
and the boundaries of the subdivision; the linear dimensions are to be
expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.



      5.   The necessary functions for all curvilinear lines and
streets, and radii for all rounded corners.



      6.   All survey monuments, ties to a section or quarter
section corner, and benchmarks, together with their description and
measurements relative to the plat.



      7.   Name of subdivision, locations and extent of property
subdivided, points of compass, scale and date of plat.



      8.   Certification under seal by a land surveyor, licensed
under the laws of Iowa.



      9.   Where previous easements appear on a separate instrument,
reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat.



      10.   The necessary resolution forms for approval of both the
Commission and the Council.



      11.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if
any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with
their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
the acknowledgments of deeds.  The statement by the proprietors may also
include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are
designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other
public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council.



      12.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if
any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with
their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
the acknowledgment of deeds.  An affidavit and bond as provided for in
Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of
the mortgage or lienholder.  When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.



      13.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the
abstract of title of the land being platted.  The opinion shall state the
names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other
encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along
with any bonds securing the encumbrances.  Utility easements shall not be
construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section.



      14.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is
free from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land
is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are
secured by bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.



      15.   A statement by the auditor approving the name or title
of the subdivision plat.



(Ord. 1372 – Jan. 10 Supp.)



180.07    PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.



   Four copies of the final plat, together with three copies of the
owners’ statement, shall be submitted to the Commission, and there shall
forthwith be referred one copy of the plat, together with a copy of the
owners’ statement to the City Engineer.  The City Engineer shall carefully
examine said plat as to its compliance with the approved preliminary plat,
and shall submit findings in duplicate to the Commission, together with the
copy of the plat received.  When the Engineer’s report is received by the
Commission, it shall, as soon as possible, consider said report and pass upon
the plat.  When the final plat has been passed upon by the Commission, all
four copies of the plat shall forthwith be transmitted to the Council,
together with a copy of the owners’ statement, a copy of the Engineer’s
report and a signed copy of its approval to the Council.  When the final
plat has been approved by the Council and all four copies duly certified, one
copy shall be delivered to the Commission, one to the City Engineer, one to
the City Clerk and the fourth copy to the owner or subdivider for filing with
the County Recorder.  If the plat is disapproved by the Council, such
disapproval shall point out wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.



180.08    MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT.



      1.   Acreage Subdivisions.  Where the parcel of land is
subdivided into larger tracts than ordinarily used for building lots, such
parcel shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major streets and
the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.  Easements providing for
the future opening and extension of such streets, may, at the discretion of
the Council, be made a requirement of the plat.



      2.   Relation to Adjoining Street System.  New subdivisions
shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets
in adjoining additions (or for their proper projection where adjoining
property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public
requirements.  In general, such street shall be of a width as great as that
of the streets so continued or projected but shall not be less than the
minimum width requirement.



      3.   Street Arrangements.  The street system shall be so
arranged to comply as far as practicable, with the Major Street Plan of the
City.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible to a right angle and in
no case shall they intersect at less than 60 degrees.  No street shall be
parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad, unless it is 150 feet or
more from the line of the railroad right-of-way.  Street jogs with
centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.



      4.   Street Width.



         A.   The widths for all street rights-of-way shall
conform to the specific street types as designated on the Major Street Plan
in the Comprehensive Development Plan.



         B.   The minimum width for streets shall be 62 feet
between property lines, except that in cases where the topography or special
conditions make a street of less width more suitable, the Commission and the
Council may waive the above requirement.



         C.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of these regulations; and where the Commission finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided.  Wherever a half street is adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.



      5.   Street Grades.  Street grades, if practical, shall not
exceed six percent for all arterial and collector streets and ten percent for
all minor streets and no grade shall be less than one-half of one percent.



      6.   Alleys.  The minimum width of an alley in a residential
block shall be 16 feet (alleys are not recommended for residential districts
except under unusual conditions).  Alleys will be required in the rear of
all business lots and shall be at least 24 feet wide.  Dead-end alleys shall
be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with
adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end.



      7.   Easements Where There Are No Alleys.  Where alleys are
not provided, easements of not less than 5 feet in width shall be provided on
both side lot lines and an easement of not less than 10 feet in width shall
be provided on all rear lot lines where necessary for poles, wires, conduits,
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains.  Easements of greater
width may be required along lines or across lots where necessary for the
extension of main sewers and similar utilities.  The subdivider shall
consult with the City Engineer, the Superintendent of Utilities, and the
Manager of the local telephone company as for the need and location of
easements.



      8.   Places.  Where it is desired to subdivide a parcel of
land, which, because of its size or location, does not permit a normal lot or
street area, there may be established a “Place.”  Such a place may be in
the form of a court, non-connecting street, or other arrangement, provided,
however, that proper access shall be given to all lots from a dedicated place
(street or court).  If any dead-end place (street or court) is more than 250
feet in length, it shall terminate in an open space, preferably circular,
having a minimum diameter of 110 feet.  Except in unusual instances, no
dead-end street or place shall exceed 600 feet in length.



      9.   Blocks.  All blocks shall be required to have a minimum
length of 300 feet and a minimum depth of 200 feet.



      10.   Lot Lines.  All side lines of lots shall be at right
angles to straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines, unless a
variation to this rule will give a better street and lot plan.  Double
frontage, and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential
to provide specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.  A planting
screen easement of at least 10 feet shall be provided along the line of lots
abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use and no right of
access shall be provided across said easement.



      11.   Size and Shape of Lots.  Minimum lot size shall be
governed by the City zoning regulations except that, where on-site sewage
disposal and/or water supply are proposed, the following lot sizes shall be
required:



         A.   Where both water supply and sanitary sewage
disposal are provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots for single-family
detached dwellings shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and a
minimum width at the building line of 100 feet.



         B.   Where only water supply or sanitary sewage disposal
facilities are to be provided on the lot, lots for single-family detached
dwellings shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and a minimum width
at the building line of 70 feet.



         C.   In either of the above cases, the Commission may
require that the subdivider have such tests made by the City Health Officer
as will determine the adequacy of the proposed facilities in relation to the
proposed lot size and existing topographical and soil conditions.  When such
tests are required, a certificate of adequacy of the proposed facilities made
by the City Health Officer shall be prerequisite to final approval of the
plans.  Lots shall be conveniently shaped, and the depth of lots shall
generally not exceed their width by more than 2½ times, provided the width
is at least 60 feet at the building line.  Each lot shall have at least 20
feet of frontage on a street.



      12.   Street Names.  Streets that are obviously in alignment
with others already existing and named shall bear the name of existing
streets; otherwise, names shall not duplicate existing street names, and
names similar to existing street names shall not be permitted.



      13.   Building Lines.  Building lines shall be shown on the
plat or included in the owner’s statement on all lots whenever the depth of
such building lines is greater than those required by the zoning
regulations.  Provisions shall be made in the owner’s statement requiring
all enclosed parts of buildings to be set back to such building lines.



      14.   Character of Development.  The Commission and the
Council may require that certain minimum regulations regarding type and
character of development be incorporated in the owner’s statement of
plat.  Such regulations shall be intended to protect the character and
development of the platted subdivision, as well as that of the surrounding
development.



      15.   Easements Along Streams and Water Courses.  Whenever
any stream or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being
subdivided, the subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, make
adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water and shall also
provide and dedicate to the City an easement along said streams and
watercourses meeting the approval of the Council.



      16.   Improvements.  Before the final plat of any subdivision
shall be approved by the Commission or the Council, the developer shall make
and install all of the improvements required by this subsection, unless the
Council permits the developer to enter into a contract for the making and
installation of said improvements after the approval of the final plat.  If
the Council permits the developer to enter into a contract for the making and
installation of improvements after the approval of the final plat, it may
require that the developer file a bond in such amount as it finds necessary
to secure the making and installation of such improvements.  Construction
plans and specifications shall be filed with the Commission and approved by
the Commission and the Council before the making or installation of any
improvements.



         A.   Street Grading and Surfacing.  All streets within
any subdivision shall be brought to grade established from the City datum
plane.  All street surfaces shall conform in width as designated on the
Major Street Plan in the Comprehensive Development Plan.



            (1)   Two eight-foot parking lines may be provided
for collector and minor streets in areas where they are warranted by need;
however, no on-street parking shall be allowed on State, regional and
arterial roads except within the area of the Central Business District, in
which case sufficient additional street surface width must be provided for
such parking.  All streets shall have integral concrete curb and gutter
according to the City Engineer’s specifications.



            (2)   All subdivision streets shall be paved with
Portland Cement Concrete at least 7 inches in thickness or with asphaltic
concrete having equivalent strength and wearing qualities.



         B.   Water Service.  Where a public water main is
reasonably accessible, the developer shall connect with such water main and
provide a water connection for each lot with service pipe installed to the
property line in accordance with the City Water Department standards,
procedure and supervision.



         C.   Storm Sewers.  The developer will be required to
construct adequate storm sewers in each subdivision.



         D.   Sanitary Sewers.  Within the subdivision the
developer will be required to construct sanitary sewers in accordance with
the State Board of Health regulations, and plans for said sewers shall be
approved by the State Board of Health before construction, and approved plans
shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to construction.



         E.   Engineering.  The City shall not be responsible
for engineering costs associated with the new subdivision.  All the
above-mentioned facilities constructed under the provisions of this chapter
shall be inspected and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer
or a representative of the City acting in the capacity of City Engineer and
the developer shall reimburse the City for all costs of inspection.  All
material used shall be required to meet all the following standards: 
American Association of State Highway Officials, American Society for Testing
Materials, American Waterworks Association and Iowa State Highway Commission
specifications.



         F.   Off-Street Parking.  Each lot shall have
off-street parking provisions as provided in the zoning regulations.



         G.   Sidewalks.  The developer shall provide sidewalks
of Portland Cement concrete 4 feet in width and 4 inches in thickness. 
Sidewalks shall be 6 inches thick through driveways.



         H.   Street Markers.  The developer shall provide
street markers at intersections as approved by the City.



         I.   Other Improvements.  The Council may also require
other improvements and any other accessories normally found in a residential
area.



      17.   Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.  Construction
plans and specifications filed pursuant to subsection 16 of this section
shall include a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan approved by the
City Engineer with adequate provisions for erosion and sediment control
measures. No plans and specifications for improvements in a subdivision shall
be approved unless the Commission and the Council find that the plans and
specifications include erosion and sediment control measures necessary to
comply with the soil loss limit regulations adopted by the Crawford County
Soil Conservation District on August 30, 1972.  No clearing, grading, or
construction work shall be done in any subdivision until the issuance of a
Land Disturbance Permit and erosion and sediment control measures in
accordance with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan have been
provided in compliance with approved plans and specifications.



(Ord. 1372 – Jan. 10 Supp.)



180.09    MODIFICATION AND WAIVER OF MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   In a planned unit development established under Chapter 169 of this
Code of Ordinances, the Commission and the Council may modify or waive any of
the minimum standards of design and development contained in Section 180.08
of this chapter to the extent that they find that such modification or waiver
is not contrary to the interests of the City and necessary to achieve the
purposes stated in Section 169.12 of this Code of Ordinances.  As a
condition to the modification or waiver of any of said minimum standards of
design and development, the Commission and the Council may require that the
developer enter into a contract for the future construction of any of the
improvements set out in subsection 16 of Section 180.08 of this chapter. 
Such contract may provide either for construction of said improvements by the
developer or for special assessment of the cost of said improvements against
the property in the subdivision.  Any modification or waiver of the minimum
standards of design and development shall be specifically stated in the
resolution establishing the planned unit development.



180.10    SUBDIVISIONS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



      1.   Pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions located in the
City or within two miles of the corporate limits of the City.



      2.   If a subdivision is located entirely outside the
corporate limits of the City and has an area of not less than fifteen acres,
the Commission and the Council on application by the developer may modify or
waive any of the minimum standards of design and development contained in
Section 180.08 of this chapter to the extent that they find that such
modification or waiver will not interfere with the future development of the
City and is necessary to achieve the purposes stated in Section 169.12 of
this Code of Ordinances.  As a condition to the modification or waiver of
any of said minimum standards of design and development, the Commission and
the Council may require that the developer enter into a contract for the
future construction of any of the improvements set out in subsection 16 of
Section 180.08 of this chapter.  Such contract may provide either for
construction of said improvements by the developer or for special assessment
of the cost of said improvements against the property of the subdivision. 
Any modification or waiver of the minimum standards of design and development
shall be specifically stated in the resolutions approving the final plat.



180.11    FEES.



   Upon filing the preliminary plat, the fee set by resolution of the
Council shall be paid to the City to cover the cost of checking and
processing of the preliminary plat and the fee set by resolution of the
Council shall be paid to the City for the processing of the final plat. 
Fees are shown in the Schedule of Civil Penalties and Fees in the Appendix to
this Code of Ordinances.



180.12    ADOPTION OF RESTRICTIONS.



   The restrictions of Section 354.8 of the Code of Iowa are hereby
adopted by the City.



APPENDIX



USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES



   The following information is provided to assist in the use and proper
maintenance of this Code of Ordinances.



   DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES



   1.   OFFICIAL COPY.



   The “OFFICIAL COPY” of the Code of Ordinances must be kept by the
City Clerk and should be identified as the “OFFICIAL COPY.” 



   2.   DISTRIBUTION.



   Other copies of the Code of Ordinances should be made available to all
persons having a relatively frequent and continuing need to have access to
ordinances which are in effect in the City as well as reference centers such
as the City Library, County Law Library, and perhaps the schools.



   3.   SALE.



   The sale or distribution of copies in a general fashion is not
recommended as experience indicates that indiscriminate distribution tends to
result in outdated codes being used or misused. 



   4.   RECORD OF DISTRIBUTION.



   The City Clerk should be responsible for maintaining an accurate and
current record of persons having a copy of the Code of Ordinances.  Each
official, elected or appointed, should return to the City, upon leaving
office, all documents, records and other materials pertaining to the office,
including this Code of Ordinances.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   NUMBERING OF ORDINANCES
AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES



   It is recommended that a simple numerical sequence be used in assigning
ordinance numbers to ordinances as they are passed.  For example, if the
ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances is No. 163, we would suggest that
the first ordinance passed changing, adding to, or deleting from the Code be
assigned the number 164, the next ordinance be assigned the number 165, and
so on.  We advise against using the Code of Ordinances numbering system for
the numbering of ordinances.



   RETENTION OF AMENDING ORDINANCES



   Please note that two books should be maintained:  (1) the Code of
Ordinances; and (2) an ordinance book.  We will assist in the maintenance of
the Code of Ordinances book, per the Supplement Agreement, by revising and
returning appropriate pages for the Code of Ordinances book as required to
accommodate ordinances amending the Code.  The City Clerk is responsible for
maintaining the ordinance book and must be sure that an original copy of each
ordinance adopted, bearing the signatures of the Mayor and Clerk, is inserted
in the ordinance book and preserved in a safe place.



   SUPPLEMENT RECORD



   A record of all supplements prepared for the Code of Ordinances is
provided in the front of the Code.  This record will indicate the number and
date of the ordinances adopting the original Code and of each subsequently
adopted ordinance which has been incorporated in the Code.  For each
supplemented ordinance, the Supplement Record will list the ordinance number,
date, topic, and chapter or section number of the Code affected by the
amending ordinance.  A periodic review of the Supplement Record and
ordinances passed will assure that all ordinances amending the Code have been
incorporated therein.



   DISTRIBUTION OF SUPPLEMENTS



   Supplements containing revised pages for insertion in each Code will be
sent to the Clerk.  It is the responsibility of the Clerk to see that each
person having a Code of Ordinances receives each supplement so that each Code
may be properly updated to reflect action of the Council in amending the Code.



   AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES



   The Code of Ordinances contains most of the laws of the City as of the
date of its adoption and is continually subject to amendment to reflect
changing policies of the Council, mandates of the State, or decisions of the
Courts.  Amendments to the Code of Ordinances can only be accomplished by
the adoption of an ordinance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)



   The following forms of ordinances are recommended for making amendments
to the Code of Ordinances:



   ADDITION OF NEW PROVISIONS



   New material may require the addition of a new SUBSECTION, SECTION or
CHAPTER, as follows:



   ORDINANCE NO. ___



   AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
____________, IOWA, ____, BY ADDING A NEW SECTION LIMITING PARKING TO THIRTY
MINUTES ON A PORTION OF SOUTH BOONE STREET



   BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of ___________, Iowa:



   SECTION 1.  NEW SECTION.



   The Code of Ordinances of the City of __________, Iowa, ____ is amended
by adding a new Section 69.16, entitled PARKING LIMITED TO THIRTY MINUTES,
which is hereby adopted to read as follows:



69.16  PARKING LIMITED TO THIRTY MINUTES.



   It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than
thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on each day
upon the following designated streets:



      1.   South Boone Street, on the west side, from Forest Avenue
to Mason Drive.



   SECTION 2.  REPEALER.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed.



   SECTION 3.  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.



   If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



   SECTION 4.  WHEN EFFECTIVE.



   This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage,
approval, and publication as provided by law.



   Passed by the Council the ___ day of _______________, 20___, and
approved this ___ day of ________________, 20___.



________________________________



   Mayor



   ATTEST:



_______________________________



   City Clerk



   First Reading:  ____________________



   Second Reading: __________________



   Third Reading:  ___________________



   I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on
the ___ day of _________________, 20___. 



_________________________________



   City Clerk



   DELETION OF EXISTING PROVISIONS



   Provisions may be removed from the Code of Ordinances by deleting
SUBSECTIONS, SECTIONS or CHAPTERS as follows:



   ORDINANCE NO. ___



   AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
______________, IOWA, ____, BY REPEALING SECTION 65.02, SUBSECTION 5,
PERTAINING TO THE SPECIAL STOP REQUIRED ON LAKE BOULEVARD



   BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:



   SECTION 1.  SUBSECTION REPEALED.



   The Code of Ordinances of the City of __________, Iowa, ____, is hereby
amended by repealing Section 65.02, Subsection 5, which required vehicles
traveling south on Lake Boulevard to stop at Second Place North.



   SECTION 2.  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.



   If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



   SECTION 3.  WHEN EFFECTIVE.



   This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage,
approval, and publication as provided by law.



   Passed by the Council the ___ day of ________________, 20___, and
approved this ___ day of ________________, 20___. 



_________________________________



   Mayor



   ATTEST:



_______________________________



   City Clerk



   First Reading:  ____________________



   Second Reading: __________________



   Third Reading:  ___________________



   I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No.___ on the
___ day of __________________, 20___. 



________________________________



   City Clerk



   MODIFICATION OR CHANGE OF EXISTING PROVISION



   Existing provisions may be added to, partially deleted, or changed as
follows:



   ORDINANCE NO. ___



   AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
________________, IOWA, ____, BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO SEWER
SERVICE CHARGES



BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of ___________, Iowa:



   SECTION 1.  SECTION MODIFIED.



   Section 99.02 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
_________________, Iowa, ____, is repealed and the following adopted in lieu
thereof:



99.02  RATE.



   Each customer shall pay sewer service charges in the amount of 100
percent (100%) of the bill for water and water service attributable to the
customer for the property served, but in no event less than ten dollars
($10.00) per month.



   SECTION 2.  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.



   If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



   SECTION 3.  WHEN EFFECTIVE.



   This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage,
approval, and publication as provided by law.



   Passed by the Council the ___ day of _______________, 20___, and
approved this ___ day of __________________, 20___.



_________________________________



   Mayor



   ATTEST:



_______________________________



   City Clerk



   First Reading:  ____________________



   Second Reading: __________________



   Third Reading:  ___________________



   I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on
the ___ day of _________________, 20___. 



_________________________________



   City Clerk



   ORDINANCES NOT CONTAINED IN THE CODE OF ORDINANCES



   There are certain types of ordinances which the City will be adopting
which do not have to be incorporated in the Code of Ordinances.  These
include ordinances:  (1) establishing grades of streets or sidewalks; (2)
vacating streets or alleys; (3) authorizing the issuance of bonds; and (4)
amending the zoning map.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.8)



   ORDINANCE NO. ___



   AN ORDINANCE VACATING THE ALLEY LYING IN BLOCK TWO (2) RAILROAD
ADDITION TO _____________, IOWA



   Be It Enacted by the City Council of the City of ___________, Iowa:



   SECTION 1.  The alley lying in Block Two (2), Railroad Addition to
_____________, Iowa, is hereby vacated and closed from public use.



   SECTION 2.  The Council may by resolution convey the alley described
above to abutting property owners in a manner directed by the City Council.



   SECTION 3.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.



   SECTION 4.  If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall
be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part
thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 



   SECTION 5.  This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final
passage, approval, and publication as provided by law. 



   Passed by the Council the ___ day of __________________, 20___, and
approved this ___ day of _________________, 20___. 



_________________________________



   Mayor



   ATTEST:



_______________________________



   City Clerk



   First Reading:  ____________________



   Second Reading: __________________



   Third Reading:  ___________________



   I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on
the ___ day of _________________, 20___. 



_________________________________



   City Clerk



   These ordinances should be numbered in the same numerical sequence as
any other amending ordinance and placed in their proper sequence in the
ordinance book.



SUGGESTED FORM:
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE



   TO:   (Name and address of owner, agent, or occupant of the property
on which the nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the
nuisance).



   You are hereby notified to abate the nuisance existing at (name
location of nuisance) or file written request for a hearing with the
undersigned officer within (hours or days) from service of this notice.



   The nuisance consists of: (describe the nuisance) and shall be abated
by:  (state action necessary to abate the particular nuisance).



   In the event you fail to abate or cause to be abated the above nuisance
as directed, the City will take such steps as are necessary to abate or cause
to be abated the nuisance and the costs will be assessed against you as
provided by law. 



   Date of Notice:  _________________________



   City of ____________________________, Iowa



   By:  ___________________________________



   (designate officer initiating notice)



SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES AND FEES



Municipal Infractions



   The penalties for violations of ordinances pursuant to Section 4.02(1)
of this Code of Ordinances are as follows:



 

      First Offense
 
not to exceed $250.00


      Second Offense
 
not to exceed $500.00


      Third Offense
 
not to exceed $750.00


      Fourth and Subsequent Offenses
 
not to exceed $1,000.00



 



   The penalties for violation of chapters of this Code of Ordinances
pursuant to Section 4.02(2) are as follows:



 

      First Offense
 
not to exceed $750.00


      Second and Subsequent Offenses
 
not to exceed $1,000.00



 



Animal Protection and Control



   Section 55.03:



 

   Annual Dog or Cat License:
 
$10.00 per license for spayed or neutered animals


 
 
$20.00 per license for animals which are not spayed or neutered


 
 
Fees are waived for certified service animals


   Delinquent Penalty:
 
$2.00 per license for each month or part thereof in which the license fee is
delinquent



 



   Section 55.17:



   Impounding Fees:



 



   Licensed Dog or Cat:
 
 


      First offense
 
$   20.00


      Second offense
 
$   30.00


      Third offense
 
$   40.00


      Each subsequent offense
 
$   50.00


   Unlicensed Dog or Cat:
 
 


      First offense
 
$   30.00


      Second offense
 
$   40.00


      Third offense
 
$   50.00


      Each subsequent offense
 
$   60.00


      Room and Board Fee
 
$   10.00 per day, plus impoundment fee




 



Mowing Fees



   As referred to in Section 57.07, fees for cutting, mowing and
maintaining all grass, weeds and brush are as follows:



      Administrative Fee      $50.00



      Equipment Fee      $100.00



      Labor for mowing      $75.00 per hour



Traffic Code



   U-Turns Prohibited – $35.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section
62.171)



   Operating Vehicles on Sidewalks – $35.00, plus surcharge and court
costs (Section 62.172)



   Driving on City Property – $35.00, plus surcharge and court costs
(Section 62.173)



   Clinging to Vehicle – $35.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section
62.174)



   Disturbing the Peace with Motor Vehicles – $35.00, plus surcharge and
court costs (Section 41.04)



   Engine Brakes and Compression brakes – $35.00, plus surcharge and
court costs (Section 41.04)



   Parking Citations – $25.00 per occurrence (Section 69.03)



   Handicap Parking Citations of Iowa Code Section 321L.4(2) –  $100.00
per occurrence (Section 69.03)



   Daily Storage Fee for Impounded Vehicles – $10.00 (Section 69.06)



   UTV Improper Operation on Highways/Parking/Designated Trails –
$50.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[1] and 75.06[2.I])



   UTV Hours of Operation – $50.00, plus surcharge and court costs
(Section 75.06 [2][A])



   UTV Operate at a Speed Greater than Reasonable/Proper – $100.00, plus
surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][B])



   UTV Operate in a Careless, Reckless or Negligent Manner – $100.00,
plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][C])



   UTV Lights Required – $20.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section
75.06[2][E])



   UTV Operate in a Tree Nursery or Planting Damaging Growing Stock –
$100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][F])



   UTV Operate on Public Land/Ice/Snow in Violation of Official Signs –
$100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][G])



   UTV Operate in Prohibited Park/Wildlife Areas/Preserves/Streambeds –
$100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][H])



   UTV Operate on Railroad Right-of-Way – $100.00, plus surcharge and
court costs (Section 75.06[2][J])



   UTV Operate or Ride with a Loaded or Uncased Firearm – $100.00, plus
surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][K])



   UTV Operate with More Persons than Vehicle was Designed to Carry –
$100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][L])



   UTV Operate on Designated Riding Areas or Trails – $100.00, plus
surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][M])



   UTV Operate a Prohibited Vehicle on Designated Riding Areas or Trails
– $100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06 [2][N])



   UTV Operate Under the Age of 18 and Without a Valid Driver’s License
– $100.00, plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06 [2][O])



   UTV Registration and/or Identification Permit Violations – $50.00,
plus surcharge and court costs (Section 75.06[2][P] and 75.06[7])



   UTV Liability Insurance – Non Accident Related – $250.00, plus
surcharge and court costs; Accident Related $500.00, plus surcharge and court
costs (Section 75.06[2][Q])



   UTV Seatbelt/Safety Restraint – $50.00, plus surcharge and court
costs (Section 75.06[3])



   UTV Child Restraint – $100.00, plus surcharge and court costs
(Section 75.06[3])



   UTV Mufflers Required – $20.00, plus surcharge and court costs
(Section 75.06[4])



   UTV Turning and Signaling – $50.00, plus surcharge and court costs
(Section 75.06[5])



   UTV Violation of Stop Signal – $100.00, plus surcharge and court
costs (Section 75.06[6])



Solid Waste Collection Fees



   As referred to in Section 105.17, fees for each single-family residence
and each dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling in duplexes and
triplexes are as follows:



 

      35-gallon cart – $10.00 + $4.00 Assessment Fee
 
$14.00


      65-gallon cart – $11.00 + $4.00 Assessment Fee
 
$15.00


      96-gallon cart – $12.00 + $4.00 Assessment Fee
 
$16.00


      Two 96-gallon carts – $18.00 + $4.00 Assessment Fee
 
$22.00


      All other electric meters – $4.00 Assessment Fee per month
 



 



License and Permit Fees



   Solid Waste Collectors – $50.00 (Section 106.02[3])



   Peddlers, Solicitors, Vendors and Transient Merchants (Section 122.05):



      For one day   $   35.00



      For one week   $   100.00



      For one month   $   200.00



      For one month to six months   $   350.00



      For one year or major part thereof   $   500.00



   Pawnbrokers – $150.00 (Section 125.02)



   Moving Building – $50.00 per structure (Section 123.08)



   Special Event Permit Fee – $100.00 (Section 125.05)



   Special Event Refundable Deposit – $250.00 (Section 125.05)



Snow Removal Fees



   As referred to in Section 136.03, fees for the removal of snow, ice,
and accumulations from sidewalks are as follows:



      Administrative Fee         $50.00



      Equipment Fee         $100.00



      Labor for snow removal      $75.00 per hour



Right-of-Way Occupancy – Permit and Management Fees



   Section 141.25(7):



 



   Annual Building Permit
 
$   100.00


   General Contractor License
 
$   45.00


   Obstruction Permit Fee – One Lane (10 x 50)
 


      Primary Arterial - $100.00 + $20.00 for administrative costs
 
$   120.00


      Minor Arterial - $75.00 + $20.00 for administrative costs
 
$   95.00


      Collector - $50.00 +20.00 for administrative costs
 
$   70.00


      Residential - $25.00 + $20.00 for administrative costs
 
$   45.00


   Right-of-Way Permit Fee - $20.00 per 500 lineal feet
 


   Repair/Maintenance Per Line
 


      Less than 100 feet
 
$   5.00


      100 to 750 feet
 
$   10.00


   Preliminary Plan Review Fee
 
$   75.00


   Final Plan Review
 
$   100.00




 



Rental Housing Regulatory and Inspection Program Fees



   Section 147.06:



 

   Annual Inspection Fee for Housing Units Exclusive of Owner Occupied
 
$   5.00/unit


   Minimum Fee Per Structure
 
$   20.00


   Annual Inspection Fee for Owner Occupied Units per Rented Sleeping Room
(Minimum Does Not Apply)
 
$   5.00/room


   Administrative Late Fee (Per Structure)
 
$   50.00


   Maximum Fee Per Unit
 
$   55.00


   Rental Inspection Fee for Missed Appointments
 
$   35.00


   Re-Inspections
 
$   35.00



 



Building and Sign Permit Fees



   Section 155.05:



 



   $1 to $2,000
 
$40.00


   $2,001 to $25,000
 
$40.00 for the first $2,000; plus $7.25 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000


   $25,001 to $50,000
 
$301.25 for the first $25,000; plus $6.25 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000


   $50,001 to $100,000
 
$450.00 for the first $50,000; plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000


   $100,001 to $500,000
 
$550.00 for the first $100,000; plus $3.75 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000


   $500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,377.00 for the first $500,000; plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000


   $1,000,001 and over
 
$4,252.00 for the first $1,000,000; plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof.


   Land Disturbance Permit Fee
 
$120.00 for the first acre; plus $20.00 for each additional acre




 



   Sidewalks and Driveway Permit Fee - $35.00



   6 Month Extension for Permit – 25% of original permit fees



   Operating Without a Permit – 50% of the permit fees plus the original
permit fee



   Annual Building Permit Fee – $100.00 (Section 155.08)



   General Contractor License – $45.00 (Section 155.09)




Roofing Permit Fee





Roofing Permit Fee-$25.00





Curb Grinding Fees





Curb Grinding Permit–$20.00





Curb Grinding Fee (minimum fee based on 8')–$15.00 per ft.*





* if the services are provided by the City of Denison, Iowa





Fire Department HAZ-MAT Equipment Fees




   Section 156.03(10):



 



   F-26 Engine - Initial Response and Up to 1 Hour
 
$   250.00


   F-26 Engine - Each Additional Hour After 1st Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-27 Engine/Tanker - Initial Response and Up to 1 Hour
 
$   250.00


   F-27 Engine/Tanker - Each Additional Hour After 1st Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-30 Heavy Rescue - Initial Response and Up to 1 Hour
 
$   250.00


   F-30 Heavy Rescue - Each Additional Hour After 1st Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-28 Aerial - Initial Response and Up to 1 Hour
 
$   250.00


   F-28 Aerial - Each Additional Hour After 1st Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-25 Equipment Apparatus Fee per Hour
 
$   100.00


   F-21 Command Vehicle Fee per Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-27-2 Fee per Hour
 
$   150.00


   F-27-3 Fee per Hour
 
$   150.00


   Each Man Hour
 
$   40.00


Costs and replacement costs of expendable materials, equipment and supplies
utilized in incident mitigation, including but not limited to HAZ-MAT suits
and consumable items such as water and Gatorade necessary for the well-being
of the responders
 
AS INVOICED




 



Mechanical, Plumbing, and Electrical Fees



   Mechanical (Section 157.09):



      New Residential Mechanical Application:



 

         Single Family
 
$   45.00


         Duplex
 
$   50.00


         Triplex
 
$   55.00


         4-Plex
 
$   60.00


         5-Plex
 
$   65.00


         More than 5-Plex
 
$   5.00 per each additional unit



 



      New Commercial Mechanical Commercial or Industrial:



 



         First $10,000
 
$   55.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   55.00 plus $4.00 per $1,000


         Third $10,000
 
$   75.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000


         Fourth $10,000
 
$   85.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         Fifth $10,000
 
$   90.00 plus $.50 per $1,000


         In Addition to Application Fee:
 
$   3.00 per unit /.5ton


      Mechanical Repairs:
 


         First $10,000
 
$   40.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   40.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         First Re-Inspection
 
$   25.00


         Second Re-Inspection
 
$   45.00


         Third and Subsequent Re-Inspection
 
$   60.00




 



   Plumbing (Section 158.11):



      New Residential Plumbing Application:



 

         Single Family
 
$   45.00


         Duplex
 
$   50.00


         Triplex
 
$   55.00


         4-Plex
 
$   60.00


         5-Plex
 
$   65.00


         More than 5-Plex
 
$   5.00 per each additional unit



 



      New Commercial Plumbing Commercial or Industrial:



 



         First $10,000
 
$   55.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   55.00 plus $4.00 per $1,000


         Third $10,000
 
$   75.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000


         Fourth $10,000
 
$   85.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         Fifth $10,000
 
$   90.00 plus $.50 per $1,000


      In Addition to Application Fee:
 
$   3.00 per fixture


      Plumbing Repairs:
 
 


         First $10,000
 
$   40.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   40.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         First Re-Inspection
 
$   25.00


         Second Re-Inspection
 
$   45.00


         Third and Subsequent Re-Inspections
 
$   60.00


      Other Plumbing Permit Fees:
 
 


         Water Heater Permit
 
$   25.00




 



   Electrical (Section 160.16):



      New Residential Electrical Application:



 

         Single Family
 
$   45.00


         Duplex
 
$   50.00


         Triplex
 
$   55.00


         4-Plex
 
$   60.00


         5-Plex
 
$   65.00


         More than 5-Plex
 
$   5.00 per each additional unit



 



      New Commercial Electrical Commercial or Industrial:



 



         First $10,000
 
$   55.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   55.00 plus $4.00 per $1,000


         Third $10,000
 
$   75.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000


         Fourth $10,000
 
$   85.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         Fifth $10,000
 
$   90.00 plus $.50 per $1,000


      In Addition to Application Fee:
 
$   3.00 per circuit


      Electrical Repairs:
 


         First $10,000
 
$   40.00


         Second $10,000
 
$   40.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000


         First Re-Inspection
 
$   25.00


         Second Re-Inspection
 
$   45.00


         Third and Subsequent Re-Inspections
 
$   60.00




 



Zoning and Subdivisions



 



   Application for Zoning Change (Section 174.04)
 
$   250.00


   Appeals and Adjustments :
 
 


      Application for Board of Appeals (Section 174.09)
 
$   20.00


      Application for Board of Adjustment (Section 174.11)
 
$   50.00


   Preliminary and Final Plats (Chapter 180):
 
 


      Preliminary Plat
 
$   100.00


      Final Plat
 
$   150.00


   Plan Review:
 
 


      Storm Water Prevention Plan Review
 
$   250.00


      Planned Unit Development Review
 
$   250.00


      Miscellaneous Plan Review per Hour
 
$   100.00


   Certificate of Occupancy (Section 174.19):
 
 


      Residential
 
$   50.00


      Commercial
 
$   75.00




 



Police Department Reproduction Fees



 

   Minimum Research Fee
 
$   5.00


   Single Form
 
$   5.00


   Copy of Officer’s Written Report (No other supporting documentation)
 
$   10.00


   Copy of Case File Contents (reports and supporting documents)
 
$   20.00


   Copy of Entire Case File and In-Car Camera Video (Cost dependent on
size of case file and number of in-car videos)
 
$25.00 to $30.00


   Copy of Entire Case File, In-Car Camera Video and Processing/Interview
Room Video (Cost dependent on size of case file and number of video
recordings)
 
$30.00 to $40.00


   Copy of Entire Case File, In-Car Camera Video and Processing/Interview
Room and Telephone/Radio Audio Recordings (Cost dependent on size of case
file, number of video recordings and number of telephone/audio recordings)
 
$40.00 to $60.00



 



City Hall Reproduction Fees



 

   Copies (black and white)
 
$   0.25 each


   Copies (color)
 
$   1.00 each


   Copies of Audio Tapes
 
$   5.00 each


   Copies of DVD, CD-ROM, Audio
 
$   10.00 each


   Research for Request for Public Information – Employee’s Hourly Rate



 



Miscellaneous Fees



 



   Parks Fees:
 
 


      Morningside Park
 
$   50.00 Deposit


      (Must fill out rental agreement)
 
$   20.00 Fee


 
 
 


      Union Park
 
$   50.00 Deposit


      (Must fill out rental agreement)
 
$   20.00 Fee


 
 
 


   Community Room Fees
 
 


      City Hall Community Room
 
$   200.00 Deposit


      (Must fill out rental agreement)
 
$   100.00 Fee


 
 
 


   Surcharge Fee for Dishonored Payment
 
$   30.00 per item




 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 554.3512)





