CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Hampton, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are
defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used herein have the
following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of
Ordinances or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary
means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Hampton, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Hampton, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building
Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hampton,
Iowa.
6. “Council” means the city council of Hampton, Iowa.
7. “County” means Franklin County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Hampton, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 2 -
entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but
does not include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the
traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution,
and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and
property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health,
welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance
of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs
and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or
remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the
failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or
comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of
such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to
indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless
from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury
or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The
provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under
this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein
or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal
injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the
action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the
City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 3 -
and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in
any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other
cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named
action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses
incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the
rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used
therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this
Code of Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized
designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this
Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or paragraph
to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of
Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code
of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate,
explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code
of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to
exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection
may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the
Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator, or occupant or any
other person having charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry
therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of Ordinances
grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 4 -
employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the
power shall be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then
existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the
impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a
reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code
of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of
this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of at least $65.00 but not to exceed $625.00.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
[The next page is 9]
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Chapter 4.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Hampton, Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such
powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two (2) Council
Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of four (4) wards as
established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with
the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter
available at the Clerk's office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 129 adopting a charter for the City was passed and approved
by the Council on June 4, 1975.
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 10 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES
3.01 Corporate Limits 3.02 Division into Wards
3.01 CORPORATE LIMITS. The corporate limits of the City are described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of Section 27, Township 92 North, Range 20,
in Franklin County, Iowa, thence west to the west line of the right-of-way of the
Chicago Northwestern Railroad, thence south along the west line of said rightof-
way of the said railroad, to a point where the west line of the said right-ofway
of the said railroad intersects the highway along the east/west centerline
of Section 28, Township 92 North, Range 20, thence west along the centerline
of the highway on the east/west centerline of said Section 28 to the center of
the highway between Sections 28 and 29, thence south along the center of the
highway between Sections 28 and 29, 32 and 33, to the township line, thence
east 2 miles, thence north 2 miles, to place of beginning; and
The E½ of Section 5, T91N; R2OW of the 5th P.M. and the NW¼ of the NW¼
of Section 4, T91N; R2OW of the 5th P.M. and the North 987' of the SW¼ of
the NW¼ of Section 4, T91N; R2OW of the 5th P.M. all being located in
Franklin County, Iowa, and more particularly described as follows: Beginning
at the SE corner of said Section 5; thence west along the South line of the SE¼
of the S¼ corner of said Section 5; thence north along the West line of the SE¼
and NE¼ to the N¼ corner of said Section 5; thence east along the North line
of the NE¼ to the NE corner of said Section 5, also being the NW corner of
said Section 4; thence east along the North line of the NW¼ to the NE corner
of the NW¼ NW¼ of said Section 4; thence south along the East line of the
NW¼ NW¼ to the SE corner of the NW¼ NW¼ of said Section 4; thence south
987' along the East line of the SW¼ NW¼; thence west parallel to the North
line of the SW¼ NW¼ to a point on the West line of the SW¼ NW¼ being 987'
south of the NW corner of the NW¼ SW¼ of said Section 4; thence south long
the West line of the SW¼ NW¼ of said Section 4 also being the East line of the
NE¼ of said Section 5 to the E¼ corner of said Section 5; thence south along
the East line of the SE¼ of said Section 5 to the point of beginning.
3.02 DIVISION INTO WARDS. The City is divided into four wards described as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 372.13[7] )
1. First Ward. All that part of the City lying south of a line drawn beginning at
the west corporate City limits through the center of Fourth Avenue Northwest to
Tenth Street Northwest, thence south on Tenth Street Northwest to Second Avenue
Northwest, thence east on Second Avenue Northwest to First Street Northwest, thence
south on First Street Northwest to First Avenue Northwest, thence east on First
Avenue Northwest to First Street Northeast, and, all that part of the City lying
westerly of a line drawn southerly on First Street Southeast to Fourth Avenue
Southeast, thence west on Fourth Avenue Southeast to Federal Street South, thence
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 12 -
south on Federal Street South to the south corporate City limits located on 140th
Street.
2. Second Ward. All that part of the City lying south of a line drawn westerly
beginning at the east corporate City limits through the center of Central Avenue
East to Eighth Street Northeast, thence north on Eighth Street Northeast to First
Avenue Northeast, thence west on First Avenue Northeast to First Street
Northeast, and, all that part of the City lying east of a line drawn southerly on
First Street Southeast to Fourth Avenue Southeast, thence west on Fourth Avenue
Southeast to Federal Street South, thence south on Federal Street South to the
Corporate City limits to 140th Street.
3. Third Ward. All that part of the City lying north of a line drawn westerly
beginning at the east corporate City limits through the center of Central Avenue
East to Eighth Street Northeast, thence north on Eighth Street Northeast to First
Avenue Northeast, thence west on First Avenue Northeast to Second Street
Northeast, and, all that part of the City lying east of a line drawn northerly on
Second Street Northeast to Third Avenue Northeast, thence west on Third Avenue
Northeast to First Street Northeast, thence north on First Street Northeast to
Eleventh Place Northeast, thence west on Eleventh Place Northeast to Federal
Street North, thence north on Federal Street North to Seventeenth Avenue
Northeast, thence east on Seventeenth Avenue Northeast to Third Street
Northeast, thence north on Third Street Northeast to Eighteenth Avenue
Northeast, thence east on Eighteenth Avenue Northeast to Fourth Street
Northeast, thence north on Fourth Street Northeast to the corporate City limits.
4. Fourth Ward. All that part of the City lying north of a line drawn beginning at
the west corporate City limits through the center of Fourth Avenue Northwest to
Tenth Street Northwest, thence south on Tenth Street Northwest to Second Avenue
Northwest, thence east on Second Avenue Northwest to First Street Northwest, thence
south on First Street Northwest to First Avenue Northwest, thence east on First
Avenue Northwest to Second Street Northeast, and, all that part of the City lying west
of a line drawn northerly on Second Street Northeast to Third Avenue Northeast,
thence west on Third Avenue Northeast to First Street Northeast, thence north on First
Street Northeast to Eleventh Place Northeast, thence west on Eleventh Place Northeast
to Federal Street North, thence north on Federal Street North to Seventeenth Avenue
Northeast, thence east on Seventeenth Avenue Northeast to Third Street Northeast,
thence north on Third Street Northeast to Eighteenth Avenue Northeast, thence east on
Eighteenth Avenue Northeast to Fourth Street Northeast, thence north on Fourth
Street Northeast to the corporate City limits.
[The next page is 15]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 15 -
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Alternative Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or
duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple
misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction
punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation
of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation
with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has
offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following
specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying
or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying
or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or
manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil
penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First offense – not to exceed $750.00
B. Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 16 -
industrial user shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for
each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation shall
be punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation shall not be subject to such penalty if all
of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or
the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure
1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address,
return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been
committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the
citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or
both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the
property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing
code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of
the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter
does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action.
Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive
relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 17 -
4.06 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer
from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if
criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal
sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 18 -
[The next page is 21]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 21 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office
by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be
taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the
first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the
term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I
will support the constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all
duties of the office of (name of office) in Hampton as now or hereafter required by
law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of
their respective office:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer
and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with
the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 22 -
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official
Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or
appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform
the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or
ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other
provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall be in
accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to the officer’s successor
in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multimembered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in
accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time,
date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall
show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of
each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the
open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in
accordance with Chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then
only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 23 -
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest,
direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered
into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of
which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest
solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection
8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly
affected as a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly
involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional
services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected
or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than 5% of the
outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or
employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for
the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee, if the
purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total
purchase price of $1,500.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 24 -
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility
services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of
the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a
transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter,
purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office
during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the
office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as
otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment
may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall
be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be
held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed
requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be
filled in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not,
directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as
defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or
jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
[The next page is 29]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal
offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the
City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25)
eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by
any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination papers shall
include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall be
substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include
information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time and
place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a
candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object
to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be
governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for
each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 30 -
[The next page is 35]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 35 -
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control 7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The City Manager is the finance and accounting officer of the
City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any said fees are
due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance
officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports
relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding
the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in
accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint
investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash fund
not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the payment of small claims for
minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees
customarily paid at the time of rendering a service for which payments the finance
officer shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor
or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance
officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated
expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as
a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts.
It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal
expenses.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct
funds in accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted,
and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 36 -
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the emergency
fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the debt service fund to meet
payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the capital improvements
reserve fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget
amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a utility or enterprise fund may be
transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax
Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and
provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the utility or enterprise
fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or the
unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each
month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City
shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The finance officer shall be responsible for preparation of
the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the
Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit
their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget
at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3. Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year.
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a
date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such
hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10)
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 37 -
nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of
such publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies
of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have
them available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City
library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the
necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board
of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount
estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted
and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal
year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original
budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original
budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another
activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to
adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity
without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of
original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated
surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk following
Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 38 -
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program, sub-program and activity as
will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with
revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation.
No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and
purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the
Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional
interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review
and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting
following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify
the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of
utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6. Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for accounting
functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the following
financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity
for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all
collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current
public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year.
A copy of the annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than
December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
[The next page is 45]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses and distribution centers.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in
the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or
used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building
or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or
structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an
existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required
for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City
Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic
Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted
primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the
design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and
corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site
services to the public.
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the
storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it
does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products
or from which goods are sold at retail.
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 46 -
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real
estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses
and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of
five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added
which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not
result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value
of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with
the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is
first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director
of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement,
its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves
to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon.
Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its
prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in
conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption
from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of
the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 47 -
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter
shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other
property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 48 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 49 -
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted
establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
192 1989 Original Project Area
208 1992 Amendment No. 1 Area
221 1994 Air Industrial Area
233 December 10, 1997 Amendment No. 2 Area
248 November 14, 2000 Franklin Prairie Urban Renewal Area
252 August 28, 2001 South Urban Renewal Area
CHAPTER 9 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 50 -
[The next page is 55]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 55 -
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 288, adopted September 13, 2005, designated the Hampton
Urban Revitalization Area for the City. This ordinance, not codified herein, is
specifically saved from repeal.
CHAPTER 10 URBAN REVITALIZATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 56 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 57 -
CHAPTER 11
SPECULATIVE BUILDING PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTION
11.01 Purpose 11.04 When Effective
11.02 Definitions 11.05 Application
11.03 Eligibility
11.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption
for shell buildings constructed by community development organizations for speculative
purposes in accordance with Section 427.1 of the Code of Iowa.
11.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Community development organization” means a City organization or a
multi-community group formed for one or more of the following purposes:
A. To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
B. To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
C. To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
D. To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
2. For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must
have at least 15 members with representation from the government at the level or
levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of operation;
a private sector lending institution; a community organization in the area; business in
the area; and private citizens in the community, area, or region.
3. “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings or
structures. “New construction” also includes reconstruction or renovation of an
existing building or structure that constitutes complete replacement of an existing
building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, if the
reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or renovation is necessary to implement
recognized industry standards for the manufacturing or processing of products, and
the reconstruction or renovation is required in order to competitively manufacture or
process products or for community development organizations to market a building or
structure as a speculative shell building, which determination must receive prior
approval from the Council.
4. “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization without a
tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user that will complete the
building to the employer’s or user’s specification for manufacturing, processing, or
warehousing the employer’s or user’s product line.
CHAPTER 11 SPECULATIVE BUILDING PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 58 -
11.03 ELIGIBILITY. The new construction of shell buildings by the community
development organization for speculative purposes is eligible for property tax exemption. The
exemption shall be for one of the following:
1. The value added by new construction of a shell building or addition to an
existing building or structure.
2. The value of an existing building being reconstructed or renovated, and the
value of the land on which the building is located, if the reconstruction or renovation
constitutes complete replacement or refitting of the existing building or structure.
11.04 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
1. If the exemption is for a project described in Section 11.03(1) of this Code of
Ordinances, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which he
building is first assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in which the
addition to an existing building first adds value. If the exemption is for a project
described in Section 11.03(2) of this Code of Ordinances, the exemption shall be
effective for the assessment year following the assessment year in which the project
commences. An exemption allowed under this section shall be allowed for all
subsequent years until the property is leased or sold or until this ordinance is repealed
by the City Council.
2. Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be
determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. If the shell building or any portion
of the shell building is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building that is leased or
sold and a proportionate share of the land on which it is located, if applicable, shall
not be entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent years.
11.05 APPLICATION. An application for the speculative shell building project shall be
filed by the community development organization and shall be considered in accordance with
the applicable provisions of Section 427.1(27) of the Code of Iowa.
[The next page is 71]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 71 -
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office 15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Chief Elected Officer. Act as the chief elected officer of the City and
presiding officer of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the
powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution within 14 days after passage. However, the Mayor may not veto an
ordinance, amendment, or resolution if the Mayor was entitled to vote on such
measure at the time of passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a
written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
requested. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal
departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in
accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City where this
duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council
direction.
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of
the City.
8. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been granted
by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another
municipal officer.
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 72 -
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Mayor Pro Tem
2. Police Chief (with Council approval)
3. Communications Utility Board of Trustees (with Council approval)
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is $2,500.00 per year, payable
quarterly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. So long as the City is governed by the Mayor-Council form of
government composed of a Mayor and a Council consisting of two Council members elected
at large, and one Council member from each of four wards, the Mayor may vote to break a tie
vote on motions not involving ordinances, resolutions, or appointments made by the Council
alone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
[The next page is 75]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 75 -
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor shall appoint a member of the
Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the
Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem
shall not have power to appoint, employ or discharge from employment, officers or employees
that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during
the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the
Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 16 MAYOR PRO TEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 76 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 77 -
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two Council
Members elected at large and one Council Member from each of four wards as established by
the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are
not limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and
audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It
shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and
other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction
of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts.
No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for
by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City
officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective
during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such
an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of
November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the
compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the
beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following
the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 78 -
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage
of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion
requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to
spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public improvement project, or to
accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council
member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive
sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council
may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the members
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective
when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately
upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion
by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance
or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a
summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the
date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant
seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council
member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 79 -
17.04 MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other
provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this
Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
1. Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are held on the
second and fourth Thursdays of the month at 6:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers at
City Hall. The Council may by resolution provide for additional regular meetings.
Four members are necessary to constitute a quorum, but a smaller number shall have
jurisdiction to adjourn to any date prior to the date of the next regular meeting or to
take such steps as they may deem advisable or necessary to bring in the absent
members.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the written request of three of the members of the Council submitted to the
Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place, and subject of
the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of
residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be
maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called meeting,
by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and
prescribe their powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
1. City Manager
2. City Attorney
3. City Clerk
4. City Treasurer
5. Planning and Zoning Commission
6. Zoning Officer
7. Zoning Board of Adjustment
8. Historic Preservation Commission
9. Library Board of Trustees
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is $30.00 for each
meeting of the Council attended, and salary for each Council committee member is $10.00 for
each meeting of their appointed Council committee attended, payable semiannually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 80 -
[The next page is 83]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 83 -
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The City Manager is ex officio City
Clerk and has the duties, powers and functions prescribed in this chapter, by State law and
other ordinances of the City. The Council shall specify by resolution the compensation to be
paid for such services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or
inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. Within 15 days following a regular or special
meeting, the Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such
publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure
considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable,
indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether
the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances,
enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by
the Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less
than four nor more than 20 days before the date of the election, hearing or other
action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by the Code of Ordinances or
law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions
with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 84 -
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any
zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to
the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings
or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically
directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the
issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or
obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the final maturity of the bonds
or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents,
or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary
to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen
when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction
of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public
documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to
be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the
action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and
petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special
Council meetings and, at the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of
the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and
permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and
permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 85 -
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the
Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time at which
they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in
accordance with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by
the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to
authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which is the word “IOWA” and
around the margin of which are the words “SEAL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON.”
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 86 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 87 -
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation 19.04 Boards and Commissions
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The Council shall appoint a City Treasurer to serve for a term of
two (2) years.
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Treasurer is paid such compensation as specified by
resolution of the Council.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City
in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received
by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what
purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the
Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody
and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books
and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund
and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
9. Reconciliation with Clerk. Reconcile the Treasurer’s books with the Clerk’s
every month.
10. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
19.04 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS. The City Treasurer is the Treasurer of the
Library Board of Trustees, and pays out all money under control of such board on orders
signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of such board, but receives no additional
compensation for such services.
CHAPTER 19 CITY TREASURER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 88 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 89 -
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Opinion on Contracts
20.02 Attorney for City 20.07 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.08 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.09 Prepare Documents
20.05 Review and Comment 20.10 Annual Reports
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Attorney to serve for a term of two (2) years. The City Attorney shall receive such
compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all
matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal,
commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings
when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all
appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances
which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report
to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances
submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 OPINION ON CONTRACTS. The City Attorney shall, at the request of the
Council, offer a written opinion on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts
involving the City before they become binding upon the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall, upon request, give advice
or a written legal opinion upon all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, City Manager or Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend
meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 20 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 90 -
20.09 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts
for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.10 ANNUAL REPORTS. The City Attorney, at the first regular meeting in January of
each year, shall report to the Council the title and character of all suits brought during the past
municipal fiscal year, by or against the City, or to which the City is in any manner a party and
shall give the status of each suit at the time of such report.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 91 -
CHAPTER 21
CITY MANAGER
21.01 Appointment and Term 21.05 City Clerk
21.02 Compensation 21.06 Deputy City Clerk
21.03 Administrative Responsibility 21.07 Bond
21.04 Duties
21.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City
Manager to serve at the pleasure of the Council.
21.02 COMPENSATION. The City Manager shall receive such annual salary as the
Council shall from time to time determine by resolution, and payment shall be made from the
treasury of the City, in the manner provided for paying other officers and employees.
21.03 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY. The City Manager is directly
responsible to the Council for the administration of municipal affairs as directed by that body.
All departmental activity requiring the attention of the Council shall be brought before the
Council by the City Manager and all Council involvement in administration initiated by the
Council must be coordinated through the City Manager.
21.04 DUTIES. The duties of the City Manager are as follows:
1. To supervise enforcement and execution of the City laws.
2. To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by a majority of the
Council.
3. To recommend to the Council such measures as deemed necessary or
expedient for the good government and welfare of the City.
4. To have the general supervision and direction of the administration of the City
government and to appoint such administrative assistants as shall be deemed
advisable.
5. To assist the Mayor in any of the Mayor’s duties as requested by the Mayor
and as approved by the Council.
6. To assist the Council with the municipal boards and commissions by making
recommendations to the boards and commissions about planning, activities and the
execution of its policies and programs as agreed on.
7. To cooperate with any administrative agency and make recommendations to
the Council for joint or cooperative activities with said agencies.
8. To supervise and direct the official conduct of all employees of the City
except the City Attorney.
9. To have the power to employ, reclassify or discharge all employees of the
City except the City Attorney, and, subject to the approval of the Council, to fix the
compensation to be paid such employees.
CHAPTER 21 CITY MANAGER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 92 -
10. To have the power to appoint or employ persons to fill all places for which no
other mode of appointment is provided and to have the power to administer oaths of
office.
11. To supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the City,
including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings,
specifications and estimates for capital improvements.
12. To supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the City,
make all purchases of material and supplies and see that such material and supplies
are received and are of the quality and character called for by the contract.
13. To investigate, summarily and without notice, any affairs and conduct of any
department, agency, officer or employee under the supervision of the City Manager.
14. To provide for and cause records to be kept of the issuance and revocation of
licenses and permits authorized by City and State law.
15. To keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the
City and of its future needs.
16. To conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to be
kept by modern and efficient accounting methods.
17. To make to the Council, no later than the first regular meeting each month, an
itemized financial report showing the receipts and disbursements for the preceding
month. Copies of financial reports must be available at the Clerk’s office for public
distribution.
18. To prepare the annual budget for Council approval and have direct
responsibility for the administration of the Council approved budget.
19. To perform other duties at the Council’s direction.
21.05 CITY CLERK. The City Manager is the City Clerk and also performs the duties of
Clerk as identified in Chapter 18 of this Code of Ordinances.
21.06 DEPUTY CITY CLERK. The City Manager may appoint a Deputy City Clerk to
perform the duties of the Clerk in the City Manager’s absence and to perform such other
duties assigned to the Deputy City Clerk.
21.07 BOND. The City Manager shall be bonded for the faithful performance of duties and
in favor of the City in an amount as determined by the Council. The City shall pay the cost of
this bond.
[The next page is 101]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 101 -
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
22.01 Public Library 22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees 22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board 22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties 22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the Hampton Public
Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, consists of nine (9) resident members and one may be a nonresident member.
All resident members are to be appointed by the Council. The nonresident member is to be
appointed by the Council with the approval of the County Board of Supervisors.
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All resident members of the Board shall be
bona fide citizens and residents of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a
bona fide citizen and resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as
follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first. Appointments shall
be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number or as near as possible,
to stagger the terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident Trustee
shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or into the City.
The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such member is absent from
six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or
temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in
the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out
the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers
and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer serves as Board
Treasurer, but is not a member of the Board.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 102 -
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior
to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in
favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for
misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions
of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases
of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary
limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and
to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the
care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the Board,
fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to
the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the
name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said
property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the
improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance
of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action
against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13. County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the
association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and
materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment
of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for
Library purposes.
22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract
with other libraries in accordance with the following:
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 103 -
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free
public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate
organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees
of any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the
electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination
proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting
party on a written petition of not less than five (5) percent in number of the electors
who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general
election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40)
days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided
by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons
not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County,
or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials
to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other
Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and
maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall
be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately
after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and
the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together
with such further information as may be required by the Council.
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully,
maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any
newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the
Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 104 -
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library
notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2) months or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to
return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date the person agreed to
return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a
reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that
such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been
made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 105 -
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of five (5) members
appointed by the Council. The Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall
not hold any elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be
five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one
year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the
original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following
powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chair
person’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and
may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes
or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in
a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure
or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 106 -
permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof
until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have
been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except
such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any
such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice
requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or
re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or
plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its
recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money
appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever
which are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and
the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 107 -
CHAPTER 24
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
24.01 Purpose and Intent 24.03 Structure of the Commission
24.02 Definitions 24.04 Powers of the Commission
24.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purposes of this chapter are to:
1. Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public
through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and districts of
historical and cultural significance;
2. Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving
sites and districts of historic and cultural significance;
3. Stabilize and improve property values;
4. Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
5. Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the
support and stimulus to business thereby provided;
6. Strengthen the economy of the City;
7. Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as
places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City.
24.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Commission” means the Hampton Historic Preservation Commission, as
established by this chapter.
2. “Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion of
buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association,
and which area as a whole:
A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to
the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity
based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials
or combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area; or
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
CHAPTER 24 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 108 -
3. “Historic site” means a structure or building which:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history; or
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
C. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
D. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
24.03 STRUCTURE OF THE COMMISSION.
1. The Commission shall initially consist of five (5) members who are residents
of the City.
2. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Council. Members
shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or
expertise in architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning,
building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate.
3. The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of three (3)
years. Members may serve for more than one term. Each member shall serve until
the appointment of a successor.
4. Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration of term of
office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced.
5. Members shall serve without compensation.
6. A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
7. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over all
Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining
written records of the Commission’s proceedings.
8. The Commission shall meet at least three (3) times a year.
24.04 POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
1. The Commission may conduct studies for the identification and designation of
historic districts and sites meeting the definitions established by this chapter. (The
necessary inventory forms and procedures for their completion are available from the
State Bureau of Historic Preservation.) The Commission may proceed at its own
initiative or upon a petition from any person, group or association. The Commission
shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.
2. The Commission may make a recommendation to the State Bureau of Historic
Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site in the National Register of
Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
3. The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council the adoption
of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if they qualify as defined
herein.
CHAPTER 24 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 109 -
4. In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the Commission may,
with Council approval,
A. Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal
property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation;
B. Acquire, by purchase, bequest or donation, fee and lesser interests in
historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with historic
properties;
C. Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the
ownership or control of the Commission;
D. Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties
subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that
will preserve the property.
E. Contract with State or Federal government or other organizations;
F. Cooperate with Federal, State and local governments in the pursuance
of the objectives of historic preservation;
G. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the
Council; and
H. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic properties within its jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 24 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 110 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 111 -
CHAPTER 25
MUNICIPAL COMMUNICATIONS UTILITY
25.01 Establishment 25.03 Members
25.02 Powers 25.04 Term and Compensation
25.01 ESTABLISHMENT. Pursuant to a vote of the people held November 8, 2005,
establishing a Municipal Communications Utility under the management and control of a
Board of Trustees, a municipal utility known as the “Hampton Municipal Communications
Utility” is hereby established under the control of a Board of Trustees consisting of five (5)
members appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
25.02 POWERS. All the powers of a municipal communications utility provided by law
are vested in the Board of Trustees.
25.03 MEMBERS. No public officer or salaried employee of the City shall be appointed as
a member of the Utility Board.
25.04 TERM AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall provide by resolution for
staggered terms and shall establish compensation for members of the Board of Trustees.
Members of the Board of Trustees may be appointed to more than one term and may succeed
themselves. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy created for any reason, other than
expiration of a term, shall fill the balance of the unexpired term.
CHAPTER 25 MUNICIPAL COMMUNICATIONS UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 112 -
[The next page is 135]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 135 -
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.02 Organization 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.10 Taking Weapons
30.04 Required Training 30.11 Accidental Injury Insurance
30.05 Compensation 30.12 Liability Insurance
30.06 Peace Officers Appointed 30.13 Mutual Aid
30.07 Police Chief: Duties
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established
to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or
appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum
training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive
such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police
Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council. The Police Chief shall select,
subject to the approval of City Manager, the other members of the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties
subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by law or
ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police
Chief.
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 136 -
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance
to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards
and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing
whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the
offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials
of the department.
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in
conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as
many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, 804.17)
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person
arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may
have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, 804.18)
30.11 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the
City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for members of the department injured in the
performance of their duties whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City. All
members of the department shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
30.12 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of
the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate
limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 137 -
30.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department
may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted agencies. Copies of any
such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 138 -
[The next page is 141]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 141 -
CHAPTER 31
RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
31.01 Establishment of Force 31.07 No Reduction of Regular Force
31.02 Training 31.08 Compensation
31.03 Status of Reserve Officers 31.09 Benefits When Injured
31.04 Carrying Weapons 31.10 Liability and False Arrest Insurance
31.05 Supplementary Capacity 31.11 No Participation in Pension Fund or
31.06 Supervision of Officers Retirement System
31.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE. A force of reserve peace officers is hereby
established. A reserve peace officer is a volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the Police
Department who will serve with or without compensation and has regular police powers while
functioning as the Police Department’s representative, and will participate on a regular basis
in the agency’s activities, including those of crime prevention and control, preservation of the
peace and enforcement of the law.
31.02 TRAINING. Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be
provided by instructors in a community college or other facility, including a law enforcement
agency, selected by the individual and approved by the law enforcement agency and the Iowa
Law Enforcement Academy. All standards and training required under Chapter 80D of the
Code of Iowa constitute the minimum standards for reserve peace officers. Upon satisfactory
completion of training, the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy shall certify the individual as a
reserve peace officer. There shall be no exemptions from the personal and training standards
provided for in this chapter.
31.03 STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace
officers on the orders and at the direction of the Police Chief. While in the actual performance
of official duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights, privileges,
obligations and duties as any other peace officer.
31.04 CARRYING WEAPONS. A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon
in the line of duty until he or she has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa
Law Enforcement Academy Council. After approval and certification, a reserve peace officer
may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when authorized by the Police Chief.
31.05 SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY. Reserve peace officers shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular
peace officers without first complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.
31.06 SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to the
Police Chief, shall not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of the Police Chief,
and shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Police Chief, unless that superior officer designates
alternate apparel for use when engaged in assignments involving special investigations, civil
process, court duties, jail duties and the handling of mental patients. The reserve peace officer
shall not wear an insignia of rank.
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 142 -
31.07 NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE. There shall be no reduction of the
authorized size of the regular law enforcement department of the City because of the
establishment or utilization of reserve peace officers.
31.08 COMPENSATION. While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer
shall be considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of $1.00 per year.
In addition to the above mentioned pay, the Police Chief may compensate reserve peace
officers on an hourly basis, in the discretion of the Police Chief and subject to the approval of
the Council. The hourly compensation shall be fixed from time to time by the Council.
31.09 BENEFITS WHEN INJURED. Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as
provided in Chapter 85 of the Code of Iowa, shall be provided by the Council to members of
the reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
31.10 LIABILITY AND FALSE ARREST INSURANCE. Liability and false arrest
insurance shall be provided by the City to members of the reserve force while performing
official duties in the same manner as for regular peace officers.
31.11 NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM. This
chapter shall not be construed to authorize or permit a reserve peace officer to become eligible
for participation in a pension fund or retirement system created by the laws of the State and of
which regular peace officers may become members.
[The next page is 145]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 145 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization 35.09 Constitution
35.03 Approved by Council 35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Training 35.11 Liability Insurance
35.05 Compensation 35.12 Calls Outside City
35.06 Election of Officers 35.13 Mutual Aid
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties 35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is hereby
established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to
promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is
no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other
officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 APPROVED BY COUNCIL. No person having otherwise qualified shall be
appointed to the department until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a
majority of the Council members.
35.04 TRAINING. All members of the department shall meet the minimum training
standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and
receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 ELECTION OF OFFICERS. The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other
officers as its constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of the Fire Chief shall be
subject to the approval of the Council. In case of absence of the Fire Chief, the officer next in
rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of Fire Chief.
35.07 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire
Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and development
of fire emergency plans.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 146 -
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the
existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or
take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the
department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching
a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that
may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes,
guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private
property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene
until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire
or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline
and control of the fire department. The members of the fire department shall, at all
times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire
department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire,
or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all
other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or
emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s
Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall
indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of
the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to
the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts,
statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building
or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such
investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be
made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating,
preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 147 -
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, fire
fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of
responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be
requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09 CONSTITUTION. The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they
deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and
any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective, must be
approved by the Council.
35.10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the
City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the
City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.11 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of
the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate
limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.12 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY. The department shall answer calls to fires and other
emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists
and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department
may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.14 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority
of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the
Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 148 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 149 -
CHAPTER 36
FIRE SERVICE FEES
36.01 Fees Established 36.02 Collection of Fees
36.01 FEES ESTABLISHED. The following fees are hereby established which shall apply
in the use of equipment and manpower furnished by the City Fire Department.
Car Fires .................................................. $150.00 up to $1,000.00
Grass Fires ............................................... $150.00 up to $1,000.00
Reckless Use of Fire ................................ $500.00 up to $1,000.00
Commercial Structure Fires .................... $300.00 up to $5,000.00
Hazardous Materials Response ............... $100.00 per truck per hour and $30.00 per
firefighter per hour
Motor Vehicle Accident Response
and Hazard Control ........................... $350.00 plus costs of consumables and
$50.00 per hour after the first hour
Auto Extrication ...................................... $500.00 per vehicle if extrication equipment
is used, plus replacement costs of
materials
consumed and $25.00 per hour per
vehicle
after the first hour
Responses shall be billed at the rate of $100.00 per truck per hour, and $30.00 per hour per
firefighter, for each hour or part thereof subject to the minimum and maximum charges for
specified activities as specified herein. All materials and/or equipment used and consumed or
destroyed in any response shall be assessed and charged at replacement costs.
36.02 COLLECTION OF FEES. The Fire Chief and City Manager are hereby directed to
issue invoices for such fire services and to collect such fees on behalf of the City and to
deposit such fees in the Fire Services Account within the City’s General Fund.
CHAPTER 36 FIRE SERVICE FEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 150 -
[The next page is 155]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 155 -
CHAPTER 37
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
37.01 Purpose 37.05 Notifications
37.02 Definitions 37.06 Police Authority
37.03 Cleanup Required 37.07 Liability
37.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
37.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare
from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to
establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of hazardous substance spills
within the City limits.
37.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent or
probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a
water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate or potential
danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates
pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may
include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as
amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of
which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person
in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the
person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
37.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 156 -
into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person
shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as
rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a
reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by
an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous
condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City
will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated
with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is
determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public
health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to
procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If
the bill for those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain
payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to
finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or
Federal funds available for said cleanup.
37.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly
liable to the City for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as
a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance
involved in a hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate
people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of
City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused
by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction, or loss.
4. The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the
City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by that person.
37.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the
Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but
not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the
hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of
Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police
Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
37.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous
condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous
condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 157 -
37.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages,
injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible
person as defined in Section 37.02[4].
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 158 -
[The next page is 185]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 185 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment 40.06 Loungers and Loafers
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.07 Window Peepers
40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to another or
that is intended to result in physical contact that will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in fear of
immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the following
circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts, and such other person, are
voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a
reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable
risk of serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts
is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency
staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or
physical struggle or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee
or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds, or at
an official school function, regardless of the location, whether the fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals, if the degree and the force
of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely
to cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by such person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 186 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to
threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or
more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does
not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these
types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests
may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public
building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report
or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or
such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States
in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States,
with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage
another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
A. “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
B. “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C. “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
D. “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 187 -
E. “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
F. “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle or animal to tread upon.
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street,
sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful
use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
1. 8. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or
other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 1,000
feet of a funeral procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60
minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble
together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any
of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an
unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or
unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06 LOUNGERS AND LOAFERS. Any person who is found to obstruct or encumber
any street corner or other public place in the City by loafing or lounging in or about the same,
after being requested to move on by a police officer, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
40.07 WINDOW PEEPERS. Any person who peeps or looks into the windows, doors or
other openings of any private residence, apartment or room within the City is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 188 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 189 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.09 Antenna and Radio Wires
Safety Entities 41.10 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information 41.11 Discharging Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.12 Throwing and Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.13 Urinating and Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts 41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or 41.15 Public Exposure
Control Device
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute
samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious
substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise
takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from
the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law
enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is
false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters
the information on a citation.
41.03 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION. No person shall
knowingly provide false identification information to anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in
the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by
any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or
attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or
neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 190 -
41.05 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person
shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing
the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall knowingly resist
or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within
the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, or firefighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist”
and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal
harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal
threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07 REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL
DEVICE. No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a peace officer or
correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance of any act which is within the
scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer and the person knew or should have known
the individual to be an officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall
abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with
doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any
person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible
to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna
wires, antenna supports, radio wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use
barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written
consent of the Council unless such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural
land.
41.11 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols,
guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of
the Council.
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 191 -
41.12 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones,
bricks, or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles,
BB guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or
defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private
building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14 FIREWORKS. The sale, use and exploding of fireworks within the City are
subject to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
1. Definition. The term “fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and
specifically includes blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman
candles, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive or flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive
substance.
2. Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale,
sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided the City may, upon application
in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled by a
competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following
amounts:
A. Personal Injury: $250,000.00 per person
B. Property Damage: $50,000.00
C. Total Exposure: $1,000,000.00
3. Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer,
manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of any kind
of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the sale or use of blank
cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads
or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section
does not apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or
fumigation purposes.
41.15 PUBLIC EXPOSURE. Except as provided in Chapter 126 of this Code of
Ordinances, no person shall expose those parts of his or her body hereinafter listed to another
person in any public place or in any place where such exposure is seen by another person who
is in a place that is open to the public or that the public has access to:
1. A woman’s nipple, the areola thereof, or full breast, except as necessary in the
breast feeding of a baby;
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 192 -
2. The pubic hair, pubes, perineum, or anus of a male or female, the penis or
scrotum of a male, or the vagina of a female.
This section shall not apply to limited or minimal exposures incident to the prescribed use of
public restrooms, locker rooms or similar facilities if the person using the facility is of the sex
the facility is provided for.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 193 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.05 Fraud
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.06 Theft
42.01 TRESPASSING.
1. Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
2. Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
A. “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
B. “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the
Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
C. “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned,
leased, or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a
physical barrier of any kind.
D. “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
E. “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
F. “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
(1) Entering upon or in property without the express permission
of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to
commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage,
harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(2) Entering or remaining upon or in property without
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering
or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or
public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance
of the property.
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 194 -
(3) Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
(4) Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(5) Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the railway corporation
which owns, leases, or operates the railway property. This paragraph
does not apply to passage over a railroad right-of-way, other than a
track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge, trestle, or railroad yard, by an
unarmed person if the person has not been notified or requested to
abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-ofway
and the passage over the right-of-way does not interfere with the
operation of the railroad.
(6) Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property
without lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility
that owns, leases, or operates the public utility property. This
paragraph does not apply to passage over public utility right-of-way
by a person if the person has not been notified or requested by posted
signage or other means to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way
or to vacate the right-of-way.
3. Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
A. Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to
and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
B. Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so,
to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person
intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or
extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation,
advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or
upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 195 -
when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to
the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1
of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 196 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 197 -
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
43.01 Purpose 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined 43.07 Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia
43.04 Determining Factors/Evidence
43.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with
intent to use, manufacture, delivery and advertisement of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled substance” as
used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform
Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter
amended.
43.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as used
in this chapter means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It
includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting
controlled substances.
7. Separators - Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana.
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 198 -
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9. Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
10. Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body.
12. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
B. Water pipes;
C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as
a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
G. Chamber pipes;
H. Carburetor pipes;
I. Electric pipes;
J. Air driven pipes;
K. Chillums;
L. Bongs;
M. Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04 DETERMINING FACTORS/EVIDENCE. In determining whether an object is
used, designed for use or intended for use as drug paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing
this chapter, the following factors/evidence will be considered in addition to all other logically
relevant factors/evidence:
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 199 -
3. Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
4. Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object is
intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Health Care Professionals. If the owner or person in control of the
object is a currently licensed health care professional such as a doctor, nurse, dentist,
pharmacist and uses or is using the object for legitimate professional health care
and/or medical purposes only, such object shall not be considered drug paraphernalia
as defined in this chapter.
13. Licensed Professionals, Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner or anyone
in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
14. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
15. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in
the community.
16. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is unlawful for
any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or
offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or
CHAPTER 43 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 200 -
knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
43.07 ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any
person to place any advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication,
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia.
[The next page is 225]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 225 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication 45.04 Social Host
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means 21
years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase,
consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to
a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and
consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as
administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and
except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages,
wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor
control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer
from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code
of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any
public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while
attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated in a public place.
3. A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 226 -
4. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under
this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a
chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine
the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the
results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of
a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the
person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of
alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Section 62.01(49) and
(50) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04 SOCIAL HOST. A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has
control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of eighteen, to
consume or possess on such property any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the property or to a person under
legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[1A])
[The next page is 229]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 229 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Cigarettes and Tobacco 46.02 Contributing to Delinquency
46.01 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of
age to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes by a person under
eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the
tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit
under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or
tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.02 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any person to
encourage any child under 18 years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 230 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 231 -
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose 47.05 Littering
47.02 Playgrounds and Recreation Centers 47.06 Parks Closed
47.03 Use of Drives Required 47.07 Camping
47.04 Fires
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park
facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION CENTERS. The management of all
playgrounds, parks and recreation centers vests in the Council and/or a committee assigned
such duties by the Council, and the Council and/or appropriate committee shall exercise such
powers and assume such duties as are authorized under Chapters 364 through 394 of the Code
of Iowa in addition to all such other powers and duties granted to the Council by this Code of
Ordinances and the Code of Iowa.
47.03 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other
vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives
or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.04 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall
be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other
party.
47.05 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.06 PARKS CLOSED. No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter
or remain within the Bandshell Park between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight
and five o’clock (5:00) a.m., and within all other parks between the hours of ten o’clock
(10:00) p.m. and five o’clock (5:00) a.m.
47.07 CAMPING. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions
prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
CHAPTER 47 PARK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 232 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 233 -
CHAPTER 48
EXPLOSIVES
48.01 Gunpowder, Blasting Powder and Dynamite 48.04 Storing, Keeping and Handling Flammable Oils
48.02 Manner of Keeping 48.05 Blasting
48.03 Handling Explosives
48.01 GUNPOWDER, BLASTING POWDER AND DYNAMITE. It is unlawful for any
person to keep or store at any one time in any house, store, shop, building or place in the City
any gunpowder, blasting powder or dynamite in any quantity without first obtaining a written
permit from the Police Chief. Nothing in this section applies to persons keeping less than six
(6) pounds of gunpowder for their own use. No person shall keep in excess of one hundred
(100) pounds of gunpowder, blasting powder or dynamite within the City, and no permit for
keeping any larger amount shall be issued.
48.02 MANNER OF KEEPING. All gunpowder and dynamite shall be kept in the original
package and securely placed in a metallic magazine made of steel or boiler iron with the walls
not less than one-eighth inch in thickness with secure locks on the doors thereof, and with a
label stating the contents thereof plainly stamped or painted on the outside of said magazine,
and each can or package shall bear on the outside a like label in plain letters describing its
contents. All such explosives must be kept on the ground floor and in the rear part of such
store or building.
48.03 HANDLING EXPLOSIVES. No person shall sell, explode or dispose of any such
explosives except by daylight and unless in the original packages and in no case shall any
lighted cigar, candle, lantern, torch or fire be brought nearer than ten (10) feet to any such
explosives.
48.04 STORING, KEEPING AND HANDLING FLAMMABLE OILS. All persons who
store, keep and handle flammable oils within the City shall at all times be subject to the
regulations or orders of the Council and shall at all times be subject to the regulations of the
State Fire Marshal. If such oils are retailed, they shall be sold from metal cases or vessels of
approved form and by approved pumps.
48.05 BLASTING. It is unlawful for any person to explode any dynamite or blasting
powder without first securing a permit from the Police Chief. Such permit shall not be granted
until the necessary precautions have been taken to make certain that no damage to adjacent
property or to persons will be done.
CHAPTER 48 EXPLOSIVES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 234 -
[The next page is 241]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 241 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions 50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit,
the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes
injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome
substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water.
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course
or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons,
landing places or burying grounds.
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of
any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a
railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also
Section 62.07)
7. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the
fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also
Chapter 51)
8. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
9. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 242 -
10. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off
and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of
the land on which the same is located.
11. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution
and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal
gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by
persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of
Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or
breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
12. Ground Cover Required. Property in a residential area shall be seeded,
sodded or otherwise planted with a ground cover not more than thirty (30) days after
construction is completed, unless impractical, but not later than the beginning of the
next growing season.
13. Machinery and Household Goods. No furniture, household furnishings,
appliances, or other such items not designed for outside use and no machinery,
implements, or other such equipment which is in an inoperable condition, including
component parts thereof, shall be stored or kept outside for a period of more than
twenty-four (24) hours on any premises in a residential area, excluding the week prior
to a declared official cleanup program.
14. Construction Equipment and Materials. Operable machinery, equipment and
materials being used for construction purposes, including pipes, lumber, forms, dirt,
sand and sod, shall not be stored or kept in the open, except:
A. For use in the ordinary course of business as the inventory or asset of
a contractor, supplier, or government subdivision if the area where stored or
kept is zoned business, commercial, or industrial to allow such storage.
B. On the job site of a project in progress for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days after construction has been completed or a separate certificate
of occupancy has been issued, whichever first occurs, and in any event for not
more than three (3) months unless a building permit has been obtained from
the City Manager for a longer period of time.
15. Outside Storage. The following items stored in outdoor areas or in other
structures not totally enclosed by structural walls: building materials, abandoned or
inoperable vehicles, non-registered vehicles, auto parts, tires, packing boxes, wooden
pallets, broken or discarded furniture, broken or discarded household furnishings or
equipment including carpeting, appliances and other typical household items, or any
item not normally required in the day-to-day use of the property when stored
continuously in excess of seventy-two (72) hours within any portion of a front, side or
rear yard area. This section applies to all property, regardless of zoning classification.
However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit a use specifically permitted by
applicable zoning law.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 243 -
16. Junk Stored in Vehicles. Any trailer, pick-up, or other motor vehicle
containing an accumulation of or used for storage of junk as defined in Chapter 51
which has been stored or parked on public or private property for more than 48 hours.
17. Attractive Nuisance. Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children in the
form of abandoned vehicles, abandoned or broken equipment, hazardous pools, ponds,
excavations, materials, including building material, debris or neglected machinery.
18. Deteriorated Property. Real property maintained in such condition that it is or
becomes defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair,
including, but not limited to broken or missing windows or doors, brush or trees
growing in or near foundation or through porch floors, unshingled or fallen roofs,
rotten trim, rotten columns or porches that the same causes substantial depreciation of
the property values of the surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to
properties and improvements, and real property that by reason of fire damage, decay,
or lack of maintenance has deteriorated to the extent its fair market value is less than
one-half the market value of comparable real property that has not so deteriorated.
19. Discarded Material. Any discarded or unused material on real property that is
not consistent with the condition and visual appearance of the surrounding or adjacent
real property.
20. Materials on Public Ways. The placing or throwing on any street, alley, road,
highway, sidewalk, or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other
substances which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the same.
21. Garbage and Debris. The depositing of, maintaining, permitting, or failing to
remove, garbage, trash, rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on any property within
the City, including large quantities of organic debris and materials, which
accumulated by other than natural means, except neatly maintained compost piles.
22. Outside Storage. The outside storage of pipe, lumber, forms, machinery or
other occupational materials upon property in the front yard or side yard corner lot or
visible from a public street in a residential district.
23. Wood Piles. The accumulation of any piles of wood which are not neatly
stacked, or secured in a stable manner to avoid collapse.
24. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by ordinances.
25. Assembly of People. Any use of property abutting on a public street or
sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people
to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks.
The contract purchaser, record holder of legal title, tenant in possession, and/or person or
persons who have caused or allowed the existence of a nuisance are jointly responsible under
this Code of Ordinances.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain
regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
3. Separation Distances from Municipal Wells (See Chapter 148)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 244 -
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is
prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal
officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property
owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE. Any nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall contain: †
A. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
B. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
C. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
D. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
E. Election of Remedies. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is
not abated as directed by the time specified in said notice, that (i) the City
may separately petition the court to allow the City to abate said nuisance or
condition and assess the costs against such person, and/or (ii) the City may
abate such nuisance or condition if granted leave by court and if the costs
assessed are unpaid after the expiration of the time set forth in the notice sent
pursuant to Section 50.06(6) herein, such costs may be certified to the County
Treasurer and collected as general property taxes, and/or (iii) said failure to
correct may be considered a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this
Code of Ordinances; that a civil citation may be issued by the City pursuant to
such chapter; that upon hearing, the Judicial Magistrate may impose a civil
judgment and order the nuisance abated by the owner; or upon a separate
petition by the City the Court may order the nuisance be abated by the City
and assess the costs of abatement against the person maintaining the nuisance
or the property upon which the nuisance is maintained. Alternatively, a peace
officer for the City may issue a criminal citation for a violation of the City
code or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the
Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement
procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings,
we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and
assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 245 -
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant,
constitutes a separate offense.
2. Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by
certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3. Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must
be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it
will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.
The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall
be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4. Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The
City shall assess the costs as provided in subsection 6 of this section after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing
as provided in subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5. Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to
abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense
account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6. Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice
to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall
then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7. Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the assessment to be
paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same
interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
8. Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall
fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and
specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances, and may be
charged under Section 1.14 of this Code of Ordinance with a simple misdemeanor, or
charged with a municipal infraction, the specific penalties for which are as follows:
A. First Offense $150.00
B. Second Offense $350.00
C. Third and Subsequent Offenses $625.00
9. In addition to a fine or monetary penalty, the Court may order the person to
abate or remove the nuisance within a time specified and if not removed within the
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 246 -
time specified, may authorize the City to remove the same and enter judgment against
the person personally and/or against the property where the violation occurred, and
collect such costs as authorized by Section 50.06(6) of this Code of Ordinances.
50.07 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE. In lieu of the
abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06 of this Code of Ordinances, the requirements
of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal infractions as set
forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
[The next page is 251]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used
lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of
such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous
materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods
or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not
considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following characteristics:
A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
B. Broken, Loose or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid.
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which has
become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D. Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
E. Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or has not been
used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
F. Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle which, because
of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that the
vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without
limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm
machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to
store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the
City any junk or junk vehicle.
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 252 -
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk
or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a
threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in
violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall
be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within:
1. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2. The premises of a business enterprise operated in a district properly zoned
therefor, when necessary to the operation of said business enterprise, as authorized
under the Zoning Ordinance of the City (this exception does not permit the business
enterprise to store vehicles or allow accumulations of junk in a manner that results in
the dense growth of weeds, brush and grasses in and around the vehicles or junk, or to
allow such vehicles or junk to become a habitat for rats, mice, snakes or any other
vermin or insects); or
3. An appropriate storage space or depository maintained in a lawful place and
lawful manner by the City for vehicles impounded by the City.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
[The next page is 265]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 265 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.09 Rabies Vaccination
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.10 Owner’s Duty
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.11 Confinement
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.12 At Large: Impoundment
55.05 Livestock 55.13 Disposition of Animals
55.06 At Large Prohibited 55.14 Care and Keeping of Animals
55.07 Damage or Interference 55.15 Scheduled Offenses and Fines
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance 55.16 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium including
but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag, or articulation.
2. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a
competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital
or kennel.
4. “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
A. The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
B. A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
C. A solicitation to make an investment.
D. An amusement or entertainment activity.
5. “Fair” means any of the following:
A. The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
B. An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
C. An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
6. “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section
99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
7. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine,
or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in Section 170.1 of
the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
8. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 266 -
9. “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a small
tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a rabbit, gerbil,
hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle,
gecko, or iguana.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in
any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with
a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate
shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by
any means which causes unjustified pain, distress, or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines
livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary
animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or
destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with
customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or
custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat
or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the
cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except
by written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow dogs and cats
to run at large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to
allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to,
or interference with, the premises.
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to
allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons
by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or
chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.09 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination
for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s
possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs
kept in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to
these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.10 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal
which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 267 -
veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or
suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.11 CONFINEMENT. If a local board of health receives information that an animal
has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall order
the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such
animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board,
and after 10 days the board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its
owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its
duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.12 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT. Dogs and cats found at large in violation of this
chapter shall be seized and impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may
be served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.13 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS. When an animal has been apprehended and
impounded, written notice shall be given in not less than two days to the owner, if known.
Impounded animals may be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs to the
veterinarian plus a pickup fee of $10.00 to the City, and if an unvaccinated dog or cat, by
having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner does not redeem the animal within seven days
of the date of notice, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the animal may be
humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.14 CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
1. No person shall aid or cause any animal, whether owned by such person or
not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or
impoundment is upon such person’s property or that of another, by opening any gate,
door or window, by making an opening in any fence, enclosure or structure, or by
unleashing such animal.
2. It is the duty of every person owning or having the custody or control of an
animal to physically restrain the animal within an enclosure or upon a leash when
such animal is left unattended outside or is not at heel. The animal must be restrained
so as to prevent the animal from leaving the premises of its owner or from coming in
contact with public right-of-way or the property of another. Failure to restrain an
animal pursuant to this subsection constitutes a misdemeanor.
3. It is prohibited for any person in any manner to interfere with any employee
or designated representative of the City so as to hinder, delay or prevent his or her
executing duties in relation to the matters and things contained in this chapter.
4. It is unlawful for any person owning, controlling or caring for any animal to
fail to keep in a clean and sanitary condition the premises and any pen, kennel, shelter,
house or person’s dwelling or other structure where the animal is at any time kept. At
least once every 24 hours, or more often if odors or health problems arise, such person
shall pick up any and all feces so as to prevent its accumulation and the same shall be
properly disposed of. Feces shall be held in watertight and flytight containers pending
disposal and shall be disposed of at least once weekly. The animal and place where
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 268 -
the animal is maintained shall also be kept free of obnoxious odors and shall be
maintained so as not to attract or permit the harborage or breeding of flies and other
insects or rodents or other vermin. All animal food and water shall be stored and
placed for the animal’s consumption in such a manner so that it will not become food
for rodents and other vermin.
55.15 SCHEDULED OFFENSES AND FINES. The following scheduled fines are
fixed for violation of the designated sections of this chapter:
1. For violation of Section 55.06 (Running at Large):
A. First offense $50.00
B. Second offense $100.00
C. Third offense $300.00
D. Over third offense to be determined by the court
2. For violation of Section 55.14:
(Care and Keeping) $50.00
3. Violations by persons who elect to not pay the scheduled fines set forth in this
section or otherwise fail to appear on or before the appearance date and all other
offenses not identified in this section as a scheduled offense shall constitute
misdemeanors. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
55.16 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717.E)
1. Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise that a pet
may be awarded as any of the following:
A. A prize for participating in a game.
B. A prize for participating in a fair.
C. An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
D. An inducement or condition for executing a contract which includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet.
2. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
A. A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
B. Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of
America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated
with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the
Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.
[The next page is 271]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 271 -
CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
56.01 Definitions 56.05 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of Vicious
56.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals Prohibited Animals
56.03 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition of Dangerous 56.06 Insurance
Animals 56.07 Scheduled Offenses and Fines
56.04 Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited
56.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Animal” means every wild, tame or domestic member of the animal
kingdom other than the genus and species Homo sapiens.
2. “Animal control officer” means the Police Chief of the City.
3. “At large” means off the premises of the owner, unless:
A. The animal is on a leash, cord, chain or similar restraint not more than
six (6) feet in length and under the control of the person; or
B. The animal is within a motor vehicle; or
C. The animal is housed within a veterinary hospital, licensed kennel,
pet shop or animal shelter; or
D. The animal is at heel.
4. “Dangerous animal” means:
A. Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink and other Mustelids (except
ferrets);
B. Black widow spiders and scorpions;
C. Raccoons, opossums and skunks.
5. “Dog” means and includes members of the canine species, male or female,
whether neutered or not.
6. “Owner” has the same meaning given in Chapter 55.
7. “Pet shop” means any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying,
selling or boarding animals of any species, except the operation of a kennel,
agriculture or wildlife pursuits.
8. “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se, as
listed above, that has bitten or clawed a person or persons while running at large and
the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious propensities in
present or past conduct, including such that said animal (a) has bitten or clawed a
person or persons on two separate occasions within a twelve-month period; or (b) did
bite or claw once causing injuries above the shoulders of a person; or (c) could not be
controlled or restrained by the owner at the time of the attack to prevent the
occurrence; or (d) has attacked any domestic animal or fowl on two separate occasions
within a twelve-month period, or which has been found to possess such propensities
by the Council, after hearing.
CHAPTER 56 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 272 -
56.02 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep,
shelter or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act as a custodian for such animal,
temporarily or otherwise, or keep such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the
City.
56.03 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS
ANIMALS.
1. In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon
public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property of someone other
than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in
the discretion of the animal control officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or
captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a
dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such
animal prior to its destruction.
2. Upon the written complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises in the City, the animal control
officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation, the facts
indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a
dangerous animal in the City, the animal control officer shall order the person named
in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal,
within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained in a
notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the
person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous animal
shall not be required where such dangerous animal has previously caused serious
physical harm or death to any person, in which case the animal control officer shall
cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and
impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any
person.
3. The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the animal control officer
may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of
appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order
contained in the notice to remove the dangerous animal. Failure to file such written
notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the animal
control officer.
4. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such appeal
shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice of appeal. After such
hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the animal control officer.
Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the
Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5. If the Council affirms the action of the animal control officer, the Council
shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or
keeping such dangerous animal remove such animal from the City or destroy it. The
decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person against whom
rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of the
animal control officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days
of its issuance, the animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound such
CHAPTER 56 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 273 -
dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven
days. If at the end of the impoundment period, the person against whom the decision
and order of the Council was issued has not petitioned the District Court for a review
of said order, the City shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale or destroy such
animal in a humane manner. Failure to comply with an order of the City issued
pursuant hereto constitutes a misdemeanor offense.
56.04 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep, shelter
or harbor for any reason within the City a vicious animal except in the following
circumstances:
1. Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
2. The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may be
processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of Section 56.05 of this Code
of Ordinances. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted
with a sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar
import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the Police Chief that a guard dog
is on duty at said premises.
56.05 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.
1. The animal control officer or designee, in his or her discretion or upon receipt
of a complaint alleging that a particular animal is a vicious animal, may initiate
proceedings to declare such animal a vicious animal. A hearing on the matter shall be
conducted by the Council. The person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring the
animal in question shall be given not less than 72 hours’ written notice of the time and
place of said hearing. Said notice shall set forth the description of the animal in
question and the basis for the allegation of viciousness. The notice shall state that if
the animal is determined to be vicious, the owner will be required to remove it from
the City or allow it to be destroyed. The notice shall be served upon any adult
residing at the premises where the animal is located, or may be posted on those
premises if no adult is present to accept service.
2. If, after hearing, the Council determines that an animal is vicious, the Council
shall order the person owning, sheltering or harboring or keeping the animal to
remove it from the City or to cause it to be destroyed in a humane manner. The order
shall immediately be served upon the person against whom issued in the same manner
as the notice of hearing. If the order is not complied with within three days of its
issuance, the animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound the animal. An
animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven days. If at the end of the
impoundment period, the person against whom the order of the Council was issued
has not petitioned the District Court for a review of such order, the animal control
officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed.
3. Failure to comply with an order of the Council issued pursuant hereto shall
constitute a misdemeanor offense.
4. Any animal found at large which displays vicious tendencies may be
processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the foregoing, unless the animal is so
vicious that it cannot be safely be apprehended, in which case the animal control
officer may immediately destroy it or unless its ownership is not ascertainable, in
which case the animal control officer may destroy it after three days of impoundment.
CHAPTER 56 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 274 -
5. Any animal which is alleged to be vicious and which is under impoundment
or quarantine at the animal shelter shall not be released to the owner, but shall
continue to be held at the expense of the owner pending the outcome of the hearing.
All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner if the animal
is determined to be vicious. If the animal is not determined to be vicious, such
impoundment or quarantine costs shall be paid by the City.
56.06 INSURANCE. Every person keeping or maintaining a guard dog as provided in this
chapter, shall accompany any application or display upon request by the animal control officer
a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the State
with coverage of at least $150,000.00 combined single limit liability for bodily injury. Such
certificate of insurance shall provide that no cancellation of the insurance will be made unless
then 10 days’ written notice is first given to the Clerk. Failure to provide or display such
certificate of insurance shall immediately cause the applicant, licensee or owner of such
animal to lose the exemption status as provided in this chapter.
56.07 SCHEDULED OFFENSES AND FINES. Fines fixed for violations of this chapter
are as follows:
1. First Offense ........................................... $100.00
2. Second Offense ...................................... $250.00
3. Third Offense ......................................... $500.00
4. Fourth Offense or Subsequent ................ to be determined by the court
Violations by persons who elect not to pay the scheduled fine set forth in this section or
otherwise fail to appear on or before the appearance date shall constitute a simple
misdemeanor. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
[The next page is 277]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 277 -
CHAPTER 57
DOG AND CAT LICENSES REQUIRED
57.01 Annual License Required 57.06 Immunization
57.02 License Fees 57.07 Duplicate Tags
57.03 Delinquency 57.08 Transfers of Licensed Animals
57.04 License Tags 57.09 Kennel Dogs
57.05 License Records 57.10 Scheduled Offenses and Fines
57.01 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
1. Every owner of a dog or cat over the age of six months shall procure a dog
license from the Clerk on or before the first day of January of each year.
2. Such license may be procured after January 1 and at any time for a dog or cat
which has come into the possession or ownership of the applicant or which has
reached the age of six months after said date.
3. The owner of a dog or cat for which a license is required shall apply to the
Clerk on forms provided by the City.
4. The form of the application shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings,
and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the address of the owner and shall be signed
by the owner. The application shall also state the date of the most recent rabies
vaccination, the type of vaccine administered and the date the dog or cat shall be
revaccinated.
5. All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following the date of
issuance.
57.02 LICENSE FEES. The annual license fee shall be $3.00 for neutered males and
females and $5.00 for unneutered males and females.
57.03 DELINQUENCY. All license fees shall become delinquent on the first day of July
of the year in which they are due and a delinquent penalty of $1.00 shall be added to each
unpaid license on and after said date.
57.04 LICENSE TAGS. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Clerk shall deliver
or mail to the owner a license which shall be in the form of a metal tag stamped with the serial
number of the license as shown on the record book of the Clerk, the year in which it is issued,
and the name of the City. The license tag shall be securely fastened by the owner to a collar or
harness which shall be worn at all times by the dog or cat for which issued. A license issued
for one dog or cat shall not be transferable to another dog or cat. Upon the expiration of the
license the owner shall remove said tag from the dog or cat.
57.05 LICENSE RECORDS. The Clerk shall keep a book to be known as the record of
licenses which shall show:
1. The serial number and date of each application for a license.
2. The description of the dog or cat as specified in the application, together with
the name of the owner of the animal.
CHAPTER 57 DOG AND CAT LICENSES REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 278 -
3. The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number of each tag, the
date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine administered, and the
date the dog or cat shall be revaccinated.
4. The amount of all fees paid.
5. Such other data as may be required by law.
57.06 IMMUNIZATION. Before a license is issued, the owner shall furnish a
veterinarian’s certificate showing that the dog or cat for which the license is sought has been
vaccinated against rabies, and that the vaccination does not expire within six months from the
effective date of the license. A tag showing evidence of proper vaccination shall at all times
be attached to the collar of the dog or cat.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
57.07 DUPLICATE TAGS. Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license tag has been
lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag on the payment of $2.00 and the Clerk
shall enter in the license record the new number assigned.
57.08 TRANSFERS OF LICENSED ANIMALS. Upon transfer of a licensed dog or cat
into the City, the owner shall surrender the original license tag to the Clerk. The Clerk shall
preserve the surrendered tag and, without a license fee, issue a new license tag.
57.09 KENNEL DOGS. Dogs kept in state or federally licensed kennels, which are kept
or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant restraint,
are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
57.10 SCHEDULED OFFENSES AND FINES. The following scheduled fines are
fixed for violations of this chapter:
1. First offense ........................................... $40.00
2. Second offense ...................................... $50.00
3. Third offense ......................................... $75.00
4. Fourth offense or subsequent ................. to be determined by the court
Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Each offense whether
scheduled above or otherwise not identified in this section as a scheduled offense shall
constitute a simple misdemeanor. Each offense, whether involving the same animal or
different animals shall constitute a separate offense for purposes of determining the number of
prior offenses, regardless of when said prior offense may have occurred.
[The next page is 285]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 285 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited
as the “Hampton Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by
State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other
words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[57])
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[45])
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent
(40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300)
feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[58])
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[59])
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
sign or signal.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 286 -
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[60])
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1[62])
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1 [1])
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this chapter and State
law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace
officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa
Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle
to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum
of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference
to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and
safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel
order, or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may
require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority
to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No funeral procession or parade containing one hundred
(100) or more persons or thirty (30) or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States
Army, the military forces of the State and the forces of the police and fire departments of the
City, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with this section.
1. “Parade” Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 287 -
manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to
the public as a parade.
2. Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Clerk. Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade
to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the
person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants
therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to
participate therein. No fee shall be required for such permit.
3. Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be
deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance to the contrary.
4. Control By Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade shall
at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their
duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 288 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 289 -
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Installation 61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks 61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
61.01 INSTALLATION. The Public Works Director shall cause to be placed and
maintained traffic control devices when and as required under the Traffic Code of the City to
make effective its provisions; emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration
of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate traffic
under the traffic code of the City or under State law, or to guide or warn traffic. The Public
Works Director shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.02 CROSSWALKS. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized, subject to
approval of the Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate
traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic
conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.03 TRAFFIC LANES. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to mark lanes
for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the
traffic code of the City. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any
such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by
The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the
time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 61 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 290 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 291 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.07 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.08 Sound Amplification Systems
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to
comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer
during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section.
These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5. Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6. Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7. Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9. Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
10. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11. Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12. Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13. Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
15. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
16. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
17. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
19. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
20. Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order.
21. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification
card.
22. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 292 -
23. Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
24. Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified.
25. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
30. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31. Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
33. Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
35. Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
36. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
37. Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals; unlawful
possession.
38. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
39. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
40. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
41. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
42. Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
43. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
44. Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
45. Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
46. Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
47. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
48. Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
49. Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.
50. Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.
51. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
52. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
53. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
54. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 293 -
55. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
56. Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
57. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
58. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
59. Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
60. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
61. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements.
62. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
63. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
64. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
65. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
66. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
67. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
68. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
69. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
70. Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
71. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
72. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
73. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
74. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
75. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
76. Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
77. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
78. Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
79. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
80. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
81. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
82. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.
83. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
84. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train or
railroad track equipment.
85. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
86. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
87. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 294 -
88. Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
89. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
90. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
91. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
92. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
93. Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing contamination by
hazardous material.
94. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
95. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
96. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
97. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
98. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
99. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
100. Section 321.372 – School buses.
101. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
102. Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
103. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
104. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
105. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
106. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
107. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
108. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
109. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
110. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
111. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
112. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
113. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
114. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
115. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
116. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
117. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
118. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
119. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
120. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
121. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 295 -
122. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
123. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
124. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
125. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
126. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
127. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
128. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
129. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
130. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
131. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
132. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
133. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
134. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
135. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
136. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
137. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
138. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
139. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
140. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
141. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
142. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
143. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
144. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
145. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
146. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
147. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
148. Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
149. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
150. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
151. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
152. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
153. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
154. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
155. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
156. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 296 -
157. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
158. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
159. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
160. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. The City Manager shall have authority to
declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or
devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs
are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care
in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or
within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets
of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates,
sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone,
no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree,
hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons
from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the
manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES. It is unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the City any
engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking
or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from
such vehicle, except in response to an imminent traffic accident. The usage of an engine
brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in braking or
deceleration in such a manner so as to be audible at a distance of 300’ from the motor vehicle
shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
62.08 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS. No driver of any motor vehicle shall
operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system in such manner that can be
heard from outside the vehicle more than 75 feet from said vehicle when being operated on
any street, highway or public place in the City. The provisions of this section do not apply (i)
when said system is being operated in such a manner to request assistance or warn of a
hazardous situation or (ii) to authorized emergency vehicles, vehicles engaged in advertising
or outside vehicle speakers in commercial use.
[The next page is 301]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 301 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due
regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing,
and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver
to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in
Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless
specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1. Business District – 20 miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District – 25 miles per hour.
3. Suburban District – 45 miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of 15 miles
per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise
in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa
Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 of this Code
of Ordinances is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at
any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall
determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and
safe at such location. The following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Central Avenue from the west corporate limits to 350 feet east of
Eighth Street East;
B. On Fourth Street Southeast from 500 feet south of Sixth Avenue
Southeast to Central Avenue;
C. On Fourth Street Northeast from Central Avenue to 550 feet north of
Twelfth Avenue Northeast;
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 302 -
D. On 140th Street from Olive Avenue to the west corporate City limits
of Hampton, Iowa.
2. Special 40 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 40 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Olive Avenue from Central Avenue West to Twelfth Avenue
Northwest;
B. On Twelfth Avenue Northwest from 600 feet west of Fourth Street
Northwest to Olive Avenue;
C. On Olive Avenue from Central Avenue West to Twelfth Avenue
Southwest.
3. Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 50 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Twelfth Avenue South from Olive Avenue to Fourth Street
Southeast.
63.05 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed
as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
[The next page is 305]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 305 -
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 U-Turn Restrictions
64.02 U-Turns 64.04 Left Turn for Parking
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the
roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and
by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn
from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of
the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different
course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when
markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at intersections
where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03 U-TURN RESTRICTIONS. No person shall make a U-turn unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and does not constitute an immediate hazard or impede the
flow of other traffic.
64.04 LEFT TURN FOR PARKING. No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the
centerline of the street, for the purpose of parking on a street within the Business District.
CHAPTER 64 TURNING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 306 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 307 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Through Streets - Stop 65.06 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.02 Special Stops Required 65.07 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.03 Four-Way Stop Intersections 65.08 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.04 Special Yield Required 65.09 Official Traffic Controls
65.05 School Stops
65.01 THROUGH STREETS - STOP. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required
by this chapter at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the right-of-way
to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through street or highway or
which are approaching so closely on the through street or highway as to constitute a hazard,
but such driver, having so yielded, may proceed cautiously and with due care enter the through
street or highway unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal before
entering an intersection with the following designated through streets.
65.02 SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED. The following intersections are designated as
stop intersections, and all vehicles are required to stop at the entrance to such intersection
when a stop sign is erected.
1. The intersections of Federal Street North and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
C. Central Avenue – northwest corner;
D. Eighteenth Avenue – northeast corner;
E. Seventeenth Avenue – northeast corner.
2. The intersections of Federal Street South and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
C. Twelfth Avenue – northwest corner.
3. The intersections of First Street Northwest and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Tenth Place – southwest corner;
C. Ninth Place – southwest corner;
D. Shar-Denn Drive – northeast corner;
E. Eighth Place – southwest corner;
F. Eighth Avenue – southwest corner;
G. Seventh Avenue – northeast corner;
H. Progress Park – north driveway, southwest corner;
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 308 -
I. Sixth Avenue – northeast corner;
J. Progress Park – south driveway, southwest corner;
K. Fourth Avenue – southwest and northeast corners.
4. The intersections of First Street Southwest and:
A. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
B. Fifth Avenue – northeast corner.
5. The intersections of Second Street Northwest and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – southeast and northwest corners;
C. First Avenue – southeast and northwest corners;
D. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
6. The intersections of Second Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest corner.
7. The intersections of Third Street Northwest and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Central Avenue – northwest corner;
C. Third Avenue – southeast and northwest corners.
8. The intersections of Third Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
9. The intersection of 4th Street NW and:
A. Second Avenue NW – northwest corner;
B. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner.
10. The intersection of Fourth Street Southwest and Third Avenue – northwest
and southeast corners.
11. The intersection of Fifth Street Northwest and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
12. The intersections of Fifth Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
13. The intersection of Sixth Street Northwest and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
14. The intersections of Sixth Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. First Avenue – southwest corner;
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 309 -
C. Second Avenue – northeast and southwest corners;
D. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
E. Fifth Avenue – northeast and southwest corners;
F. Sixth Avenue – northeast and southwest corners;
G. Seventh Avenue – northeast and southwest corners;
H. Eighth Avenue – northeast and southwest corners;
I. Ninth Avenue Drive – northeast corner;
J. Twelfth Avenue – northwest corner.
15. The intersection of Seventh Street Northwest and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
16. The intersections of Seventh Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northeast corner.
17. The intersections of Eighth Street Northwest and:
A. Second Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
B. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
18. The intersection of Ninth Street Northwest and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
19. The intersection of Tenth Street Northwest and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
20. The intersection of Twelfth Street Northwest and Twelfth Avenue – extreme
southeast corner.
21. The intersections of Twelfth Street Southwest and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Twelfth Avenue – northeast corner.
22. The intersection of Fifth Street Northeast and:
A. Ninth Place – southwest and northeast corners;
B. Sixth Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
C. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
D. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
23. The intersections of First Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
24. The intersections of Second Street Northeast and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Sixth Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 310 -
C. Third Avenue – southeast corner;
D. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
25. The intersections of Second Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
26. The intersection of Val-Kay Court Northeast and Twelfth Avenue – center of
median.
27. The intersections of Third Street Northeast and:
A. Sixth Avenue – northwest and southeast corners;
B. Third Avenue – southeast corner;
C. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
28. The intersections of Third Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
29. The intersections of Fourth Street Northeast and:
A. Nineteenth Avenue – southwest corner;
B. Eighteenth Avenue – southwest corner;
C. Twelfth Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
D. Eleventh Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
E. Tenth Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
F. Ninth Place – southwest corner;
G. Seventh Avenue –northeast corner;
H. Sixth Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
I. Fifth Avenue – southwest corner;
J. Third Avenue – southwest corner;
K. Second Avenue – southwest corner;
L. First Avenue – southwest and northeast corners.
30. The intersections of Fourth Street Southeast and:
A. First Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
B. Second Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
C. Third Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
D. Fourth Avenue – southwest and northeast corners;
E. Fifth Avenue – southwest corner;
F. Sixth Avenue – southwest corner;
G. Twelfth Avenue – northeast corner.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 311 -
31. The intersection of Fifth Street Northeast and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
32. The intersections of Fifth Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
33. The intersections of Sixth Street Northeast and:
A. Twelfth Avenue – southeast corner;
B. First Avenue – southeast corner;
C. Central Avenue – northwest corner.
34. The intersection of Sixth Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
35. The intersection of Seventh Street Northeast and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
36. The intersections of Seventh Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
37. The intersection of Eighth Street Northeast and Central Avenue – northwest
corner.
38. The intersections of Eighth Street Southeast and:
A. Central Avenue – southeast corner;
B. Third Avenue – northwest and southeast corners.
39. The intersections of Central Avenue East and:
A. Windsor Boulevard – northwest corner;
B. Franklin General Hospital entrance driveway – northwest corner;
C. Quail Avenue – southwest corner;
D. All stop signs located within the boundary lines of the Franklin
General Hospital, specifically one being at the exit from the emergency drive
to the main drive of the hospital and one being from the exit of the main
parking area of the hospital.
40. The intersection of Olive Avenue Northwest and Fourth Avenue – northeast
corner.
41. The intersection of First Street Northeast and:
A. First Avenue Northeast – northwest corner;
B. First Avenue Northeast – southeast corner;
C. Second Avenue Northeast – northwest corner;
D. Second Avenue Northeast – southeast corner.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 312 -
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. The following intersections are
designated as four-way stop intersections, and all vehicles are required to stop at the entrances
to such intersection when stop signs are erected.
1. The intersections of First Street Northwest and:
A. Third Avenue – southwest, northwest, northeast and southeast
corners;
B. Second Avenue – southwest, northwest, northeast and southeast
corners;
C. First Avenue – southwest, northwest, northeast and southeast corners.
2. The intersections of Second Street Northwest and:
A. First Avenue Northwest – northwest, northeast, southwest and
southeast corners;
B. Second Avenue Northwest – northwest, northeast, south-west and
southeast corners.
3. The intersections of Federal Street North and:
A. First Avenue – northwest, northeast, southwest and southeast corners;
B. Second Avenue – northwest, northeast, southwest and southeast
corners;
C. Twelfth Avenue – northwest, northeast, southwest and southeast
corners.
65.04 SPECIAL YIELD REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. The intersection of First Street Northeast:
A. Seventh Avenue Northeast – southeast corner;
B. Seventh Avenue Northeast – northwest corner.
2. The intersection of Third Street Southwest:
A. First Avenue Southwest – southeast corner;
B. First Avenue Southwest – northwest corner.
65.05 SCHOOL STOPS. At the following school crossing zones every driver of a
vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such
school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
1. Intersection of Fourth Street Southeast (Highway 65) and Fourth Avenue;
2. Intersection of Twelfth Avenue Northeast and Fourth Street Northeast
(Highway 65);
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 313 -
3. Intersection of Twelfth Avenue Northeast and Third Street;
4. Intersection of Fourth Avenue Southeast and Fifth Street.
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging
from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when
able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.07 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle.
65.08 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals
are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing
down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
65.09 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS. Every driver shall observe and comply with
the directions provided by official traffic control signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
1. Intersection of Central Avenue East and Fourth Street;
2. Intersection of Central Avenue West and First Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 314 -
[The next page is 321]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 321 -
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears
by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be
seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the
signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon
application and good cause being shown, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the
applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible
for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the
amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
1. First Street Northwest. 7,000 pound limit from Central Avenue to Third
Avenue Northwest.
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City
bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the
street serving the bridge, the Public Works Director may cause to be posted and maintained
signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of
such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded,
upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1. Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing 10 tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading
shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
A. Highway 3 from Olive Avenue to Quail Avenue;
B. Highway 65 from Nineteenth Avenue NE to 140th Street;
C. Twelfth Avenue North from Olive Avenue to Quail Avenue;
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 322 -
D. Olive Avenue from Twelfth Avenue North to 130th Street;
E. 140th Street from Nuthatch Avenue to Highway 65;
F. First Street NW from Twelfth Avenue North to Sixth Avenue NW;
G. Ninth Place NE from First Street NE to Highway 65;
H. Imperial Road from 140th Street;
I. South Federal Street from 140th Street to Sixth Avenue SE.
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing 10 tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop
within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite
stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to
its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
4. Exemptions. Implements of husbandry, as defined by Section 321.1 of the
Code of Iowa, are exempt from the truck route regulations established in this section.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 323 -
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking 67.04 Use Sidewalks
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a
street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 USE SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 324 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 325 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. Upon the following streets and alleys
vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction
when appropriate signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
- NONE -
CHAPTER 68 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 326 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 327 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 No Parking Zones
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb - One-Way Street 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Angle Parking 69.10 Buses and Taxicabs
69.04 Angle Parking – Manner 69.11 Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.12 Emergency Snow Regulations
69.06 Parking Prohibited 69.13 Snow Routes
69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking 69.14 Limited Parking
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles
parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB - ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of
the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided
in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following
locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. First Street Southwest on the east side from First Avenue Southwest to
Central Avenue;
2. First Street Northwest on both sides from Central Avenue West to Second
Avenue Northwest;
3. Federal Street South on the west side from First Avenue South to Central
Avenue;
4. Federal Street North on both sides from Central Avenue to First Avenue
North;
5. Federal Street North on the west side from First Avenue North to Second
Avenue North;
6. First Avenue Northwest on both sides from Federal Street to First Street
Northwest;
7. First Avenue Northeast on the north side from Federal Street to First Street
Northeast;
8. Second Avenue Northwest on the north side from First Street Northwest to
Second Street Northwest;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 328 -
9. Second Avenue Northwest on the north side from First Street Northwest to
Federal Street.
69.04 ANGLE PARKING - MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets which
have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a
diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when
measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a
vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours, unless otherwise limited under the
provisions of this chapter, or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising;
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and
so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an intersection of any
street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 329 -
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing,
except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said
entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing
or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the Police Chief may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color
and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is hereby
reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more
than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or
other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space,
when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or
stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for
such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley which is 18 feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked to
deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private
property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Roadway and Sidewalk. That area between the roadway and
sidewalk of any street or highway in the City without authorization from the Clerk.
Such area shall be kept clear of any implements, equipment, machinery, tools,
contrivances, apparatus, appliances, devices, gadgets, obstacles, impediments or other
obstructions.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 330 -
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall
apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established
and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street
persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of
Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair
parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa
when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of
Iowa.
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the
following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control
signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Central Avenue on both sides from west corporate limits to east corporate
limits;
2. Fourth Street on both sides from north corporate limits to south corporate
limits;
3. First Street Northwest on the west side from Third Avenue Northwest to
Eighth Place Northwest;
4. First Street Northwest on the east side from Fifth Avenue Northwest to Eighth
Place Northwest;
5. Twelfth Avenue Northeast on the south side from Third Street Northeast to
Federal Street;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 331 -
6. Twelfth Avenue Northwest on the south side from First Street Northwest to
Second Street Northwest;
7. Twelfth Avenue Northwest on the north side from Second Street Northwest to
Fourth Street Northwest;
8. Olive Street on both sides from Twelfth Avenue Northwest to Fourth Avenue
Northwest;
9. On any street within the Business District between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m;
10. Second Street Northeast on the east side from Tenth Place Northeast to
Eleventh Place Northeast;
11. Third Street Northwest on the west side from Twelfth Avenue Northwest to
Oak Hill Drive;
12. Second Street Northeast on the east side from Ninth Place Northeast to Tenth
Place Northeast, and from Eleventh Place Northeast to Twelfth Avenue Northeast;
13. Fourth Avenue Northwest on both sides from Federal Street North to Second
Street Northwest;
14. Eleventh Place Northeast on the north side between First Street Northeast and
Federal Street North;
15. Third Street Northeast on the west side from First Avenue Northeast to Third
Avenue Northeast;
16. Second Avenue Southeast on the north side from Fifth Street Southeast to
Seventh Street Southeast;
17. Fifth Street Southeast on the east side from Central Avenue East to First
Avenue Southeast;
18. First Avenue Southeast on the south side from Fourth Street Southeast to Fifth
Street Southeast;
19. Federal Street North on the east side from Eleventh Place Northeast to
Twelfth Avenue Northeast;
20. Fourth Avenue Southeast on the north side from Fourth Street Southeast to
Seventh Street Southeast;
21. Second Avenue Southeast on the north side from Third Street Southeast to
Fourth Street Southeast;
22. First Street Southeast on the east side from Central Avenue East to First
Avenue Southeast;
23. First Street Northwest on the west side, 65 feet south of south right-of-way of
Twelfth Avenue Northwest;
24. First Street Northwest on the east side, 65 feet south of the south right-of-way
of Twelfth Avenue Northwest;
25. Tenth Avenue Northeast on the south side from Fourth Street Northeast to
Sixth Street Northeast; during school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 332 -
26. Eleventh Avenue Northeast on the south side from Fourth Street Northeast to
Sixth Street Northeast; during school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.;
27. Tenth Avenue Northeast on the north side, 50 feet east of the Tenth Avenue
Northeast and Fourth Street Northeast intersection;
28. Fourth Avenue Southeast on the north side from Seventh Street Southeast to
Fourth Street Southeast; during school days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.;
29. Second Street Southeast on both sides on the 600 block; from 8:00 a.m.
through 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday;
30. First Street Southwest on the west side, north from First Avenue Southwest,
first three parallel parking spaces; during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
69.09 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer,
or other motor vehicle with trailer attached exceeding thirty feet in length in violation of the
following regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to pick-up, light delivery
or panel delivery trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in
the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo within the Business District, no
person shall park or leave unattended such vehicle within the Business District. When
actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or
parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
2. Other Parts of Town. No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked upon
any other street or alley except for moving vans as specified in Section 69.09(3) of
this Code of Ordinances.
3. Exception for Moving Vans. Vans engaged in the act of loading and/or
unloading may be parked for a period of time not exceeding 24 hours.
4. Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked in any area of the City
with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other
device in operation giving off audible sounds for a period of time longer than two
hours.
5. Dollying Down. No person shall dolly down a camper, trailer, semi-trailer or
other such vehicle onto a street and let it remain there.
6. Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any street,
alley or highway within 300 feet of any residence within the City for a period of time
of more than one hour. In addition, any such livestock truck, semi-trailer or any other
vehicle shall be thoroughly cleansed of all refuse, manure, hay, straw or sand within
two hours after it is placed on any premises or in any garage within the City after it
has been used to transport livestock.
69.10 BUSES AND TAXICABS. The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park
upon any street in any Business District at any place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand,
respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations, or stopping or
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 333 -
parking any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers.
69.11 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS. No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such
stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of
a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
69.12 EMERGENCY SNOW REGULATIONS.
1. Parking Restrictions. It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on or along
any public street, avenue, alley, or other public place in the City in such a manner as
to interfere with the plowing or removal of snow and/or ice from the same.
2. Declaration of Emergency Snow Parking Regulations. When it becomes
necessary for the City to cause snow and/or ice to be plowed or removed from its
public streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places, due to the accumulation thereon,
causing a hindrance to traffic and constituting an emergency, requiring the same to be
plowed or removed, the Public Works Director or his/her designated representative
shall, by “appropriate public media,” declare the commencement of such emergency
situation, and the enforcement of emergency snow parking regulations as hereafter set
forth, which regulations shall remain in force and effect until lifted by the Public
Works Director or his/her designated representative. For the purpose of this chapter,
the accumulation of snow and/or ice on any public street, avenue, alley, or other
public places deemed sufficient for the application of emergency parking regulations
is hereby defined as being such accumulation thereof which hinders the safe
movement of vehicular traffic in general thereon, or which impedes the ability of
emergency and public transportation vehicles to travel safely and expeditiously along,
over, and across the same. “Appropriate public media” is defined as being a public
announcement by means of broadcasts or telecasts from radio, television, telephone,
and internet-based public announcements. The Public Works Director or his/her
designated representative may also cause such declaration to be announced in a
newspaper of general circulation in this City, when time permits. The public
announcements shall also specify the time and date the emergency situation shall be in
force and effect.
3. Snow Parking Regulations. Upon the declaration of such emergency situation
by the Public Works Director or his/her designated representative, as stated in
subsection 2 of this section, no parking shall be permitted on the designated City
streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places for the duration of the emergency.
During times of declared snow emergencies when street or avenue parking is
disallowed, TEMPORARY parking of vehicles on private yards is permitted with the
permission of the property owner, until 24 hours after the snow emergency has been
lifted by the Public Works Director or his/her designated representative.
4. Downtown Parking During Snow Emergency Declarations. No person shall
park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle during a declared Snow Emergency
between 2:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m. in the Downtown C-1 Commercial Zoning
District, bounded by First Avenue South to Third Avenue North, and between First
Street East to Third Street West.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 334 -
5. Parking on City-owned or Operated Parking Lots. It is unlawful for any
vehicle to be parked on or in any City-owned or operated parking lot during the period
of such declared Snow Emergency, as authorized in this section, from 2:00 a.m. until
6:00 a.m. Parking shall be allowed from 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. in said City-owned
or operated parking lots throughout a declared Snow Emergency. Any vehicle
remaining parked in violation of the provisions of this Chapter may be removed as
provided in subsection 9 this section. EXCEPTIONS: The following City-owned and
operated parking lots may be utilized for parking during Snow Emergency
declarations for 24 hours after the Snow Emergency declaration has been lifted:
A. Hampton Public Library east parking lot;
B. North downtown parking lot (corner of Second Street Northwest and
Third Avenue Northwest);
C. The lower parking area at Progress Park (between the basketball court
and tennis courts).
Vehicles must be removed from these City-owned and operated parking lots within 24
hours after the Snow Emergency declaration has been lifted, and not utilized for
parking until such time the snow has been cleared from said parking lots.
6. Post Hours. No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle
during posted hours on streets or avenues, where parking is prohibited during certain
hours, as posted on official signs.
7. Enforcement of Regulations. The provisions of this section shall supersede
all other parking regulations in force and effect on any such arterial or residential
street, avenue, or alley during such emergency situation, and shall not require posting
of the emergency situation.
8. Vehicle Declared Nuisance. Any vehicle located or parked within the limits
of any street in the City or parked in or upon any City-owned or operated parking lot
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a nuisance and may be towed or
removed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police or his/her designated
subordinate.
9. Notice of Towing or Removal. In the event the Chief of Police or his/her
designated subordinate shall direct the towing or removal of any vehicle in accordance
with subsection 6 of this section he/she shall make a record thereof and shall within 24
hours thereafter given written notice to the owner at his or her last known address, and
if the owner is unknown, on the first business day following the day or such towing or
removal submit for publication such notice at least once in a newspaper having
general circulation in the City. Such notice shall include a statement of the time of
towing or removal, the place of storage, a description of the vehicle, and the
registration number, if any.
10. Cost of Towing or Removal. The cost of towing or removal of any nuisance
vehicle in accordance with this chapter, as well as storage charges, if any, shall be
paid by the owner of such vehicle, but any such charges shall not be considered a fine,
penalty, or forfeiture.
11. Penalty. Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of $25.00, payable at the Hampton Police Department within 30
days of issue. Non-payment after 30 days results in an additional penalty of $5.00.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 335 -
Unpaid fines after 60 days are subject to citation filed with the Franklin County
Magistrate’s Court.
69.13 SNOW ROUTES. The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow
routes. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow route,
it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.14 LIMITED PARKING. The following parking areas of the City are hereby
designated as limited parking areas for a specified time as designated by posted signs for the
purposes of making or receiving deliveries:
1. Parking at the first marked and designated parallel parking spot on the south
side of First Avenue Northwest, located immediately east of the intersection of First
Avenue Northwest and Second Street Northwest and adjacent to Hampton City Hall is
limited to five minutes from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
2. Parking at the third marked and designated parallel parking spot on the south
side of First Avenue Northwest, located as the third parking spot west of the
intersection of First Avenue Northwest and First Street Northwest shall be limited to
parking for 10 minutes between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., seven days per
week.
3. Parking at the first marked and designated parallel parking spot on the north
side of First Avenue Northwest, located immediately west of the intersection of First
Avenue Northwest and First Street Northwest shall be limited to parking for 10
minutes, seven days per week.
4. Parking at the first marked and designated parallel parking spot on the east
side of First Street Northwest, located immediately north of the intersection of Second
Avenue Northwest and First Street Northwest and adjacent business, located at 205
First Street Northwest, is limited to 15 minutes from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 336 -
[The next page is 341]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 341 -
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved
computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are
designated by Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled
fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Uncontested violations of parking
restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a
fine payable at the office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount
of $15.00 for all violations except snow removal parking violation, snow route parking
violations†, and improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not
paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The simple notice of a fine for snow
removal parking violations and snow route parking violations is $25.00. If such fine is not
paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The simple notice of a fine for improper
use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00. Failure to pay the fine within 30
days from the date upon which the violation occurred will be grounds for filing of a complaint
in the District Court of Iowa in and for Franklin County, and may be grounds for refusing to
renew a violator’s motor vehicle registration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is
parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the
notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous
place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any
proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the
† Editor’s Note: A snow route parking violation occurs when the driver of a vehicle impedes or blocks
traffic on a designated snow route. (See Section 69.13 of this Code of Ordinances.)
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 342 -
registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or
cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City,
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason
of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its
custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
[The next page is 351]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 351 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions 75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than
three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine displacement
to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1,200 pounds
and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars
for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and
that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle”
includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for
highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design
features that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator of an off-road
motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of
all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than four
and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is
of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering
wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following
vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than type 1
vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
C. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this
chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48 inches or
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 352 -
less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed for travel on snow
or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or
equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road
motorcycle or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code
of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the
Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the
Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of
operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall
comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the
City:
1. Prohibited Streets. Snowmobiles are prohibited on the following properties
and streets within the corporate limits of the City:
A. Highways No. 65 and No. 3;
B. Second Street Northwest from Third Avenue Northwest to First
Avenue Southwest;
C. First Street Northwest from Third Avenue Northwest to First Avenue
Southwest;
D. Federal Street North from Third Avenue Northwest to First Avenue
Southwest;
E. Central Avenue from Third Street Northwest to First Street Northeast;
F. First Avenue Northwest from Third Street Northeast to First Street
Northeast;
G. Second Avenue from Third Street Northwest to First Street Northeast;
H. In the cemetery;
I. On any parking or other City property and in unrestricted areas
anywhere, except the traveled portion of the street.
Snowmobiles may be operated on other streets within the City for the sole and
exclusive purpose of using the most direct roadway for ingress to and egress from the
City.
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under
the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon
the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 353 -
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad rightof-
way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of
law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after
yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except
where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of
the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover
of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing
the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall
comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or
registered off-road utility vehicles. In designating such streets, the Council may
authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience
stores along a designated street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
1. 3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way
only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may,
if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 354 -
1. 4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park,
playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of
the City.
2. 5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for
any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the
owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred
or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an
accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or
more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 355 -
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.08 Bicycles on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.09 Skate, Skateboard, and Coaster Restrictions
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.10 Towing
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.11 Improper Riding
76.05 Speed 76.12 Parking
76.06 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Carrying Articles 76.14 Special Penalty
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle
is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein. In addition, this chapter regulates the use of in-line
skates, roller skates, skateboards, coasters and similar devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the
traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a
bicycle the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride
other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride
more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.05 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.06 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.07 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 356 -
76.08 BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS. Riding bicycles is prohibited on sidewalks in the
following locations:
1. Business District. Upon a sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in
Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
2. School Zones. Upon a sidewalk in a school zone.
3. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting such use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-ofway
to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.09 SKATE, SKATEBOARD, AND COASTER RESTRICTIONS. The riding or
use of skates, skateboards, coasters or similar devices within the corporate limits of the City
shall be subject to the following:
1. No person shall ride or use such devices at any time on any street, sidewalk,
plaza area or public parking lot in the Business District as defined in Section 60.02(1)
of this Code of Ordinances.
2. No person shall ride or use such devices on a street in a residential district or
area which runs parallel to a hard-surface sidewalk.
3. No person shall ride or use such devices in a publicly owned parking lot.
4. All persons using or riding such devices within the City shall yield the rightof-
way to pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian using the same sidewalk.
5. All persons using or riding such devices on any street or alley shall:
A. Observe all traffic regulations, laws and ordinances.
B. Stay as near to the side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
6. No person shall use or ride such devices on privately-owned parking lots
unless written permission has been obtained from the owner(s).
7. No person shall use or ride such devices on any sidewalk abutting a business.
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for such use.
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless
manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the
operator or others.
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a
building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 357 -
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be
responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible
from a distance of 300 feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle, may be used
in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.14 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter will be
issued a simple notice of a fine in the amount of $5.00.
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 358 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 359 -
CHAPTER 77
BICYCLE LICENSING
77.01 License Required 77.03 Maintenance of License Records
77.02 License Plates or Decals
77.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person who resides within the City shall ride or propel a
bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless
such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate or decal is attached thereto as provided
herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
1. License Application. Application for a bicycle license and license plate or
decal shall be made upon a form provided by the City and shall be made to the Clerk.
A license fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid to the City before each license is
granted.
2. Issuance of License. The Clerk, upon receiving proper application therefor is
authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be effective immediately.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
77.02 LICENSE PLATES OR DECALS. License plates or decals are required as follows:
1. Issued. The Clerk, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a license
plate or decal bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
2. Attached to Bicycle. The Clerk shall cause such license plate or decal to be
firmly attached to the bicycle for which issued in such position as to be plainly seen
from the rear.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
3. Removal. No person shall remove a license plate or decal from a bicycle
during the period for which issued unless said bicycle is dismantled and no longer
operated upon any street in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
4. Lost License. In the event a license plate or decal shall be lost, destroyed or
stolen, the owner shall report such to the Clerk immediately. A new license shall be
issued upon payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00).
77.03 MAINTENANCE OF LICENSE RECORDS. The Clerk shall keep a record of the
number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued,
and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle
license fees collected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
CHAPTER 77 BICYCLE LICENSING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 360 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 361 -
CHAPTER 78
ROLLING PRAIRIE TRAIL REGULATIONS
78.01 Purpose 78.04 Exceptions
78.02 Definitions 78.05 Violation and Penalties
78.03 Limitations on Operation
78.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the condition of that portion
of Rolling Prairie Trail located within the City of Hampton, Iowa, and to regulate the
operation of motor vehicles, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles on said Rolling Prairie Trail
and Spurs, and provide for penalty for improper or illegal operation due to repair costs.
78.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicles” is defined as provide in the Chapter 321G.1 of the Code
of Iowa as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
2. “Motor vehicles” is defined as provided in the Chapter 321 of the Code of
Iowa as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
3. “Snowmobile” is defined as provided in the Chapter 321G.1 of the Code of
Iowa as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
78.03 LIMITATIONS ON OPERATION. Motor vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and
snowmobiles are prohibited from operating on any section of the Rolling Prairie Trail or Spurs
thereof located within the City except on segments clearly marked for operation of such
vehicles.
78.04 EXCEPTIONS. Any persons who are elder (defined as a person 60 years of age or
older) or handicapped may operate on the Rolling Prairie Trail or Spurs thereof within the City
limits an electric personal assistive mobility device as defined in the Chapter 321.1(20B) of
the Code of Iowa or an electric assistive device defined in the Chapter 216E.1(1) of the Code
of Iowa including but limited to an electric wheelchair, electric scooter or three or four wheel
electric vehicle typically used by handicapped persons.
78.05 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter commits a simple misdemeanor and if charged as a simple misdemeanor upon
conviction shall be subject to a scheduled fine as outlined in Section 1.14 of this Code of
Ordinances. A violation of this chapter may be charged as a Municipal Infraction per the
penalties outlined in Section 4.03 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 78 ROLLING PRAIRIE TRAIL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 362 -
[The next page is 375]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 375 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a
police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period
by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of
the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for
carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal,
or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3. “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
4. “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A
police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority
having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned
vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private
property. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 376 -
hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing,
or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of private
property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned
vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned
vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of
the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or
the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody
an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within 20 days, by certified mail, the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or
to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of
record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the
location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the
notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within 10 days after the
effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The
notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a
waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the
vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is
deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a
demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the
notice shall state that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in
Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the
abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by
a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the
vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by
the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters.
If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the
vehicle or personal property within the 10-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or
claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the
personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title,
claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the 10-day
reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle
was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The
published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property
but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as
prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 377 -
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay an
impoundment fee of $20.00 plus $5.00 for each additional day within the reclaiming period,
plus towing charges, plus preservation charges if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees
if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing
charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages shall be established by
such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not
been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a
determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the
highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any
person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or
any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or
destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and
without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels
or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall
give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County
Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the
certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle
shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use
Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs
the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise
acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise
demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 378 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 379 -
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
81.01 Definitions 81.03 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Obstructing Streets
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
2. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in such a
manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in
excess of 10 minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the
safety of the movement of trains.
2. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the
track.
3. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed regulations.
5. In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching
operations.
6. No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s action was necessary
to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors.
Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.
81.03 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and maintain good,
sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
CHAPTER 81 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 380 -
[The next page is 395]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 395 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.11 Tapping Mains
90.02 Duties of the Water Operator In Charge 90.12 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections 90.13 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.04 Abandoned Connections 90.14 Failure to Maintain
90.05 Permit 90.15 Working Curb Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit 90.16 Interior Valve
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required 90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations 90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Inspection and Approval 90.20 Cross-Connections
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this
Code of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from the
City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties,
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and
several.
3. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
4. “Water Operator In Charge” means the Water Operator In Charge of the City
water system or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02 DUTIES OF THE WATER OPERATOR IN CHARGE. The Water Operator In
Charge shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and their connection to the water
main and enforce all regulations pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with
this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as
well as to new ones. The Water Operator In Charge shall make such rules, not in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the water system,
subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an emergency the Water Operator In
Charge may make temporary rules for the protection of the system until due consideration by
the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
1. Mandatory Connections. The owners of any houses, buildings or structures
used for human occupancy, employment or use, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main are
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 396 -
hereby required to connect such facilities to the City’s public water system in
accordance with the provisions of these Water Service chapters within 60 days after
the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public water main is located
within 300 feet of the property line of such owner.
2. Individual Water Service Connection Requirements. Each building
containing one or more dwelling units to be rented must have water supplied to it by
its own individual service connection as provided for in Section 90.11 of this Code of
Ordinances. If a building has more than one dwelling unit to be rented, the owner of
the building must either be responsible for the bill for all water and sewer usage of all
units in the building, or the owner must provide means whereby each water service on
a separate billing account can be disconnected without disconnecting service provided
to other billing accounts. Such connection valves must be accessible to City staff
from outside the building, a common area, or through some other means whereby the
City employee would not have to enter the private premises of a resident.
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is abandoned
or a service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains
shall be turned off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05 PERMIT. Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a
written permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall include a
legal description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the
person who will do the work, and the general uses of the water. If the proposed work meets
all the requirements of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid,
the permit shall be issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the
permit is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to conditions
beyond the control of person making the application, an extension of time within which to
complete the work may be granted. The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation
of these chapters.
90.06 FEE FOR PERMIT. Before any permit is issued the person who makes the
application shall pay $25.00 to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[2a])
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any water
service pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and
applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State
Plumbing Code.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of water service pipes and connections
to the water system shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making
a connection shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All water service pipes and their connections
to the water system must be inspected and approved by the Water Operator In Charge before
they are covered, and the Water Operator In Charge shall keep a record of such approvals. If
the Water Operator In Charge refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 397 -
must proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to use the
municipal water system shall permit the Water Operator In Charge to enter the premises to
inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of
authority.
90.11 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by the Water Operator
In Charge in accord with the following:
1. Fee. The tapping fee is $150.00, plus the cost of any materials.
2. Independent Services. No more than one house, building or premises shall be
supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the Water
Operator In Charge and unless provision is made so that each house, building or
premise may be shut off independently of the other.
3. Sizes and Location of Taps. The size and location of the taps shall be
determined by the Water Operator In Charge.
4. Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Water Operator In Charge, shall be inserted in every tap in the main.
The corporation stop in the main shall in no case be smaller than one size smaller than
the service pipe.
90.12 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipes from the
main to the meter setting shall be standard weight type K copper. Pipe must be laid
sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing.
90.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. All costs and expenses
incident to the installation and maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the
building served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance
of said water service pipe.
90.14 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service pipe which is
the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the
owner fails to correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.15 WORKING CURB VALVE. There shall be installed within the public right-ofway
a main shut-off valve of the inverted key type on the water service pipe at the outer
sidewalk line with a suitable lock of a pattern approved by the Water Operator In Charge. The
shut-off valve shall be covered with a heavy metal cover having the letter “W” marked
thereon, visible and even with the pavement or ground. The shut-off valve cannot have a
drain-back, and all work must be done by a licensed plumber.
90.16 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service
pipe inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and
so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service pipe supplies more
than one customer within the building, there shall be separate valves for each such customer
so that service may be shut off for one without interfering with service to the others.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 398 -
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open or only
partly refilled for 24 hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the
water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or the plumber.
If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before receiving another permit. If
the property owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Water Operator In Charge may shut
off the supply of water to any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained
in these Water Service System chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply
shall not be turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Water Operator In
Charge has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS. It is unlawful for any
person except the Water Operator In Charge to turn water on at the curb valve, and no person,
unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire
hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
1. Definitions. For use in this section the following terms are defined:
A. “Approved backflow prevention assembly” means backflow
assemblies complying with the State Plumbing Code Section 641-25.5(1)b or
Section 641-25.5(1)c for containment in a fire protection system.
B. “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to
the premises other than the purveyor’s public water supply. These auxiliary
waters may include water from any purveyor’s public potable water supply or
any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used
waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be contaminated or polluted
or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source
over which the water purveyor does not have authority for sanitary control.
C. “Back-pressure” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source other than the intended source.
D. “Back-siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures
or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of
pressure in the potable water supply system.
E. “Backflow” means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by
either back-pressure or back-siphonage.
F. “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the potable
water supply by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or
other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
G. “Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of
piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 399 -
which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial
fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow
may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary
connections, such as swing connection, removable sections, four-way plus
valve, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or
sliding multi-port tubes.
H. “Cross-connection containment” means the installation of an
approved backflow assembly at the water service connection to any
customer’s premises where it is physically, economically infeasible to find
and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections
with the customer’s water system; or it means the installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to the supplying
portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential crossconnections
which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point
of the cross-connection (isolation).
I. “Cross-connection controlled” means a connection between a potable
water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow
prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will
continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
2. Responsibility. The Water Operator In Charge shall be responsible for the
protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or
pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through
the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Water Operator In Charge, an
approved backflow device is required (at the customer’s water service connection, or
within the customer’s private water system) for the safety of the water system, the
Water Operator In Charge shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such
an approved backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on said customer’s
premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly at the
customer’s own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to
install, have tested and maintain said assembly shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been
satisfactorily met.
3. Plumbing Official. The Water Operator In Charge has the responsibility not
only to review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed, but the Water
Operator In Charge has the explicit responsibility of preventing cross-connections
from being designated and built into the structure within the City’s jurisdiction.
Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the potential for a crossconnection
being made an integral part of the plumbing system, the Water Operator In
Charge has the responsibility to require such cross-connections be either eliminated or
provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly in accordance with the
Plumbing Code. The Water Operator In Charge’s responsibility begins at the point of
service (the downstream side of the meter) and carries throughout the entire length of
the customer’s water system. The Water Operator In Charge should inquire about the
intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that a cross-connection might
be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When such a crossconnection
is discovered, it will be mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow
prevention assembly be required by the plans and be properly installed in accordance
with the Manual of Cross-connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control, Hy Di Research.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 400 -
4. Certified Backflow Assembly Technician. When employed by the customer
or the City Water Department to test, repair, overhaul and/or maintain backflow
prevention assemblies, a backflow assembly technician will have the following
responsibilities:
A. Be responsible for insuring acceptable testing equipment and
procedures that are used for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow
prevention assemblies.
B. Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the customer and City.
The report shall include a list of materials or replacement parts used.
C. Insure replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally
supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
D. Maintain the design, material or operational characteristics of the
assembly during repair or maintenance.
E. Perform the work and be responsible for the competence and
accuracy of all tests and reports.
F. Ensure that his or her license is current, the testing equipment being
used is acceptable to the State and is in proper operating condition.
G. Report any failing assembly to the Bureau of Public Water Supplies
and the water purveyor within five working days. Failure to do so may be
grounds for revocation of the technician’s certification.
H. Be equipped with and be competent to use all necessary tools, gauges
and other equipment necessary to properly test, repair and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies.
I. Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure backflow assembly and air gaps, showing the serial number, date
tested and by whom. The technician’s license number must also be on this
tag.
In the case of a customer requiring a commercially available technician, any certified
technician is authorized to make the test and report the results of that test to the
customer, water purveyor. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of
repair, a qualified and trained person must make the actual repair.
5. Requirements.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the City Water Department unless the water supply is protected
as required by State laws, regulations, codes and this section. All new
construction shall include an approved backflow prevention assembly to
achieve total containment of each water service connection for residential,
commercial, industrial, fire, governmental and/or irrigation use. Service of
water to any premises shall be discontinued by the Water Department if a
backflow prevention assembly required by this section for control of backflow
and cross-connection is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found
that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be
restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 401 -
B. The customer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to the Water Operator In Charge to determine whether crossconnections
or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this
section exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Water Department
shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a
physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the
condition in conformance with the State and City statutes relating to
plumbing, water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
C. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each
service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line, or
immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first
branch line leading off the service line, whenever the Water Department
deems the protection of the water supply to be in the best interest of the water
supply customers. All water tank fill points, bulk load-outs and chemical
spraying devices attached to any garden hose shall have a backflow
prevention device or a proper air gap. The type of protection assembly
required under paragraph B of this subsection shall depend upon the degree of
hazard which exists at the point of cross-connection (whether direct or
indirect).
D. All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not
meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation, and which have been
properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance
requirements under paragraph A of this subsection, be excluded from the
requirements of these rules so long as the Water Department is assured that
they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the
existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than
minimum maintenance or when the Water Department finds that the
maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the
requirements of this section.
E. Where the level of the risk of backflow warrants, in the opinion of the
Water Water Operator In Charge, there shall be an annual inspection and
operational test of the backflow prevention assemblies, at the customer-user’s
expense. In those instances where the Water Operator In Charge deems the
hazard to be great, he or she may require certified inspections and tests at a
more frequent interval. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a
certified backflow assembly technician.
F. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in water supply
lines to provide at least the degree of protection stipulated in the Manual of
Cross-connection Control. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be
exposed for easy observation and be readily accessible.
G. All backflow prevention assemblies installed in potable water supply
systems for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working
condition by the person or persons having control of such assemblies. The
Water Operator In Charge may inspect such assemblies and, if found to be
defective or inoperative, shall require the replacement thereof. No assembly
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 402 -
shall be removed from use, relocated or another assembly substituted without
the approval of the Water Operator In Charge.
H. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10)
working days of installation.
I. No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a
safety hazard, for example, installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes,
boilers, pits or above ceiling level.
J. In the event a contamination of the water distribution system should
occur from any home or business, that home or business shall be responsible
for all costs incurred by the Water Department to resolve said contamination.
K. Industrial fixture and cross-connection inspections will be performed
annually by the Water Operator In Charge.
6. Permits. The Department shall not permit a cross-connection within the
public water system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot be eliminated.
A. Cross-connection permits that are required for each backflow
prevention device are obtained from the Department. A fee of $25.00 will be
charged for the initial permit and $10.00 for the renewal of each permit.
B. Permits shall be renewed every year and are non-transferable.
Permits are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked if the
owner should so change the cross-connection or degree of hazard associated
with the service.
C. A permit is not required when fixture isolation is achieved with the
utilization of a non-testable backflow preventer.
7. Records and Reports.
A. Records. The Water Department will initiate and maintain the
following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or
inspections.
(2) Master files of cross-connection permits.
(3) Copies of permits and permit applications.
(4) Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the State of Iowa
Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission.
B. Reports. The Water Department will submit the following to the
Commission.
(1) Initial listing of low hazard cross-connection to the State.
(2) Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connection to the State.
(3) Annual update of lists.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections to the State.
[The next page is 405]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 405 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.05 Meter Setting
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.06 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems- Exception 91.07 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters 91.08 Tampering Prohibited
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water
and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be measured
through meters furnished by the City and installed by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler systems may be
connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of
the Water Operator In Charge. No open connection can be incorporated in the system, and
there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must
be sealed open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05 METER SETTING. The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and
fittings for proper setting of the meter. All meters shall be set immediately after the meter
valve and immediately following the meter an approved backflow prevention device,
approved by the Water Operator In Charge, shall be installed. Meter pits may be used only
upon approval of the Water Operator In Charge and shall be of a design and construction
approved by the Water Operator In Charge.
91.06 METER REPAIRS. Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out
of order the Water Operator In Charge shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the
meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, or
the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of
repairs.
91.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Water Operator In Charge shall be permitted to enter the
premises of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.08 TAMPERING PROHIBITED. If any person tampers with any meter and so injures
the same that it does not accurately measure the amount of water flowing through it, or if any
person diverts the flow of water so that it does not pass through the meter, such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 406 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 407 -
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.06 Lien Exemption
92.02 Rates For Service 92.07 Lien Notice
92.03 Billing for Water Service 92.08 Customer Deposits
92.04 Service Discontinued 92.09 Temporary Vacancy
92.05 Lien for Nonpayment 92.10 No Deduction for Leakage
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the
City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91 of this Code
of Ordinances. Each location, building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate
and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. Water service shall be furnished at the following
monthly rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
Gallons Used Per Month Rate
First 1,500 $5.60 per 1,000 gallons
Next 4,000 $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
Next 60,000 $2.55 per 1,000 gallons
All over 65,500 $1.60 per 1,000 gallons
There shall be added a charge of $0.75 to each bill, allocated to the Solid
Waste Fund for the cost of maintaining the Hampton Compost and Brush
site.
The minimum bill per month is $8.90.
92.03 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as part of a
combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined service
accounts on or before the first day of each month.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and payable
at the office of the Clerk by the 20th day of the same month.
3. Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 5% of the amount due shall be added
to each delinquent bill.
92.04 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers shall be
discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 408 -
1. Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be
discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment
charges, is not received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency. Such
notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose name the delinquent
charges were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency
and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord
of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of
delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the customer is a tenant
and requests a change of name for service under the account, such request shall be
sent to the owner or landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a
written request for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the
rental property.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off,
the Public Works Director or City Manager shall conduct an informal hearing and
shall make a determination as to whether the disconnection is justified
4. Fees. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a
delinquent customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the
regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.05 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises.
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.06 LIEN EXEMPTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where water
service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water service are paid
directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that
the property is residential or commercial rental property and that the tenant is liable
for the rates or charges. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost
of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the
rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in full.
The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of
the services.
2. Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to the
charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage systems,
sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for a residential
rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the
landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property
and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges for such service. The City may
require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to
the City. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 409 -
deposit if all service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3. Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the
tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or commercial rental
property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy begins. Upon
receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and deposit. A change in tenant for a
residential rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial
rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10
business days of the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential
rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change in
the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice of such
change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the completion of the
change of ownership.
4. Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall
not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured
home if the mobile home, modular homes, or manufactured home is owned by a
tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and
the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the
account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is responsible for
payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the account holder.
92.07 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If the customer is a tenant and
if the owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate
persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to the County
Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS. There shall be required from every customer not the
owner of the premises served a $150.00 deposit intended to guarantee the payment of bills for
service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 TEMPORARY VACANCY. A property owner may request water service be
temporarily discontinued and shut off at the curb stop when the property is expected to be
vacant for an extended period of time. There shall be a $10.00 fee collected for restoring
service. During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as provided herein there
shall be no monthly minimum service charge. The City will not drain pipes or pull meters for
temporary vacancies.
92.10 NO DEDUCTION FOR LEAKAGE. No deduction will be made because of
leakage after the water has passed through a meter. If leakage occurs in a service pipe,
including frozen pipes, the City may shut off the supply at the curb valve until the service is
repaired.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 410 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 411 -
CHAPTER 93
PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
93.01 Required Conditions 93.06 Health and Safety Standards; Right of Inspection
93.02 Permit for New Well 93.07 Permit Fees
93.03 Annual Renewal of Permit 93.08 Termination and Abandonment
93.04 Non-renewal of Annual Permit 93.09 Special Restricted Area
93.05 Revocation of Permit
93.01 REQUIRED CONDITIONS. Except as hereinafter provided, private wells and
water systems shall not be maintained by any individual or property owner, nor shall any new
wells be established within the City limits. Private wells and water systems shall be allowed
only if one or more of the following conditions are established by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the City:
1. Existing Well. The well or water system was in existence prior to January 1,
2000, and no part of a tract of ground from which a private well or water system is
proposed is within 300 feet of a City water main.
2. Undue Hardship. If the property owner or individual applying for a private
well permit can show that denying the permit and not allowing the private well or
water system will cause the individual or property owner undue hardship. “Undue
hardship” in this case means that the particular tract of land is so topographically
situated that connection to the City water main system would be unfeasible and that
the particular conditions causing the unfeasibility of the connection are in no way
caused or contributed to by the owner or permit applicant. The Council shall rule on
all questions of undue hardship and their decision shall be final.
93.02 PERMIT FOR NEW WELL. All individuals who desire to construct or maintain
a new private well or water system within the City must first make application to the Water
Operator In Charge for a private well permit. The Council shall establish the contents of the
permit application by resolution. No permit for a new well or water system shall be granted
unless one or more of the required conditions under Section 93.01 of this Code of Ordinances
are established and the well meets all the requirements of the Code of Iowa.
93.03 ANNUAL RENEWAL OF PERMIT. Every well, including existing wells and
future wells, shall be tested annually and results of the tests filed with the Water Operator In
Charge. The Water Operator In Charge shall test every well annually for bacteria and nitrates
during the month of July of each year at the well owner’s expense, and the test results shall be
filed with the Water Operator In Charge on or before the first day of August of each year. If a
well owner fails to comply with this annual test requirement, the Water Operator In Charge
shall send a notice to the well owner at the last known address, advising the well owner no
annual test results have been filled with the Water Operator In Charge. The notice shall
further specify that if the well owner does not properly test the well and file the test results
with the Water Operator In Charge within 60 days after the date of mailing of the notice, the
City shall declare the well abandoned, and the owner shall forthwith terminate use of the well
as required under Section 93.08 of this Code of Ordinances. In the event a well owner has
timely filed the annual test results with the Water Operator In Charge or timely filed test
results after notice and the test results show compliance with all applicable health and safety
CHAPTER 93 PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 412 -
standards as required by appropriate City, County, State and Federal rules, regulations and
laws, the Water Operator In Charge shall renew the original permit for an additional one-year
period.
93.04 NON-RENEWAL OF ANNUAL PERMIT. In the event a well owner receives
annual test results that indicate lack of compliance with appropriate City, County, State and
Federal rules, regulations and laws, the well owner shall immediately advise the City of the
test results and immediately correct the problems and bring the well up to applicable
standards. The well owner shall have an additional 90 days after August 1 of each year to
correct any problems shown by the annual test. If applicable standards cannot be met or if the
problems are not timely corrected, no renewal permit shall be issued and the well owner shall
forthwith terminate use of the well as required under Section 93.08 of this Code of
Ordinances.
93.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. If at any time it is determined that a private well
or water system does not meet applicable City, County, State and Federal rules regulations or
laws, the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall automatically terminate without further
notice to the well owner. The well owner shall have 90 days to correct the problem so that
applicable standards are met. In the event applicable standards cannot be met, the well shall
be abandoned and the well owner shall forthwith terminate use of the well as required by
Section 93.08 of this Code of Ordinances. In the event a private well or water system is not
used for any consecutive nine-month period of time, then at the expiration of the current
private well permit period, the permit shall not be renewed unless the well owner shows good
cause for the non-use and all provisions of this chapter for a new well are complied with.
93.06 HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS; RIGHT OF INSPECTION. All
private wells and private water systems for which permits are granted pursuant to this chapter
shall meet all applicable City, County, State and Federal rules, regulations and laws. All
permit holders, as a condition of receiving a permit, grant to the City the right to enter the well
owner’s property solely to inspect and test any private well and water system maintained upon
the permit holder’s property. In the event the private well or water system so inspected and
tested by the City does not meet applicable standards, the City shall notify the well owner in
writing of the failure to meet applicable standards. The well owner shall have 90 days from
the date of mailing the notice to correct the problems. If the owner fails to timely correct the
problem, the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate without further notice to the
well owner, and the well owner shall forthwith terminate use of the well as required under
Section 93.08 of this Code of Ordinances. In the event a private well or water system cannot
be brought up to applicable standards in the time period allowed herein, and the well owner is
not otherwise connected to the City’s water system, the well owner shall connect to the City’s
water system within 180 days in accordance with this Code of Ordinances.
93.07 PERMIT FEES. The following fee schedule applies to permits for private wells
and water systems.
1. Initial Permit. No fee is charged for the initial registration permit for an
existing well.
2. Annual Renewal Permit. There is no fee for each annual renewal permit,
provided the well owner does the test at the owner’s own expense. In the event a well
owner fails to have the well tested as required pursuant to this chapter and the City
makes the test, the costs of testing shall be charged to the well owner, and the well
owner shall pay an annual permit fee of $50.00.
CHAPTER 93 PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 413 -
3. Permit Fees for New Wells. Any person desiring to install a new well or
water system shall make application to the Water Operator In Charge for a permit and
prior to start of construction shall pay, for a new well to be used for a supply of
potable water, a fee of $50.00; and in addition, the well owner shall file with the Clerk
a certificate from a State authorized laboratory that a State bacteriological test has
been made on the water and the water supply is potable. All permit fees shall be paid
to the Clerk at the time the application is filed. In the event the permit is not granted,
the application fee shall be returned to the applicant.
93.08 TERMINATION AND ABANDONMENT. In the event any private well or water
system is no longer being used, due to failure to comply with applicable standards, the well
owner’s connection to the City water system or other reasons, the well owner or property
owner shall cut off the service mains to the well and the well abandoned in such manner as to
preclude its further use by being plugged by a licensed contractor. The termination of use
shall be done by the owner in accordance with standards and guidelines of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
93.09 SPECIAL RESTRICTED AREA. Because of previous ground contamination in
the area, no person shall drill, construct, or install a private water well without City Council
approval and permit after the date of adoption of the 2016 Code of Ordinances within the area
shown in the following map:
CHAPTER 93 PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 414 -
[The next page is 431]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 431 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Wastewater Lead Operator 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
(IAC, 567-69.3[1])
3. “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building
wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an onsite
wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building
site.
4. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the
public sewer system.
6. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce.
7. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer
system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
10. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and
devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 432 -
of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the
equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
11. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
12. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or
institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
14. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
15. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
16. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
17. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
18. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19. “Sewer rental” means any and all charges, rates, fees, or rentals levied against
and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers by said
sewer system.
20. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twentyfour
(24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
21. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
22. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
23. “Wastewater Lead Operator” means the Wastewater Lead Operator of sewage
works and/or of water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
24. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 WASTEWATER LEAD OPERATOR. The Wastewater Lead Operator shall
exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 433 -
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewers chapters.
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Wastewater Lead Operator.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as
provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in
any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses, buildings, or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to
install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer
connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in
accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewers chapters, such compliance to be
completed within ninety (90) days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided
that said public sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of such
owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be
conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to
connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the corporate
limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the
Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated
by resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 434 -
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Wastewater Lead Operator and other duly authorized
employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing
in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewers chapters. The Wastewater Lead
Operator or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Wastewater Lead Operator and other duly authorized
employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to
violations of these Sanitary Sewers chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these
chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned
the City by reason of such violation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 435 -
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.08 Inspection Required
96.03 Plumber Required 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.04 Excavations 96.10 Sump Pump and Drain Requirements
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.11 Backflow Prevention; Cross-Connection
96.06 Interceptors Required 96.12 Abatement of Violations
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall set forth the
location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and the
purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner
to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60
days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient
showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time
period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the
provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time
for a violation of these chapters.
96.02 PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE. The person who makes the
application shall pay a fee in the amount of $10.00 to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the
permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a
connection charge in the amount of $250.00 for a single-family residence. For multiple
dwelling units, the connection fee shall be $250.00 for the first dwelling unit and $100.00 for
each additional dwelling unit. The minimum sewer connection fee for commercial
establishments shall be $500.00. These fees will be charged for connection with City-owned
sewer mains, or for a connection with sewer mains on private property on which the City has
an easement for maintenance purposes. This fee will not be collectible on sewer connections
from lots on which a previous special assessment for sewer construction has been made, but
will be charged on all connections where the cost of building and installation of the sewer line
was paid by the City.
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and connections to
the public sewer shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the
installation of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. Any connection with a public sanitary
sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the Wastewater Lead Operator and in
accordance with the following:
1. Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by the
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 436 -
owner and observed by the Wastewater Lead Operator, to meet all requirements of
this chapter.
2. Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
3. Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code,
applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in A.S.T.M.
Specification C-12. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Wastewater Lead Operator before installation.
4. Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10 feet
horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less, provided the
water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches above the top of the
building sewer.
5. Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow from
the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
6. Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line to
meet the following:
A. Recommended grade at 1/4 inch per foot.
B. Minimum grade of 1/8 inch per foot.
C. Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer half full.
D. Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the
written approval of the Wastewater Lead Operator and shall be made only
with approved fittings.
7. Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
8. Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be
lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
9. Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits, or
breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code except that the
building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall comply with the
current edition of one of the following:
A. Ductile iron water pipe – A.S.T.M. A-377.
B. P.V.C. – DWV – A.S.T.M. D-2665.
10. Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within three feet
of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 437 -
11. Jointing. Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material shall be compatible with
the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the Wastewater Lead Operator.
Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
12. Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed when
crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be crossed or
where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified
clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings.
Such encasement shall extend at least six inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron
pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either end.
13. Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any residence,
business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the basement
floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless the
ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to the foundation of such building
cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so
that the drainage is away from the foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is
poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be
plugged and the plug shall be sealed by the Wastewater Lead Operator. Any
accumulation of water in any excavation or basement during construction and prior to
connection to the sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into
the sanitary sewer.
14. Clean-out Required. A two-way clean-out is required to be placed outside the
building and every 100 feet thereof to the main connection. In the case of new
construction, a check valve is also required in a residential line.
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be
provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, restaurants, food preparation
facilities, car washes, garages, and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Wastewater
Lead Operator, they are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease
in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
1. Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as
specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Wastewater Lead
Operator, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
2. Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They
shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
3. Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all times.
96.07 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be supplied by the City, at the property
owner’s expense and shall be installed at the location specified by the Wastewater Lead
Operator. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle shall be
glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 438 -
be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is received from the
Wastewater Lead Operator and in accordance with the Wastewater Lead Operator’s direction
if such connection is approved.
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All connections with the sanitary sewer system
before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the Wastewater Lead
Operator. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been
completed, and before any backfilling is done, the Wastewater Lead Operator shall be notified
and the Wastewater Lead Operator shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and
material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the
sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Wastewater Lead Operator refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident to
the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10 SUMP PUMP AND DRAIN REQUIREMENTS. All sump pumps operated
within the City shall be required to make application to the Wastewater Lead Operator for a
sump pump permit, which shall be filed by the Wastewater Lead Operator. Sump pumps shall
be allowed only upon the meeting of the following conditions established by the City:
1. All new construction, the building permits for which are received after the
effective date of the 2002 Code of Ordinances and having a floor level which at all
points is below ground level shall be serviced by a sump pump and footing drains.
This requirement may be waived by the Wastewater Lead Operator upon the
applicant’s showing that existing drainage conditions do not require installation of a
sump pump. All such connections shall be inspected by the Wastewater Lead
Operator.
2. In all new construction, plans for the installation of the sump pump and
footing drains shall be submitted with the building plans and shall be a condition of
approval of any plans. All the plans and construction of the sump pumps and footing
drains shall be done in such a manner as to comply with all the requirements of this
Code of Ordinances in disposing of all waters of any kind as well as any sewage or
waste.
3. No existing structure in the City shall have a sump pump operated in such a
manner so as to allow the drainage from the pump to flow into the sanitary sewer
system of the City.
4. The Wastewater Lead Operator is directed and authorized to compile a list of
sump pumps in existing structures within the City. The purpose of this list will be to
evaluate and monitor the discharge from the sump pumps to ensure that the discharge
shall not infiltrate the sanitary sewer system or otherwise create a nuisance. The
Wastewater Lead Operator is further directed and authorized to conduct routine
inspections of every existing structure within the City connected to the sanitary sewer
system to determine whether or not the structure has a sump pump and, if so, whether
the discharge from the sump pump is in conformity with this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 439 -
96.11 BACKFLOW PREVENTION; CROSS-CONNECTION. When the Wastewater
Lead Operator concludes that a possible backflow condition could result or a possible crossconnection
exists in any premises connected to the sanitary sewer system, the owner of such
premises shall take action deemed appropriate or install devices approved by the Wastewater
Lead Operator to correct the condition. All costs shall be borne by the owner and failure to
take such action shall result in termination of water service to the premises until the condition
is corrected.
96.12 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Construction or maintenance of building
sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-ofway,
which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of official notice
from the Council of such violation. If not made within such time the Council shall, in addition
to the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess
the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the
same manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 440 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 441 -
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges - Powers
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Wastewater Lead
Operator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Wastewater Lead Operator, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging surface
waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the
Wastewater Lead Operator where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for
purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when
deemed to the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides
in excess of two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public
sewer.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 442 -
A. Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million
by weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely
in the opinion of the Wastewater Lead Operator that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Wastewater Lead Operator will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150
degrees F (65 degrees C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600 milligrams per
liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees F (0 and 65
degrees C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Wastewater Lead Operator for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Wastewater Lead Operator as necessary, after treatment of the
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 443 -
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies
or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Wastewater Lead Operator in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating
a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color
of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or
create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES - POWERS. If any waters or wastes are
discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 of this Code of
Ordinances and which in the judgment of the Wastewater Lead Operator may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Wastewater Lead Operator
may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 444 -
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of Chapter 99 of this Code of Ordinances.
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Wastewater Lead Operator permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Wastewater Lead Operator and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s
expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Wastewater Lead Operator, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Wastewater Lead Operator. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods of the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods
to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
24 hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic
grab samples).
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 445 -
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful
to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and layout
of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the
specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69,
and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County
Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from
an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any
ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at
no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in
Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 446 -
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 447 -
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.05 Payment of Bills
99.02 Rate 99.06 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Special Rates 99.07 Special Agreements Permitted
99.04 Private Water Systems
99.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall pay to the
City sewer service fees as hereinafter provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02 RATE. Sewer service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Base Rate. The following base rates plus usage rate per month are hereby
established.
A. For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, commencing July 1, 2015, the base rate
shall be $27.41 per month, plus the monthly usage rate.
B. For Fiscal Year 2016-2017, commencing July 1, 2016, the base rate
shall be $31.24 per month, plus the monthly usage rate.
C. For Fiscal Year 2017-2018, commencing July 1, 2017, the base rate
shall be $34.05 per month, plus the monthly usage rate.
D. For Fiscal Year 2018-2019, commencing July 1, 2018, the base rate
shall be $35.08 per month, plus the monthly usage rate.
E. For Fiscal Year 2019-2020, commencing July 1, 2019, the base rate
shall be $36.13 per month, plus the monthly usage rate, and continue
thereafter until and unless established by ordinance.
2. Usage Rate. Monthly usage rates are hereby established as follows:
A. For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, commencing July 1, 2015, the monthly
usage rate shall be $2.13 per 1,000 gallons for the first 15,000 gallons, and
$1.82 per 1,000 gallons for usage over 15,000 gallons.
B. For Fiscal Year 2016-2017, commencing July 1, 2016, the monthly
usage rate shall be $2.43 per 1,000 gallons for the first 15,000 gallons, and
$2.08 per 1,000 gallons for usage over 15,000 gallons.
C. For Fiscal Year 2017-2018, commencing July 1, 2017, the monthly
usage rate shall be $2.65 per 1,000 gallons for the first 15,000 gallons, and
$2.27 per 1,000 gallons for usage over 15,000 gallons.
D. For Fiscal Year 2018-2019, commencing July 1, 2018, the monthly
usage rate shall be $2.73 per 1,000 gallons for the first 15,000 gallons, and
$2.33 per 1,000 gallons for usage over 15,000 gallons.
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 448 -
E. For Fiscal Year 2019-2020, commencing July 1, 2019, the monthly
usage rate shall be $2.81 per 1,000 gallons for the first 15,000 gallons, and
$2.40 per 1,000 gallons for usage over 15,000 gallons, and continue thereafter
until and unless established by ordinance.
99.03 SPECIAL RATES. Where, in the judgment of the Wastewater Lead Operator and
the Council, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges
provided in Section 99.02 of this Code of Ordinances would be inequitable or unfair to either
the City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Wastewater Lead Operator
and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS. Customers whose premises are served by a
private water system and/or connected to the public sewer disposal system shall pay sewer
charges based upon water used as determined by the City either by an estimate agreed to by
the customer or by metering the water system at the customer’s expense. Any negotiated or
agreed upon sales or charge shall be subject to approval of the City Council. The minimum
charges shall be as follows:
1. For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, commencing July 1, 2015, $36.55 per month.
2. For Fiscal Year 2016-2017, commencing July 1, 2016, $41.67 per month.
3. For Fiscal Year 2017-2018, commencing July 1, 2017, $45.42 per month.
4. For Fiscal Year 2018-2019, commencing July 1, 2018, $46.78 per month.
5. For Fiscal Year 2019-2020, commencing July 1, 2019, $48.18 per month.
Said minimum charge or negotiated charge shall continue thereafter until or unless established
by ordinance.
99.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All sewer service charges are due and payable under the
same terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained
in Section 92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances if the
combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.07
of this Code of Ordinances relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.06 of this
Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served
and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner
as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED. No statement in these chapters shall
be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council,
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the Council.
[The next page is 461]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 461 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.08 Separation and Disposal of Yard Waste
105.02 Definitions 105.09 Littering Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.10 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.11 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.12 Prohibited Practices
105.06 Burning and Incineration Prohibited 105.13 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.07 Incinerators 105.14 Scheduled Offenses and Fines
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to
their health, safety, and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
3. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be
used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding
useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and
private establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
5. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
6. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or debris
not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter includes but is
not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food waste packaging, other
food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
7. “Owner” means in addition to the record titleholder any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as
between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 462 -
8. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and
industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
9. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiplefamily
dwelling.
10. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of
residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or
deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes, and any
locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
11. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not
produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13. “Sanitary disposal project” means a sanitary landfill site operated by Landfill
of North Iowa pursuant to and in accordance with an agreement between the City and
said agency dated June 22, 1994.
14. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include
vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not
include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A. Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B. Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have
been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C. Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D. Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
E. Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as
a discarded material.
1. 105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to
provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it
becomes a nuisance. If it becomes a nuisance, the City may proceed to abate such nuisances
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances or by initiating
proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 463 -
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to
accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of
solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause or permit open
burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open
air without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared
emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any structures or demolished
structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR Section 61.145.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2. Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at a
City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance with the
rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3. Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises. However, the burning of landscape waste produced in
clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas located at least
one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant
conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])
4. Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Recreational
fires shall be limited to small fires utilizing only natural wood, small sticks and faux
logs. It is unlawful to burn in such fire paper products, plastic, tires, treated, stained
or varnished lumber or any lumber that contains any chemical substances,
construction materials except dimensional lumber that has not been treated with
chemicals or stained and is cut into lengths not exceeding the diameter of the fire
containment device, and/or yard waste such as leaves and grass clippings. Such
recreational fire shall be contained in a fire ring or other recreational fire containment
device not exceeding three (3) feet in diameter with the flame height not to exceed
four (4) feet. Such fire shall be supervised by a competent individual at all times and
extinguished completely before leaving the site of the recreational fire. Such fire shall
be extinguished if determined to be a nuisance as defined by Chapter 50 of this Code
of Ordinances.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
5. Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training of
public or industrial employees in fire fighting methods, provided that the training fires
are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
6. Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning of
paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing organic forms
of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium or arsenic) and seed corn bags
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 464 -
resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if burned in accordance
with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3h])
7. Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if in
accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3i])
8. Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of a
demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided that the
controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and limitations established
by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3j])
9. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06 BURNING AND INCINERATION PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person
for hire to burn or incinerate or permit the burning or incineration of any solid waste within
the City. This section applies to all solid waste and also specifically includes all waste paper,
boxes, market waste, garden waste, trees, tree limbs, leaves and any and all materials other
than materials used as a fuel in a furnace or boiler. This section does not apply to any
incinerator operated by or for the City or to any burning conducted under the direction of the
Fire Department of the City.
105.07 INCINERATORS.
1. It is unlawful for any person within the City to sell or offer for sale or to
install or offer to install any device intended for use as a garbage or solid waste burner
or incinerator, except when the intended user of such a device has secured a license to
operate or use the same from the City, or when such device will be operated by or for
the City.
2. It is unlawful for any person within the City to use, install or otherwise permit
the use or installation of a container for the purpose of incineration unless such
container is licensed by the City and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and
conforms to State and Federal limits for emission of air contaminants.
105.08 SEPARATION AND DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE. All yard waste shall be
separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises
and shall be composted, mulched or utilized or burned on the premises in such a manner so as
not to cause a public nuisance, or placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection.
As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps. Burning of yard waste shall
be limited to a 30-day time period in the fall of each year. Said time period will be determined
by the City Manager. Burning during said 30 days shall only be allowed from 12:00 p.m.
(noon) until darkness, “darkness” being defined as when the street lights come on. Burning of
yard waste shall not occur at a proximity of less than 20 feet from any structure or building
and shall be supervised by a competent person at all times and shall not be left unattended
until the fire is completely extinguished.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 465 -
105.09 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any
water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose.
When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be
responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor
vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.10 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste
container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall
be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste
materials, including but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics,
pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste which
requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the
environment and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.11 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing, or renting any premises, dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall
provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the
following specifications:
A. Residential. Residential waste containers, whether they are reusable,
portable containers or heavy-duty disposable garbage bags, shall be of
sufficient capacity, and leakproof and waterproof. Disposable containers shall
be securely fastened, and reusable containers shall be fitted with a fly-tight lid
which shall be kept in place except when depositing or removing the contents
of the container. Reusable containers shall also be lightweight and of sturdy
construction and have suitable lifting devices.
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or
renting any commercial premise where an excessive amount of refuse
accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is
impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the
City.
2. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon
the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon
private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City
to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully
accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel, and fire inspection
personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for
proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from leaving the
premises except at collection.
3. Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid
waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily accessible place by
the owner or occupant of the premises served.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 466 -
4. Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.12 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not
owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as
such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other
authorized waste collection service.
3. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
4. Commercial Containers on Residential Property. It is unlawful for a person to
store a commercial container on a residential property without the written permission
of the City. Permission will be granted only for the express purpose of construction
on the property or the cleanup of a residence for the purpose of vacating a premises.
Written permission will be granted on a time scale determined by the City and will be
regulated by the City.
105.13 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary landfill
facilities operated by Landfill of North Iowa in accordance with an agreement between the
City and said agency dated June 22, 1994, are hereby designated as the official “Public
Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the
City.
105.14 SCHEDULED OFFENSES AND FINES. The following scheduled fines are fixed
for violation of this chapter:
1. First Offense - $25.00
2. Second Offense - $100.00
3. Third Offense - $200.00
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 467 -
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Collector’s License
106.03 Loading 106.08 Landfill Fee
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The collection of solid waste within the City shall be
only by collectors licensed by the City.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and
transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such
materials shall be leak-proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be
cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good
repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall,
leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where
spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter
and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from
residential premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional
premises as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in
the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon
private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this
chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.07 COLLECTOR’S LICENSE. No person shall engage in the business of collecting,
transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that person
within the City without first obtaining from the City an annual license in accordance with the
following:
1. Application. Application for a solid waste collector’s license shall be made to
the Clerk and provide the following:
A. Name and Address. The full name and address of the applicant, and
if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 468 -
B. Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type
of collection and transportation equipment to be used.
C. Collection Program. A complete description of the frequency, routes
and method of collection and transportation to be used.
D. Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of
disposal or processing facilities to be used.
E. Hours of Collection. Hours of collection shall be specified.
2. Restricted Collection Times. Hour of collection shall be no earlier than 5:00
a.m., and no collection shall be done after 6:00 p.m., unless a time extension is
granted by the Hampton Police Department or Hampton City Hall. Any personnel of
authorized Solid Waste Collectors who violate the provisions of this subsection may
each be charged by the Hampton Police Department with a municipal infraction as
defined by Chapter 4, Municipal Infractions, of this Code of Ordinances and shall be
subject to standard civil penalties of Section 4.03(1) of this Code of Ordinances or a
criminal offense under Section 1.14 of the Code of Ordinances. Repeat offenses by
personnel of an authorized Solid Waste Collector may result in temporary or
permanent revocation of collection licensing with the City of Hampton, as determined
and approved by the City Council. Reinstatement of a revoked Solid Waste
Collection License shall require the approval of the City Council.
3. Insurance. No collector’s license shall be issued until and unless the applicant
therefor, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain with the
City evidence of satisfactory public liability insurance covering all operations of the
applicant pertaining to such business and all equipment and vehicles to be operated in
the conduct thereof in the following minimum amounts:
Bodily Injury $100,000 per person.
$300,000 per occurrence.
Property Damage $ 50,000.
Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as a part thereof provisions
requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City of the expiration, cancellation or
other termination of coverage not less than 10 days prior to the effective date of such
action.
4. License Fee. A license fee in the amount of $100.00 shall accompany the
application. In the event the requested license is not granted, the fee paid shall be
refunded to the applicant.
5. License Issued. If the Council upon investigation finds the application to be
in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport, process or dispose of
solid waste without hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in
conformity with law and ordinance, the requested license shall be issued to be
effective for a period of one year from the date approved.
6. License Renewal. An annual license may be renewed simply upon payment
of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to operate in accordance
with the terms and conditions set forth by the City and provided the applicant
furnishes the Clerk with a current listing of vehicles, equipment and facilities in use,
as well as the insurance certificates referenced in subsection 3 of this section.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 469 -
7. License Not Transferable. No license authorized by this chapter may be
transferred to another person.
8. Revocation of License. The City may revoke any license issued under this
section for violation of the terms and conditions of said license as set forth by the
City.
9. Owner May Transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent the
owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or
used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved
sanitary disposal project.
10. Grading or Excavation Excepted. No license or permit is required for the
removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation
activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported
spills upon any public right-of-way.
106.08 LANDFILL FEE. Each property located within the City shall pay a monthly
landfill fee to the Clerk at the City Hall at the same time payment for City water and
wastewater service is made, in an amount as determined herein:
1. A monthly sum of $1.35, if such property is habitually and usually occupied
and used as a single family residential unit.
2. A monthly sum of $2.10, if such property is a government entity, a retail or
commercial business and/or is habitually and usually occupied and used as multifamily
residential units with four or less units; unless such charges are paid by the
tenants of multi-family units directly, in which event such fee shall be $1.35 for each
unit.
3. A monthly sum of $3.60, if such property is an industrial or manufacturing
business and/or is habitually and usually occupied and used as multi-family residential
units with five or more units and/or any hospital, nursing home, extended care facility,
motel or hotel; unless such charges are paid by the tenants of multi-family units
directly, in which event such fee shall be $1.35 for each unit.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.06 of this
Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are
jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining
unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be
certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 470 -
[The next page is 485]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 485 -
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Grant of Franchise 110.09 Brush and Trees
110.02 Pipes and Mains 110.10 Indemnification
110.03 Construction and Maintenance 110.11 Franchise Fee
110.04 Excavations 110.12 Gross Revenue
110.05 Utility Easements 110.13 Fee Refunds
110.06 Relocation Not Required 110.14 Successors and Assigns
110.07 Relocation Reimbursement 110.15 Termination
110.08 Information
110.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and
assigns the right and nonexclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, replace, erect,
maintain, and operate in the City of Hampton, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a system for
the transmission and distribution of natural gas along, under, over, and upon the streets,
avenues, rights of way, alleys, public places, or public grounds (excluding parks) to serve
customers within the City, and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants.
The City Council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to parks at the request of
the Company. The Company is granted the right to exercise of powers of eminent domain.
This franchise shall be effective for a 20 year period from and after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.†
110.02 PIPES AND MAINS. The Company shall have the right to lay, re-lay, operate,
repair, construct, reconstruct, replace, and extend natural gas pipes, mains, conduit,
fixtures, valves, support brackets, line markers, and other accessories as well as to
excavate for the distribution of natural gas in and through the City, provided the same
shall be placed in accord with this franchise and the City Code and regulations of the City
of Hampton, regarding the placement of structures, facilities, accessories, or other objects
in the right of way by utilities and other users of the right of way, including ordinances
which assign corridors or other placements to users of the right of way and requirements
which may be adopted regarding separations of structures, facilities, accessories, or other
objects.
110.03 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. The Company shall, excluding
facilities located in private easements (whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company
and other entities), in accordance with Iowa law including Company’s Tariff on file with and
made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff”), at its
cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing pipes, mains, conduits, and facilities in, on,
over, or under any public street, avenue, right of way, or alley in the City in such a manner as
the City may reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street, avenue, right of way, or alley. If the City
has a reasonable alternative route for the street, avenue, right of way, or alley or an alternative
construction method, which would not cause the relocation of the Company installations or
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 360, adopting a natural gas franchise for the City, was passed and
adopted on September 21, 2015.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 486 -
would minimize the cost or expense of relocation of Company installations, the City and
Company shall work together to consider said alternative route, or construction method. The
City shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the
placement of Company service lines and facilities on City-owned right of way without charge
to Company. In planning for the extension or modification of streets, the City shall, to the
extent practicable design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of Company
facilities. The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City
projects that require the Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall
provide, at no cost to the Company, copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross section
drawings. If tree removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are
necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City at its own cost shall be
responsible for said removals. If the timing of tree removals does not coincide with
Company’s facilities relocation schedule and the Company must remove trees that are
included in the City’s portion of the project, the City shall either remove the trees or reimburse
the Company for the expenses incurred to remove the trees. If project funds from a source
other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall
attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company
for the costs of relocation.
110.04 EXCAVATIONS. In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and
public places for the installation, maintenance, or repair of gas pipes, mains, conduit, fixtures,
accessories, or other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the
streets. The Company in making such excavations shall, if required by ordinance, obtain a
City permit therefore and shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets, avenues, or alleys,
shall provide the Public Works Director with 24 hours’ notice prior to the actual
commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the City
in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such work. In emergencies
which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with the work without first
applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that the Company shall apply for and
obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work.
The Company shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the City in its regulation
of the use of City right of way in performing such work. To the extent not inconsistent with
this franchise, the Company shall comply with all City ordinances regarding paving cuts,
placement of facilities, and restoration of pavement and other public infrastructure. The
Company shall replace the surface, restoring the condition as existed prior to the Company’s
excavation, but shall not be required to improve or modify the public right of way. The
Company shall complete all repairs in a timely and prompt manner. Company agrees any
replacement of road surface shall conform to current City ordinances regarding its depth and
composition.
110.05 UTILITY EASEMENTS. Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or
public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to
the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, right-of-way, or public ground
where the Company has installed gas lines, mains, or facilities, the City shall grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities.
110.06 RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED. The Company shall not be required to
relocate, at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that have been
relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 487 -
110.07 RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT. Pursuant to relocation of Company
facilities as may be required by Sections 110.04-110.06 of this chapter, if the City orders or
requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly
facilitate the project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the City
shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such
relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing facilities or equipment. The Company
shall not be required to relocate in order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
110.08 INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request the Company shall provide the City,
on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control
that is located in City right of way, including documents, maps, and other information in paper
or electronic or other forms (“Information”). The Company and City recognize the
Information may in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state or federal
law or both. Therefore, the City shall not release any information without prior consent of the
Company and shall return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that
Company claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise protected from
public disclosure by state or federal law on other grounds and agrees to retain the Information
in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or information
provided to the City by the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if
such documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy
Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the
Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time. In the
event any action at law, in equity, or administrative is brought against the City regarding
disclosure of any document which the Company has designated as a trade secret or as
otherwise protected from disclosure the City shall promptly notify the Company. The
Company shall have the right to assume, upon request of the City, the defense of said action.
The Company shall reimburse the City any and all cost, including attorney fees and penalties
to the extent allowed by law which may result from any said action.
110.09 BRUSH AND TREES. The Company is granted the right to remove brush and
trees from the right of way or other locations where gas pipe or mains are located consistent
with the requirements of state or federal regulations.
110.10 INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify, save, and hold harmless
the City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damage, costs, or expenses, including attorneys’
fees, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent caused or
occasioned in whole or part by the Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction,
excavation, operation or maintenance of the natural gas distribution system authorized by this
franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify,
and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising in whole or part from
the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.11 FRANCHISE FEE. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of 5% upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of natural and mixed gas and distribution service by the
Company within the corporate limits of the City from December 1, 2015. The franchise fee
shall be remitted by the Company to the City on or before the last business day of the calendar
quarter following the close of the calendar quarter in which the franchise fee is charged.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 488 -
110.12 GROSS REVENUE. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall certify the gross
revenue generated from sales of natural gas by the Company within the corporate limits of the
City for the prior fiscal year.
110.13 FEE REFUNDS. The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to
return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted to the
City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the
City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the
City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.14 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS. This franchise shall apply to and bind the City
and the Company and their successors and assigns.
110.15 TERMINATION. Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise
if the other party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with notification by
certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching party shall have 60 days to cure
the breach, unless it notifies the non-breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer
period for cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of this franchise if it
has operated in compliance with state or federal law. A party shall not be considered to have
breached this franchise if the alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the
other party.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 489 -
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – MID AMERICAN ENERGY
111.01 Grant of Franchise 111.09 Trees
111.02 Poles and Wires 111.10 Indemnification
111.03 Construction and Maintenance 111.11 Franchise Fee
111.04 Excavations 111.12 Gross Revenue
111.05 Utility Easements 111.13 Fee Refunds
111.06 Relocation Not Required 111.14 Successors and Assigns
111.07 Relocation 111.15 Termination
111.08 Information
111.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and
assigns, the right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, replace, erect,
maintain, and operate in the City of Hampton, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a system for
the transmission and distribution of electric energy along, under, over, and upon the streets,
avenues, rights of way, alleys, public places, or public grounds (excluding parks) to serve
customers within the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the City and its
inhabitants. The City Council reserves, to itself, the right to extend this franchise to parks at
the request of the Company. The Company is granted the right to exercise of powers of
eminent domain. This franchise shall be effective for a 20 year period from and after the
effective date of the ordinance. †
111.02 POLES AND WIRES. The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary
poles and to place thereon and attach thereto the necessary wires, guys, anchors, fixtures, and
accessories as well as to excavate and bury conduits or conductors and related equipment and
appurtenances for the distribution of electric energy in and through the City, provided the
same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and the City Code and regulations of the
City of Hampton, regarding the placement of structures, facilities, accessories or other objects
in the right of way by utilities and other users of the right of way, including ordinances which
assign corridors or other placements to users of the right of way and requirements which may
be adopted regarding separations of structures, facilities, accessories, or other objects.
111.03 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. The Company shall, excluding
facilities located in private easements (whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company
and other entities), in accordance with Iowa law including Company’s Tariff on file with and
made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff”), at its
cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over, or under
any public street, avenue, right of way, or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, or repair of the street, avenue, right of way or alley. If the City has a reasonable
alternative route for the street, avenue, right of way, or alley or an alternative construction
method, which would not cause the relocation of the Company installations or would
minimize the cost or expense of relocation of Company installations, the City and Company
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 359, adopting an electric franchise for the City, was passed and
adopted on September 21, 2015.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – MID AMERICAN
ENERGY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 490 -
shall work together to consider said alternative route, or construction method. The City shall,
in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of
Company service lines and facilities on City-owned right of way without charge to Company.
In planning for the extension or modification of streets, the City shall, to the extent practicable
design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of Company facilities. The City shall
be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the
Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the
Company, copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross section drawings. If tree
removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are necessary
whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City at its own cost shall be responsible
for said removals. If the timing of tree removals does not coincide with Company’s facilities
relocation schedule and the Company must remove trees that are included in the City’s portion
of the project, the City shall either remove the trees or reimburse the Company for the
expenses incurred to remove the trees. If project funds from a source other than the City are
available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall attempt to secure said
funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of
relocation.
111.04 EXCAVATIONS. In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and
public places for the installation, maintenance or repair of conductor, conduits, or other
appurtenances or the erection of poles and wires or other appliances, the Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. The Company in making such excavations shall,
if required by ordinance, obtain a City permit therefore and shall not unnecessarily obstruct
the use of streets, avenues, or alleys, shall provide the Director of Public Works with 24 hours’
notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and
requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such
work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with
the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that the
Company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after
commencing such emergency work. The Company shall comply with all provisions and
requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such
work. To the extent not inconsistent with the franchise, the Company shall comply with all
City ordinances regarding paving cuts, placement of facilities, and restoration of pavement
and other public infrastructure. The Company shall replace the surface, restoring the
condition as existed prior to the Company’s excavation, but shall not be required to improve
or modify the public right of way. The Company shall complete all repairs in a timely and
prompt manner. Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current
City ordinances regarding its depth and composition.
111.05 UTILITY EASEMENTS. Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or
public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to
the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, right of way, or other public ground
where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement
for said facilities.
111.06 RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED. The Company shall not be required to
relocate, at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that have been
relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – MID AMERICAN
ENERGY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 491 -
111.07 RELOCATION. Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required
by Sections 111.03-111.05 of this chapter, if the City orders or requests the Company to
relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly facilitate the project of a
commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the City may require the developer
or non-public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a
precondition to relocation of its existing facilities or equipment. The Company shall not be
required to relocate in order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
111.08 INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request the Company shall provide the City,
on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control
that is located in City right of way, including documents, maps, and other information in paper
or electronic, or other forms (“Information”). The Company and City recognize the
Information may in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state or Federal
law or both. Therefore, the City shall not release any information without prior consent of the
Company and shall return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that
Company claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise protected from
public disclosure by state or federal law on other grounds and agrees to retain the Information
in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or information
provided to the City by the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if
such documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy
Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the
Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time. In the
event any action at law, in equity, or administrative is brought against the City regarding
disclosure of any document which the Company has designated as a trade secret or as
otherwise protected from disclosure the City shall promptly notify the Company. The
Company shall have the right to assume the defense of said action. The Company shall
reimburse the City any and all costs, including attorney fees and penalties, to the extent
allowed by law which may result from any said action.
111.09 TREES. The pruning and removal of trees shall be done in accordance with current
nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards and federal and state law, rules and
regulations. The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company
expense, any tree extending into any street, avenue, right of way, alley, public place, or public
grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs,
branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the Company. The pruning
and removal of trees shall be completed in accordance with nationally accepted safety and
utility standards, ANSI Z133-2012, American National Standard for Arboricultural
Operations-Safety Requirements, and ANSI A300 (part 1) – 2008 Pruning, American National
Standard for Tree, Shrub, and other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard of Practices
Pruning, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and City ordinances regarding the pruning
of trees that incorporate by reference that standard.
111.10 INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify, save, and hold harmless
the City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, including
attorneys’ fees, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent caused
or occasioned in whole or part by the Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction,
excavation, operation, or maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify, and save
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – MID AMERICAN
ENERGY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 492 -
harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising in whole or part from the
negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
111.11 FRANCHISE FEE. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of 5% upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the corporate limits of the
City from December 1, 2015. The franchise fee shall be remitted by the Company to the City
on or before the last business day of the calendar quarter following the close of the calendar
quarter in which the franchise fee is charged.
111.12 GROSS REVENUE. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall certify the
gross revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the corporate limits
of the City for the prior fiscal year.
111.13 FEE REFUNDS. The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to
return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted to the
City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the
City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the
City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
111.14 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS. This franchise shall apply to and bind the City
and the Company and their successors and assigns.
111.15 TERMINATION. Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise
if the other party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with notification by
certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching party shall have 60 days to cure
the breach, unless it notifies the non-breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer
period for cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of this franchise if it
has operated in compliance with state or federal law. A party shall not be considered to have
breached this franchise if the alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the
other party.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 493 -
CHAPTER 112
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – FRANKLIN RURAL
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
111.01 Grant of Franchise 111.09 Trees
111.02 Poles and Wires 111.10 Indemnification
111.03 Construction and Maintenance 111.11 Franchise Fee
111.04 Excavations 111.12 Gross Revenue
111.05 Utility Easements 111.13 Fee Refunds
111.06 Relocation Not Required 111.14 Successors and Assigns
111.07 Relocation 111.15 Termination
111.08 Information
112.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to Franklin Rural Electric
Cooperative, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and
assigns, the right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, replace, erect,
maintain and operate in the City of Hampton, Iowa hereinafter called the “City,” a system for
the transmission and distribution of electric energy along, under, over, and upon the streets,
avenues, rights of way, alleys, public places, or public grounds (excluding parks) to serve
customers within the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the City and its
inhabitants. The City Council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to parks at the
request of the Company. The Company is granted the right to exercise the powers of eminent
domain. This franchise shall be effective for a 20-year period from and after the effective date
of this the ordinance. †
112.02 POLES AND WIRES. The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary
poles and to place thereon and attach thereto the necessary wires, guys, anchors, fixtures, and
accessories as well as to excavate and bury conduits or conductors and related equipment and
appurtenances for the distribution of electric energy in and through the City, provided the
same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and the City Code and regulations of the
City of Hampton, regarding the placement of structures, facilities, accessories or other objects
in the right of way by utilities and other users of the right of way, including ordinances which
assign corridors or other placements to users of the right of way and requirements which may
be adopted regarding separations of structures, facilities, accessories, or other objects.
112.03 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. The Company shall, excluding
facilities located in private easements (whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company
and other entities), in accordance with Iowa law including Company’s Tariff on file with and
made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff”), at its
cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over, or under
any public street, avenue, right of way, or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, or repair of the street, avenue, right of way or alley. If the City has a reasonable
alternative route for the street, avenue, right of way, or alley or an alternative construction
method, which would not cause the relocation of the Company installations or would
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 363, adopting an electric franchise for the City, was passed and
adopted on February 11, 2016.
CHAPTER 112 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – FRANKLIN RURAL
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 494 -
minimize the cost or expense of relocation of Company installations, the City and Company
shall work together to consider said alternative route, or construction method. The City shall,
in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of
Company service lines and facilities on City-owned right of way without charge to Company.
In planning for the extension or modification of streets, the City shall, to the extent practicable
design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of Company facilities. The City shall
be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the
Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the
Company, copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross section drawings. If tree
removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are necessary
whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City at its own cost shall be responsible
for said removals. If the timing of tree removals does not coincide with Company’s facilities
relocation schedule and the Company must remove trees that are included in the City’s portion
of the project, the City shall either remove the trees or reimburse the Company for the
expenses incurred to remove the trees. If project funds from a source other than the City are
available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall attempt to secure said
funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of
relocation.
112.04 EXCAVATIONS. In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and
public places for the installation, maintenance or repair of conductor, conduits, or other
appurtenances or the erection of poles and wires or other appliances, the Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. The Company in making such excavations shall,
if required by ordinance, obtain a City permit therefore and shall not unnecessarily obstruct
the use of streets, avenues, or alleys, shall provide the Director of Public Works with 24 hours’
notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and
requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such
work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with
the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that the
Company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after
commencing such emergency work. The Company shall comply with all provisions and
requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such
work. To the extent not inconsistent with the franchise, the Company shall comply with all
City ordinances regarding paving cuts, placement of facilities, and restoration of pavement
and other public infrastructure. The Company shall replace the surface, restoring the
condition as existed prior to the Company’s excavation, but shall not be required to improve
or modify the public right of way. The Company shall complete all repairs in a timely and
prompt manner. Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current
City ordinances regarding its depth and composition.
112.05 UTILITY EASEMENTS. Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or
public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to
the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, right of way, or other public ground
where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement
for said facilities.
112.06 RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED. The Company shall not be required to
relocate, at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that have been
relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
CHAPTER 112 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – FRANKLIN RURAL
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 495 -
112.07 RELOCATION. Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required
by Sections 112.03-112.05 of this chapter, if the City orders or requests the Company to
relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly facilitate the project of a
commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the City may require the developer
or non-public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a
precondition to relocation of its existing facilities or equipment. The Company shall not be
required to relocate in order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
112.08 INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request the Company shall provide the City,
on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control
that is located in City right of way, including documents, maps, and other information in paper
or electronic, or other forms (“Information”). The Company and City recognize the
Information may in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state or Federal
law or both. Therefore, the City shall not release any information without prior consent of the
Company and shall return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that
Company claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise protected from
public disclosure by state or federal law on other grounds and agrees to retain the Information
in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or information
provided to the City by the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if
such documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy
Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the
Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time. In the
event any action at law, in equity, or administrative is brought against the City regarding
disclosure of any document which the Company has designated as a trade secret or as
otherwise protected from disclosure the City shall promptly notify the Company. The
Company shall have the right to assume the defense of said action. The Company shall
reimburse the City any and all costs, including attorney fees and penalties, to the extent
allowed by law which may result from any said action.
112.09 TREES. The pruning and removal of trees shall be done in accordance with current
nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards and federal and state law, rules and
regulations. The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company
expense, any tree extending into any street, avenue, right of way, alley, public place, or public
grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs,
branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the Company. The pruning
and removal of trees shall be completed in accordance with nationally accepted safety and
utility standards, ANSI Z133-2012, American National Standard for Arboricultural
Operations-Safety Requirements, and ANSI A300 (part 1) – 2008 Pruning, American National
Standard for Tree, Shrub, and other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard of Practices
Pruning, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and City ordinances regarding the pruning
of trees that incorporate by reference that standard.
112.10 INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify, save, and hold harmless
the City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, including
attorneys’ fees, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent caused
or occasioned in whole or part by the Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction,
excavation, operation, or maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify, and save
CHAPTER 112 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE – FRANKLIN RURAL
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 496 -
harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising in whole or part from the
negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
112.11 FRANCHISE FEE. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of 5% upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the corporate limits of the
City from December 1, 2015. The franchise fee shall be remitted by the Company to the City
on or before the last business day of the calendar quarter following the close of the calendar
quarter in which the franchise fee is charged.
112.12 GROSS REVENUE. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall certify the
gross revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the corporate limits
of the City for the prior fiscal year.
112.13 FEE REFUNDS. The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to
return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted to the
City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the
City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the
City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
112.14 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS. This franchise shall apply to and bind the City
and the Company and their successors and assigns.
112.15 TERMINATION. Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise
if the other party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with notification by
certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching party shall have 60 days to cure
the breach, unless it notifies the non-breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer
period for cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of this franchise if it
has operated in compliance with state or federal law. A party shall not be considered to have
breached this franchise if the alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the
other party.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 497 -
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
113.01 Definitions 113.05 Compliance and Monitoring
113.02 Grant of Franchise 113.06 Insurance, Indemnification and Other Surety
113.03 Standards of Service 113.07 Enforcement and Termination
113.04 Regulation by City 113.08 Miscellaneous Provisions
113.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below.
1. “Affiliate” means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by
or is under common ownership with Grantee.
2. “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
as may be amended from time to time.
3. “Cable service” means (i) the one-way transmission. to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful
communication service.
4. “Cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other
communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other service
to subscribers, but such term does not include:
A. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signal of one or
more television broadcast stations;
B. A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such
facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way, public property, public
easement, or other easement whose use is regulated by government;
C. A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the
Cable Act to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers;
D. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
5. “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission, or successor
government entity thereto.
6. “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
City, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes construction and
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 498 -
operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service
to subscribers.
7. “Grantee” means Cablevision IV, LTD., or the lawful successor, transferee, or
assignee thereof.
8. “Gross revenues” means any and all revenue from all sources received by the
Grantee including and relating to the operation of the system in the service area,
provided, however, that such phrase does not include any fees or taxes which are
imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any government unit or
agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit
or agency.
9. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation, or governmental entity, or any other legally recognized entity,
whether for profit or not-for-profit.
10. “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including,
but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way
dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or
improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the City in the service area
which shall entitle the City and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system. Public way also
means any easement now or hereafter held by the City within the service area for the
purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible
uses, and includes other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use
and meaning entitle the City and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing or transmitting Grantee’s cable service or other service over poles, wires,
cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the
cable system.
11. “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of the City, and
includes any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
12. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by
Grantee and for which a separate charge is made by Grantee.
13. “Subscriber” means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully
receives cable service or other service therefrom with Grantee’s express permission.
Commercial subscribers are limited to those business establishments that provide the
general public access to and the right to view programs provided by cable service.
Any service provided to a commercial location which is limited to a private office not
generally accessible or used by the general public to view programming provided by
Grantee and service provided to all residential subscribers shall be charged at the same
basic service rate without any discrimination in rights.
14. “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station.
113.02 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
1. Grant. The City hereby grants to Grantee a nonexclusive franchise which
authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system and offer cable service
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 499 -
and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any
manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to
erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment
as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system. If Federal or State law is
enacted which allows other services over the cable system, the fact that such service
or services are not mentioned in this franchise shall not deprive the Grantee or the
City of any rights either may have under such Federal or State law.
2. Term. The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for an initial
term of 10 years from the effective date of the franchise, unless otherwise lawfully
terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
3. Equal Protection. In the event the City enters into a franchise, permit, license,
authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other
than the Grantee to enter into the City’s streets and public ways for the purpose of
constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the
service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those
contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive
advantage over another and to provide all parties equal protection under the law.
4. Additional Channels and Equipment. Grantee shall install and maintain a
cable system providing a minimum of 36 channel capacity, and shall provide capacity
for a public, educational, or governmental (PEG) channel. The City reserves the right
to provide input on the channels selected, provided, however, that Grantee expressly
reserves its right to control programming as authorized under Federal Law. The
Grantee shall provide and install the cable lines related to the establishment of a PEG
channel at a site to be determined by the City, and at City’s request.
113.03 STANDARDS OF SERVICE.
1. Conditions of Street Occupancy. All transmission and distribution structures,
poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the
terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper
use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who own property that adjoins any of said public ways. Grantee will obtain
permission from property owners to use their property for cable construction when
public ways are not available.
2. Restoration of Public Ways. If during the course of Grantee’s construction,
operation, or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public
way by Grantee, Grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a
condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing
immediately prior to such disturbance.
3. Relocation at Request of City. Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice,
not less than five business days, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way,
any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by City by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change
or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 500 -
any other type of structures or improvements by the City; but, the Grantee shall in all
cases have the right to abandonment of its property.
4. Relocation at Request of Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or
lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: (a) the reasonable
expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person,
including, if required by Grantee, making such payment in advance; and (b) the
Grantee is given not less than 10 business days’ advance written notice to arrange for
such temporary wire changes, except for an emergency where less time may be
necessary.
5. Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Grantee shall have the authority at its
expense to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in
the service area that is located within public easements so as to prevent branches from
coming in contact with the Grantee’s wires, cables or other equipment. The Grantee
shall reasonably compensate the City or property owner for any damages caused by
such trimming, or shall, at its discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably
replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the cable system
undertaken by Grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations
Grantee may have to the City or property owner pursuant to the terms of this section.
6. Use of Grantee’s Equipment by City. Subject to any applicable State or
Federal regulations or tariffs, the City shall have the right to make additional use, for
any public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by
or for the Grantee in any public way; provided that (a) such use by the City does not
interfere with a current or future use by the Grantee; (b) the City holds the Grantee
harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and
nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including but not
limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; and (c) by mutual agreement, the City
may be required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably
compensate Grantee for the use of such poles, conduits, or equipment; provided,
however, Grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed those paid
by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other
authorization, relating to the service area.
7. Safety Requirements. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work
shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other Federal,
State, and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.
8. Aerial and Underground Construction. In those areas of the service area
where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities
providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the
Grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of
receiving Grantee’s cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the
cable system’s signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the
transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing
telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground,
Grantee shall have the right to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission
and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 501 -
contained in this section shall require Grantee to construct, operate, and maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line
extenders, system passive devices (splatters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power
supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the transmission or
distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Grantee shall only be required to construct,
operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if
it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities, facilities at the time that
such are placed underground.
9. Required Extensions of Service. The cable system as constructed as of the
date of the passage and final adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter
substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is hereby
authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required
pursuant to the terms hereof within the service area. Whenever Grantee shall receive
a request for service from at least 10 potential subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing
strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its
cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension,
other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided that such extension is
technically feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial
condition, or market development of the cable system, or as provided for under
subsection 10 of this section.
10. Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service. No subscriber shall be refused
service arbitrarily, and Grantee shall be required to serve all residences of the City
with cable service if such residences are within 150 feet of a current cable line unless
other arrangements have been made between Grantee and the individual subscriber.
However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber’s request to locate a cable
drop underground, existence of more than 150 feet of distance from distribution cable
to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than 10 potential
subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable
service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in
aid of construction, including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose
of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by
Grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, Grantee
will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile,
multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential
subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and
whose denominator equals 10 potential subscribers. Potential subscribers will bear
the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may
require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by
such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
11. Service to Public Buildings. The Grantee shall provide, without charge, one
outlet of basic service to the City’s office buildings, City Hall, fire stations, police
stations, public library and public school buildings that are passed by its cable system.
The outlets of basic cable service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services
in or throughout such buildings. Users of such outlets shall hold Grantee harmless
from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including
but not limited to those arising from copyright liability. Notwithstanding anything to
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 502 -
the contrary set forth in this section, the Grantee shall not be required to provide an
outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said building or
premises exceeds 150 cable feet, unless it is technically feasible and so long as it will
not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the
cable system to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the
incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 cable feet. In the event that
additional outlets of basic cable service are provided to such buildings, the building
owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including, but not
limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of Grantee, the building owner may also
be required to pay the service fees associated with the provision of basic cable service
and the additional outlets relating thereto.
12. Additional subscriber Services.
A. Lock-Out Device. Grantee shall make available, to any subscriber so
requesting, and shall notify subscribers of the availability of such devices, a
“parental guidance” or “lock out” device which shall permit the subscriber, at
his or her option, to eliminate the audio and visual aspects from any channels
reception. An additional reasonable charge for any such device may be
imposed.
B. A/B Switch. Grantee shall make available, to any subscriber so
requesting, and shall notify each subscriber of the availability of such device,
an input selector or A/B switch permitting conversion from cable to antenna
reception. An additional reasonable charge for any such device may be
imposed.
C. Grantee shall provide an emergency broadcast voice override system
for area severe weather notices on all channels on or before July 1, 1997,
pursuant to FCC Rules.
13. Performance Evaluation Hearings/Periodic Reviews. On the fifth anniversary
of the effective date of this ordinance, the Council may require a review of the
franchise granted by this chapter, subject to the following:
A. Any such review shall be open to the public and announced in the
official City newspaper. The City shall notify the community of the time and
place of review sessions by such announcement in the official City
newspaper.
B. The topic to be discussed at any scheduled review session will
include, but will not be limited to, franchise fees; free or discounted services;
application of new technologies; system performance; services provided;
programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; surety bond; judicial and
FCC rulings; line extension policies; complaints made by subscribers and/or
the City; and existing or perspective rules or regulations of the Grantee or the
City. Topics to be discussed at any scheduled review session also may
include the issue of whether or not a legitimate community need exists to
justify the implementation of an educational and governmental channel.
C. Members of the general public may add topics by requesting the City
add such topics be added to the agenda of its meeting.
D. During a review or evaluation by the Council, the Grantee shall fully
cooperate with the City and shall provide such non-confidential information
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 503 -
and documents including a list of complaints made by the subscribers prior to
such review or evaluation, as the City may need to reasonably perform the
review.
E. Upon 30 days’ written notice from the City, a representative of the
Grantee shall be present at the meeting in order to be able to respond to any
complaints voiced by the City Council, subscribers, or other members of the
general public.
113.04 REGULATION BY CITY.
1. Franchise Fee. Grantee shall pay to the City a franchise fee equal to 5% of
Gross Revenues (as defined in Section 113.01 of this chapter) received by Grantee
from the operation of the cable system each six months; provided, however, Grantee
may credit against any such payments: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind
imposed by City or other governmental entity on a cable operator or subscriber, or
both, solely because of status as such; (ii) any tax, fee or assessment of general
applicability which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers
(including any such tax, fee, or assessments imposed, both on utilities and cable
operators and their services), and (iii) any other special tax, assessment, or fee such as
a business, occupation, and entertainment tax. For the purpose of this section, the
period applicable under the franchise for the computation of each half year franchise
fee shall be one-half of the calendar year, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the
City and Grantee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable 60 days after
the close of the preceding half of the calendar year, and a payment shall be due for
each half of the calendar year immediately following the half for which payment has
been made. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a
representative of Grantee showing the basis for the computation.
2. Limitation of Franchise Fee Actions. The period of limitation for recovery of
any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five years from the date on which
payment by the Grantee is due. Unless within five years from and after said payment
due date the City initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fee in a court of
competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred, and the City shall be estopped
from asserting any claims whatsoever against the Grantee relating to any such alleged
deficiencies.
3. Rates and Charges. The City may not regulate the rates for the provision of
cable service and other services, including, but not limited to, ancillary charges
relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as authorized pursuant
to Federal and State law including, but not limited to, the Cable Act and FCC Rules
and Regulations relating thereto, as amended from time to time. If Grantee modifies
its rates and charges, it shall give notice to the City and its subscribers not less than 30
days prior to the effective date of the change. The notice to the City shall include all
FCC required financial information regarding the modification. It is expressly
provided that the City may enact an ordinance for the regulation of rates charged by
cable television operators for the basic cable programming service tier and related
equipment, as expressly authorized by the Cable Act and FCC Rules and Regulations
passed pursuant thereto, as amended from time to time. All rates and charges for the
provision of cable service and other services by Grantee shall at all times be regulated
consistent with then current Federal, State and local law.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 504 -
4. Renewal of Franchise. The City and the Grantee agree that any proceedings
undertaken by the City that relate to the renewal of the Grantee’s franchise shall be
governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (as such
existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act); unless the procedures and
substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and
superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State law. In
addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a) of the Cable Act as
amended from time to time, the City agrees to notify Grantee of its preliminary
assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and
interests, as well as the past performance of Grantee under the then current franchise
term. The City further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to
the Grantee prior to the time that the four month period referred to in Subsection (c) of
Section 626 is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
in this section, the Grantee and City agree that at any time during the term of the then
current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to
comment, the City and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations
regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the City may grant a renewal
thereof. The Grantee and the City consider the terms set forth in this section to be
consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended
from time to time.
5. Conditions of Sale. Except to the extent expressly required by Federal or
State law, if a renewal or extension of Grantee’s franchise is denied or the franchise is
lawfully terminated, and the City either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable
system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to
another party, such acquisition or transfer shall be determined by Section 627 of Cable
Act of 1996, as amended.
6. Transfer of Franchise. Grantee’s right, title or interest in the franchise shall
not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate,
without the prior consent of the City, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by
other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of Grantee in the
franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness.
113.05 COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING.
1. Testing for Compliance. The City may perform technical tests of the cable
system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably
interfere with the normal business operations of the Grantee or the cable system in
order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof
and applicable State or Federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests
may be undertaken only after giving Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less
than 15 business days, and providing a representative of Grantee an opportunity to be
present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that Grantee has
substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs
of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates
that Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost
of such testing shall be borne by the City. Except in emergency circumstances, the
City agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than two times a year in the
aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the Grantee upon
Grantee’s request.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 505 -
2. Reports, Books and Records. The Grantee shall report annually to the City on
Grantee’s activities during the past calendar year, its revenues and performance the
past year, and its projected year activities the upcoming year which would affect the
Grantee’s cable system operated under the terms of the franchise. Such report shall be
made not later than the 15th day of March in the year immediately following the year
for which such report is required, upon request by City. The Grantee agrees that the
City may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a
non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms
hereof. Such records shall include, but limited to, any public records required to be
kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Grantee shall not be
required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or
confidential in nature. The City agrees to treat any information disclosed by the
Grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and
agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.
113.06 INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND OTHER SURETY.
1. Insurance Requirements. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its
own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, Comprehensive General
Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the City as an additional
insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancelable, provided however, that Grantee may
from time to time and at any time change the underwriter upon 30 days’ prior written
notice to the City.
2. Indemnification. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless,
and defend the City, its officers, boards, and employees, from and against any liability
for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily
injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee’s construction,
operation, or maintenance of its cable system.
113.07 ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION.
1. Notice of Violation. In the event that the City believes that the Grantee has
not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify Grantee in writing of the
exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
2. Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. Grantee shall have 30 days from receipt
of the notice described in subsection 1: (a) to respond to the City contesting the
assertion of noncompliance; or (b) to cure such default; or (c) in the event that, by the
nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30 day period, initiate
reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the City of the steps being taken
and the projected date that they will be completed.
3. Public Hearing. In the event that Grantee fails to respond to the notice
described in subsection 1 pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection 2, or in
the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 60 days after the Grantee is
notified of the alleged default pursuant to Subsection 1, the City shall schedule a
public hearing to investigate the default. Such public hearing shall be held at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the City which is scheduled at a time which is no less
than twenty-one calendar days therefrom. The City shall notify the Grantee of the time
and place of such hearing and provide the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 506 -
4. Enforcement. Subject to applicable Federal and State law, in the event the
City, after such hearing, determines that Grantee is in default of any provision of the
franchise, the City may:
A. Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this
chapter, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety;
provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such
amount as the City reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default;
B. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief;
C. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or
D. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends
itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages.
The Grantee shall not be relieved on any of its obligations to comply promptly with
any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
5. Excused Defaults. The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance
with the provisions of the franchise, or suffer any enforcement or penalty relating
thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by acts of God,
strikes, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
113.08 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
1. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
A. “Normal business hours” means those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers. In all
cases, “normal business hours” shall include some evening hours at least one
night per week and/or some weekend hours. The Grantee will notify its
subscribers and the City of its normal business hours.
B. “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions which
are within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within
the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, payper-
view events, rate increases, regular, peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the system.
C. “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound in one or
more channels.
2. Documents Incorporated and Made a Part Hereof. The following documents
shall be incorporated herein by this reference, and in the case of a conflict or
ambiguity between or among them, the document of latest date shall govern:
A. Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the date hereof;
B. Any franchise agreement between Grantee and City reflecting the
renewal of the franchise, if any;
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 507 -
C. Any supplemental written commitment, understanding or letter signed
or approved by the parties explaining, expanding, modifying, amending, or
supplementing this agreement.
3. Preemption. If the FCC or any other Federal or State body or agency shall
now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude
the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the City, the jurisdiction of the City shall cease
and no longer exist.
4. Actions of City. In any action by the City or representative thereof mandated
or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious,
and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is
required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
5. Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice
or response to be served upon the City or Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be
deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business days after having
been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or
registered mail, postage prepaid, at the post office or branch thereof regularly
maintained by the U.S. Postal Service.
6. Customer Service Standards.
A. System Office Hours and Telephone Availability. The Grantee will
maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be
available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Trained
representatives of the Grantee will be available to respond to subscriber
telephone inquiries during normal business hours, as defined herein. After
normal business hours, an access line will be available to be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including a phone answering
system. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to
by a trained representative of the Grantee on the next business day. Under
normal operating conditions, as defined herein, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed 30 seconds
when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
will not exceed 30 seconds. These standards will be met no less than 90% of
the time under normal operating conditions, as measured by the Grantee on a
quarterly basis. The Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering
standards as set forth above unless an historical record of complaints indicates
a clear failure to comply with such standards. Under normal operating
conditions, the subscriber will receive a busy signal less than 5 percent of the
time.
B. Installations, Outages and Service Calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95%
the time, as measured by the Grantee on a quarterly basis:
(1) Standard installations will be performed within seven
business days after an order has been placed. “Standard” installations
are those that are located up to 300 feet from the existing distribution
system.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 508 -
(2) Excluding conditions beyond its control, the Grantee will
begin working on service interruptions, as defined herein, promptly
and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known. The Grantee will begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service
problem.
(3) The Grantee will provide “appointment window” alternatives
for installations, service calls, and other installation activities, which
will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block
during normal business hours.
(4) The Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a
subscriber after close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment.
(5) If a representative of the Grantee is running late for an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the
appointment as scheduled, the subscriber will be contacted. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is
convenient for the subscriber.
C. Billing:
(1) Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills will be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic
and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also
clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including
optional charges, rebates and credits.
(2) In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee will respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days from receipt of
the complaint.
(3) Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either (i) the subscriber’s next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or 60 days, whichever is earlier, or (ii) the return of the
equipment supplied by the Grantee if service is terminated.
(4) Credit for service will be issued no later than the subscriber’s
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
(5) In addition to the notification in paragraph 6 below, all
subscribers and customer covered by the franchising agreement will
receive written notification a minimum of 30 days in advance of any
channel changes or additions contemplated by Grantee; provided, the
change is within the control of the Grantee, and shall consult with the
City Council or appropriate committee concerning additional
channels desired.
(6) The Grantee must give 30 days’ prior written notice to the
City and all affected subscribers of any pricing changes or additional
charges, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers.
The Grantee may reduce the price at any time.
[The next page is 551]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 551 -
CHAPTER 115
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
115.01 Purpose 115.04 Council Control
115.02 Definition 115.05 Regulations
115.03 Extent of Power 115.06 Air Traffic Rules
115.01 PURPOSE. This chapter is to provide for the establishment, control, supervision
and operation of the Hampton Municipal Airport.
115.02 DEFINITION. As used in this chapter, “airport” includes landing fields, airdrome,
aviation field or other similar terms used in connection with aerial traffic.
115.03 EXTENT OF POWER. The provisions of this chapter shall extend to the lands and
waters within the corporation and to the space above the land and waters within the
corporation and to the airport controlled, maintained and operated by the City outside its
corporate limits and to the space above the same.
115.04 COUNCIL CONTROL. The Hampton Municipal Airport is under the control of
the Council. The airport committee of the Council has general supervision over the airport,
subject to the control of the entire Council.
115.05 REGULATIONS. Any rules and regulations so made or laid down by the Council
shall in no way be contrary to or in conflict with the rules and regulations for the operation of
aircraft adopted by the Federal government or the State.
115.06 AIR TRAFFIC RULES. It is unlawful to operate any aircraft over or within the
City or the Hampton Municipal Airport in violation of the air traffic rules and regulations
which have been or may hereafter be established by the Secretary of Commerce of the United
States or by any other office of the Federal or State government whose duty it may be to
establish such rules.
CHAPTER 115 MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 552 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 553 -
CHAPTER 116
CEMETERY
116.01 Definition 116.05 Records
116.02 Trusteeship 116.06 Sale of Interment Rights
116.03 Parks/Cemetery Lead Operator 116.07 Perpetual Care
116.04 Duties of Parks/Cemetery Lead Operator 116.08 Rules and Regulations
116.01 DEFINITION. The term “cemetery” means the Hampton Cemetery, which is a
municipal cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall
be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
116.02 TRUSTEESHIP. Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City
Council hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual
maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
116.03 PARKS/CEMETERY LEAD OPERATOR. The Parks/Cemetery Lead Operator
shall operate the cemetery in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor and under the
direction of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
116.04 DUTIES OF PARKS/CEMETERY LEAD OPERATOR. The duties of the
Parks/Cemetery Lead Operator are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Supervise Openings. Supervise the opening of all graves and be present at
every interment in the cemetery;
2. Maintenance. Be responsible for the maintenance of the cemetery buildings,
grounds and equipment and make a monthly report of the cemetery operation to the
Council.
116.05 RECORDS. It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records
identifying the owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information
regarding any transfers of ownership. The records shall include all of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
1. Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
A. The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of
interment rights.
B. The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
C. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
2. Interments.
A. The date the remains are interred.
CHAPTER 116 CEMETERY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 554 -
B. The name, date of birth and date of death of the decedent interred, if
those facts can be conveniently obtained.
C. A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space where the remains are interred.
116.06 SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS. The sale or transfer of interment rights in the
cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing
the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price.
The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by Chapter 523I of
the Code of Iowa. The payment of all fees and charges shall be made at the office of the Clerk
where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid. Said fees and charges shall be based upon
the charges as established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
116.07 PERPETUAL CARE. The Council, by resolution, shall accept, receive and
expend all moneys and property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care, and that
portion of interment space sales or permanent charges made against interment spaces which
has been set aside in a perpetual care fund. The assets of the perpetual care fund shall be
invested in accordance with State law. The Council, by resolution, shall provide for the
payment of interest annually to the appropriate fund, or to the cemetery, or to the person in
charge of the cemetery to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of the
donor in the cemetery, or interment spaces which have been sold with provisions for perpetual
care, all in accordance with the terms of the donation or bequest, or the terms of the sale or
purchase of an interment space and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)
116.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS. Rules and regulations for the cemetery may be
adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the Council and may cover
such things as the use, care, control, management, restrictions and protection of the cemetery
as necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the cemetery. The rules shall specify
the cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces, memorials, or memorializations
are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism. Any veteran, as defined in Section 35.1 of the
Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an
interment space and to be interred within the cemetery. In addition, any veteran who
purchases an interment space within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment
space for interment of the spouse of the veteran if such a space is available, and the surviving
spouse of a veteran interred within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment
space and be interred within the cemetery if such a space is available.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
[The next page is 575]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 575 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale,
import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a
liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or
keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a
license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a
violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or
beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application.
The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements
of the City. The Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any
premises that does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the
issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its
approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and
bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State
Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or
retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of
the following:
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered
by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and
6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted
the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 576 -
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m.
of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor
control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer
for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00
a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the
managing entity of a convention center, civic center or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4. Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or
adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine, or any other beverage in or
about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly
conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered
by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j]
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in
any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails
mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or
cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may
be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic
Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used
originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any
substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic
liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or
adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the
licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in
any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages,
except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g]
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 577 -
11. Sell, give, possess or otherwise supply a machine which is used to vaporize an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
1. 12. Permit or allow any person under 21 years of age to remain upon
licensed premises unless over 50% of the dollar volume of the business establishment
comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does not apply to
holders of a class “C” beer permit only.
120.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES. The following provisions pertain to electrical or
mechanical amusement devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the
Code of Iowa. (Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license or beer
permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1. As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with the
Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of the
Code of Iowa.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3. It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person
under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device.
4. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of
21.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 578 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 579 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether
by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other
means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products,
or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United
States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or
any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or
any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other
material. However, cigarette shall not be construed to include cigars.
3. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are
sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of the quantity or amount
or the number of sales, or who engages in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.
5. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the
retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing
tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for
chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but
does not mean cigarettes.
7. “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or
other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can
be used to produce vapor from a solution or other substance. “Vapor product”
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 580 -
includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution or other
substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or
in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of
a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at
retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit
for each place of business. The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the
place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to
inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
vapor products at any place of business without first having received a permit as a
retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a retail tobacco
permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette permit and that permit is suspended,
revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products, during such time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms furnished by the State
Department of Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be
filed at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal
application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the
application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the
required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of
business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit
issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within 30 days
of issuance.
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 581 -
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as
provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply
any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to
any person under 18 years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor
from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and
cigarettes from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to
the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount
of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall
result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of 14 days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its preference in the
penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of 30 days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of 60 days.
5. For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall be
revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to
the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the
reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and
be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Except for the sale of cigarettes
through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a
retailer shall not sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the
permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at
which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless
good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 582 -
suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of
Commerce within 30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 583 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.06 Transient Merchant Bond
122.02 Definitions 122.07 Time Restriction
122.03 Registration Required 122.08 Exemptions
122.04 Registration Requirements 122.09 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.05 Registration Fee
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by registering and
regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house
or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to
house or upon the public street any contribution, donation or money or any order for
goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or
occupies any building, stand or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle
which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association with a local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in
connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or
auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in
the business of a transient merchant in the City without first registering with the City as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS. The registration shall be in writing, filed
with the Clerk, and shall set forth the following information:
1. The person’s name, permanent and local address and business address if any,
driver’s license number and vehicle description.
2. The person’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the
business and the length of time such business will be carried on in the City.
3. The names of all people who are to be working within the City and their
vehicle descriptions and license numbers.
The registration is valid only for a seven-day period and must be renewed for each seven-day
period thereafter.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 584 -
122.05 REGISTRATION FEE. A registration fee of $10.00 shall be paid at the time of
registration to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.06 TRANSIENT MERCHANT BOND. Any person registering as a transient
merchant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that such person has filed a bond with the
Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 TIME RESTRICTION. Peddlers and solicitors shall conduct business in the City
only during daylight hours.
122.08 EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to
newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale
their own products.
4. Students. Students representing the Hampton-Dumont School District
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.09 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized
representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of
Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa, or political candidates for State, local or Federal office
desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the requirements of
Sections 122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations or individuals are required to submit in
writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought,
names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, and the period during
which such activities are to be carried on.
[The next page is 591]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 591 -
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required 123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application 123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required 123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required 123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee 123.12 Overhead Wires
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person who
undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or
property when the building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks,
dollies or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of
house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or
similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 100 square feet are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
123.03 APPLICATION. At least five days prior to moving a structure, application for a
house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Mayor. The application shall include:
1. Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a
corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2. Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and future
site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3. Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, Street Lead
Operator, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the
minimum sum of $5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or
to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the
building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the
duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following
minimum amounts:
1. Bodily Injury - $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.
2. Property Damage - $50,000 per accident.
123.06 PERMIT FEE. A scheduled permit fee shall be payable at the time of filing the
application with the Clerk for each qualifying structure to be moved. The permit fees for
moving a house, building or similar structure are as follows:
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 592 -
1. Structure measuring 900 square feet or more ....................$ 500.00
2. Structure measuring between 400-899 square feet ............$ 50.00
3. Structure measuring between 101-399 square feet ............$ 30.00
A separate permit shall be required for each house, building or structure to be moved.
123.07 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance
certificate, and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at the
closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the
building or structure. At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or
lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building
or structure.
123.09 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar
structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure is found to
be in violation of Section 123.09 of this Code of Ordinances the City is authorized to remove
such building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety
on the permit holder’s bond.
123.11 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or building of any
kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is
moved are at least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to such
weight shall be final.
123.12 OVERHEAD WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that
all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
[The next page is 595]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 595 -
CHAPTER 125
LICENSING OF TREE SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
125.01 License Required 125.04 Insurance Required
125.02 Application to Clerk 125.05 Certification Required
125.03 License Fee 125.06 Penalty
125.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to be employed in the
practice of topping, trimming, pruning or removing trees in the City unless said person is
licensed by the City.
125.02 APPLICATION TO CLERK. Written application for a tree service license shall
be filed with the Clerk giving the name of the applicant and the names of all other persons
associated with said applicant in the tree service business, if any, whether as a firm or
corporation, and designating the place of business and stating a willingness to be governed in
all respects by the rules, regulations and ordinances of the City relating to such business then
in effect or thereafter adopted by the City.
125.03 LICENSE FEE. The annual license fee is ten dollars ($10.00).
125.04 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect covering the
applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
1. Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
2. Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
125.05 CERTIFICATION REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
training through the Iowa State Extension or of equal accreditation.
125.06 PENALTY. Failure to obtain a tree service license as required by this chapter
constitutes a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 125 LICENSING OF TREE SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 596 -
[The next page is 601]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 601 -
CHAPTER 126
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
126.01 Purpose 126.05 Responsibilities of the Operator
126.02 Definitions Related to Adult-Oriented 126.06 Minors
Establishments 126.07 Hours of Operation
126.03 Location Restrictions 126.08 Enforcement
126.04 Development Design Standards
126.01 PURPOSE. The City Council of the City of Hampton, Iowa, finds:
1. Adult-oriented establishments require special consideration in order to protect
and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such establishments as
well as the citizens of Hampton;
2. Adult-oriented establishments, because of their very nature, have a
detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and surrounding
residential areas adjacent to them;
3. The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern
of the City that demands reasonable regulation of adult-oriented establishments in
order to protect the health and well-being of the community;
4. Adult-oriented establishments, due to their very nature, have serious
objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area;
5. The City of Hampton wants to prevent these adverse effects and thereby
protect the health and welfare of its residents; protect residents from increased crime;
preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of the
surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight;
6. It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities protected
by the First Amendment, but to enact content-neutral regulations that address the
secondary effects of adult-oriented establishments as well as the health problems
associated with such establishments.
126.02 DEFINITIONS RELATED TO ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
1. ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment that has a facility or facilities,
including but not limited to booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls for the presentation of
"adult entertainment," including adult-oriented films, movies, or live performances for
observation by patrons therein; or an establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books,
films, video cassettes, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined below.
2. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display, or dance of any type which has as its dominant theme or is
CHAPTER 126 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 602 -
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below.
3. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used for
presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas as defined below for observation by patrons of the
building.
4. ADULT NOVELTY SHOP: An establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade and sales in novelty or other
items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or design for
sexual activity or simulating such activity.
5. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises including, without
limitation, "adult bookstores," "adult motion picture theaters," or "adult novelty shop."
It further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or
admitted and which are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the
purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, where such
adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a profit, direct or
indirect. "Adult-Oriented Establishment" further includes, without limitation, any
premises physically arranged and used as such whether advertised or represented as an
adult entertainment studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or
any other term of like import.
6. OPERATORS: Any person, partnership, or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining, or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
7. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, buttocks, female breasts below the areola; or male genitalia.
8. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Simulated or actual (a) showing of
human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) acts of sexual activity,
sodomy, or sadomasochism; or (c) fondling or erotic touching of human genitals,
buttocks, or female breasts.
126.03 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS. An adult-oriented establishment shall be a
conditional permitted use within the City of Hampton only in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District
upon receipt of a site plan and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with
procedures set forth in Article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance, and only if it meets all of the
location requirements set forth below. Distances provided hereafter shall be measured by
following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the
property parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be located, to the
nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district boundary line from which the
proposed adult entertainment business is to be separated.
1. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited in or within five hundred
(500) feet of the borders of a residential district.
2. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of religious worship.
CHAPTER 126 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 603 -
3. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any public or private school offering general education for students between
the years of pre-kindergarten and twelfth grade, public library, or museum.
4. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any registered day-care home or registered day-care business.
5. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any public park or playground. For purposes of this section, bike paths, trails,
waterways, and boat launches shall not be deemed a public park.
6. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any other adult entertainment business.
7. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within five hundred (500)
feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on
premises.
126.04 DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult-oriented establishment:
A. To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside the establishment.
B. To allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
C. To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other
than a single color.
2. Signage. The operator shall comply with Article 17 "Signs and Awnings
Regulations" of the Zoning Ordinance. Additionally, the display surfaces of the sign
shall not contain any flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
126.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR. Every act or omission by an
employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or
omission of the operator if such an act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to
supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
126.06 MINORS. It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18)
years of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment at any time that
the establishment is open for business. The operator must ensure that an attendant is stationed
at each public entrance at all times during regular business hours. The attendant shall prohibit
any person under the age of eighteen (18) from entering the establishment. It shall be
presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished a valid drivers license issued by a state reflecting that
person's age.
126.07 HOURS OF OPERATION. An adult-oriented establishment may remain open for
business no longer than the hours from between 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m., seven days a week.
CHAPTER 126 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 604 -
126.08 ENFORCEMENT. Any violation of this chapter by the owner or operator shall be
a criminal penalty that would be a simple misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Section
1.14 of this Code of Ordinances, plus statutory surcharge and court costs, or a municipal
infraction with a scheduled civil penalty as follows:
1. First Offense: $ 200.00
2. Second Offense $ 500.00
3. Third Offense $1,000.00
In addition, any violation may be temporarily and/or permanently enjoined by any Judge of
the Second Judicial District of Iowa upon five (5) days’ notice to owner and/or operator of any
adult-oriented business.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 605 -
CHAPTER 127
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
127.01 Definitions 127.04 Remittance
127.02 Tax Imposed 127.05 Use of Revenues
127.03 Relationship to State Sales Tax
127.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, the terms “lodging,” “renting,” “rent,”
“sales price,” and “hotel and motel tax” shall have the meaning given to them in Chapter 423A
of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
127.02 TAX IMPOSED. Effective as of July 1, 2003, there is imposed a local hotel and
motel tax of 5% upon the sales price from renting of lodging within the corporate boundaries
of the City subject to the exemption set forth in Section 423A.5 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
127.03 RELATIONSHIP TO STATE SALES TAX. The hotel and motel tax set forth in
this chapter shall be imposed in addition to any State sales tax imposed on all sales prices
received from the renting of lodging within the corporate boundaries of the City.
127.04 REMITTANCE. The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or
company liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by State law.
127.05 USE OF REVENUES. All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the
hotel and motel tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City and shall be used and
distributed as follows:
1. 60% of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel tax shall be contributed
to the Hampton Chamber of Commerce, specifically designated toward tourism.
2. 40% of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel tax shall be designated
to the General Fund of the City as provided by Section 423A of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 127 HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 606 -
[The next page is 625]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 625 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.09 Excavations
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Maintenance
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.04 Playing In 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.14 Sump Pump Discharging
135.07 Washing Vehicles 135.15 Mailbox Regulations
135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully
remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction,
guard, or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or
alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct,
deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any
street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer, could clog the storm sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any
person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades,
lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police
officer or member of the fire department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place,
temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or
offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk,
street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent
any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully
parked in the street or alley.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 626 -
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or
other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any
street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
1. Application for Permission. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining permission from the Public Works Director or City Manager. Before
permission is granted, the person shall file a written application with the City
containing the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
C. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of
water along the gutter on the street
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and warning
lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the
public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining
adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the
applicant/property owner.
4. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the Public Works Director or the Street Lead Operator, at the expense of the
applicant/property owner.
5. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill shall
not be deemed completed, nor shall resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface
begin, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the Public Works Director.
The applicant/property owner shall provide the City with notice at least 24 hours prior
to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
6. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the approved
completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City has the right to
finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the
applicant/property owner.
7. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation
shall be borne by the applicant and/or property owner. The applicant and owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by such excavation.
8. Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the excavation,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 627 -
excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with
the information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
As an alternative, such person may request that the City do the excavation work and pay the
City the amount of the cost of the excavation.
135.10 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. The
abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and
inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep such area in a safe condition, free from
nuisances, obstructions, and hazards. In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend
from the property line to that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular
purposes. The abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter and debris. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the publicly
owned property or right-of-way.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. If the abutting property owner does not perform an
action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or
cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the
passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except
where, with the express consent of the Street Lead Operator, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the
street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property
owner or agent, and only after first making arrangements for such prompt removal at the
owner’s cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense,
install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In
the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City
shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for
the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14 SUMP PUMP DISCHARGING. It is unlawful for any person or property owner
to have a sump pump discharging onto any street, avenue or alley without the approval of the
City.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s responsibility for
maintenance of sidewalks.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 628 -
135.15 MAILBOX REGULATIONS. All mailboxes located along any street, avenue or
alley shall have the opening behind the curb but within arm’s length for vehicles. The City
will not be responsible for the replacement of any mailboxes damaged during the course of
snow removal.
[The next page is 631]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 631 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.02 Definitions 136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 136.12 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 City May Order Repairs 136.14 Fires and Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 136.15 Defacing
136.07 Permission Required 136.16 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards 136.17 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.18 Sales Stands
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of
the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
2. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular
area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required
herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
7. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. The abutting property
owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property
owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within 24 hours after cessation of
snowfall or accumulation, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner
for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The abutting property owner may be
liable for damages caused by failure to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from
the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. The abutting property owner shall
maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 632 -
and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line
and that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting
property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain
sidewalks as required by this chapter, the City may serve notice requiring the owner to repair,
replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed
within the time stated in the notice, the City will proceed with the work to be done and assess
the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
Defects that would require a notice are:†
1. Vertical or horizontal separations of 3/4-inch or more.
2. Chipping or spalling of over 50% of a single square or panel of the sidewalk.
3. The sidewalk has cracked into more than three pieces per 4 x 4-foot square
and sections are distorted or distressed with a vertical height difference of one-half
inch or more or a horizontal separation of two inches or more.
4. A sidewalk portion which is missing to the full depth forming holes in the
sidewalk.
5. The sidewalk has raised or depressed more than two inches in an eight-foot
area from the normal line of grade of the sidewalk.
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The City may order the
construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially
assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMISSION REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a
sidewalk unless such person has obtained permission from the Code Enforcement Officer and
has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all
ordinances and requirements of the City for such work.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under
the provisions of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
1. Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction
and repair of sidewalks.
2. Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3. Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and welldrained
soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three inch sub-base of compact, clean,
coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be
determined by the City.
4. Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: See Page 16 of the Appendix.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 633 -
5. Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches
thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in length.
B. All sidewalks throughout the Business District shall be constructed
from lot line to the curb line unless the location of the sidewalk is varied by
an appropriate resolution of the Council upon application by the landowner.
Specifications for Business District sidewalk construction are:
(1) Sub-grade to be three to four inches of good granular fill.
(2) Sub-grade to be packed with mechanical plate packer or other
approved method in order to achieve 95% proctor.
(3) Water curb box (shutoff) to be inspected by Water
Department personnel to determine condition of the box.
(4) One-half-inch by five-inch expansion joint to be placed at
back of curb and where sidewalk meets building.
(5) Drill 5/8-inch hole 12 inches deep and 30 inches apart into
existing sidewalks and at all construction joints, place #4 re-bar in
hole 24 inches long.
(6) Sidewalks to be five inches thick with #4 re-bar 24 inches on
center both ways, strength of concrete to be no less than 3500 P.S.I.
Re-bar to be supported on re-bar chairs or the same in order to place
re-bar in the center of the slab.
(7) Need to achieve drainage of runoff water over curb to gutter
line.
(8) Concrete to be struck off with straight edge so finished
product has tolerance of deflection no more or less than one-fourth
inch in 10 feet of width or length.
(9) Finishing process: After striking off, float concrete, edge all
edges with 3/8-inch radius edger except at building. Broom finish as
not to expose aggregate.
(10) Saw Cuts: Cuts to be 1/4-inch wide, 1/3 depth of the slab.
(Example: Five-inch slab would be 1 3/4-inch deep saw cut.) Sawing
sequence to be approximately 4- to 5-foot squares or what fits width
of sidewalk.
(11) Place roping in saw cuts and caulk with approved concrete
caulk.
C. Driveways, sidewalks crossing driveways, crossings or alley areas
shall be no less than six inches in thickness.
6. Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge
nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the Council
establishes a different distance due to special circumstances.
7. Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street which shall
be the established grade.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 634 -
8. Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with
the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for each foot between
the curb and the sidewalk.
9. Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter inch per foot toward the curb.
10. Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” finish.
11. Ramps for Persons with Disabilities. There shall be not less than two curb
cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or near the crosswalks at
intersections. Each curb cut or ramp newly installed shall conform to the following:
A. The maximum slope of a ramp shall be 1:12. The maximum rise for
any run shall be 30 inches. Curb ramps on existing sites may have a slope
between 1:10 and 1:12 for a maximum rise of six inches and a slope between
1:8 and 1:10 for a maximum rise of three inches.
B. Transitions from ramps to walks, gutters, or streets shall be flush and
free of abrupt changes. Maximum slopes of adjoining gutters, road surface
immediately adjacent to the curb ramp, or accessible route shall not exceed
1:20.
C. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least 48 inches wide. The minimum
width exclusive of flared sides shall be 36 inches.
D. If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk across the
ramp, or where it is not protected by handrails or guardrails, it shall have
flared sides; the maximum slope of the flare shall be 1:10. Curb ramps with
returned curbs (i.e., no flare) may be used where pedestrians would not
normally walk across the ramp.
E. Built-up curb ramps shall be located so that they do not project into
vehicular traffic lanes.
F. A curb ramp shall have a detectable warning that extends the width
and depth of the curb ramp. The detectable warning shall consist of raised
truncated domes with a diameter of nominal 0.2 inches and a center-to-center
spacing of nominal 2.35 inches and shall contrast visually with adjoining
surfaces, either light-on-dark, or dark-on-light. The material used to provide
contrast shall be an integral part of the walking surface.
G. Curb ramps shall be located or protected to prevent their obstruction
by parked vehicles.
H. If corner type (i.e., diagonal) curb ramps have returned curbs or other
well-defined edges, such edges shall be parallel to the direction of pedestrian
flow. Corner type curb ramps shall have 48 inches of clear space at the
bottom of the ramp to the cross-walk marking lines. If corner type curb ramps
have flared sides, they shall also have at least a 24-inch segment of straight
curb located on each side of the curb ramp and within the marked crossing.
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind
is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk
improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the
duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such
dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 635 -
each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved
warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient
barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the
street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage
to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or
their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of
any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the
property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City
immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or
to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall
knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto
while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or
approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach
thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar,
remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any
stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution
of the Council.
136.13 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar
or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a
sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or
within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.14 FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of
any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.15 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.16 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any
sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or
any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.17 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above
any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere
with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more
than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 636 -
136.18 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine
or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk
without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 637 -
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Power to Vacate 137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the
best interest of the City to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, the Council may do so by
ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a street or
alley shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study
and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall
submit a written report including recommendations to the Council within 30 days after the
date the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be published a
notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for the
use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer
justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.15)
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the judgment of
the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or
portion thereof, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7,
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property by
gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 638 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
65 April 17, 1906
66 February 20, 1894
67 November 1, 1937
68 January 6, 1947
69 June 2, 1947
75 November 7, 1949
79 June 6, 1950
90 May 7, 1956
98 February 20, 1958
100 March 19, 1958
103 November 4, 1959
106 January 4, 1961
109 October 2, 1963
138 October 5, 1977
140 October 12, 1977
144 June 21, 1978
152 April 2, 1980
163 November 3, 1982
164 November 2, 1983
196 May 30, 1989
198 October 4, 1989
243 June 21, 1999
249 April 10, 2001
296 April 10, 2007
317 January 11, 2011
344 September 12, 2013
364 April 28, 2016
365 July 14, 2016
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 639 -
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which
have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established
as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established
grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
104 June 1, 1960
167 August 16, 1984
CHAPTER 138 STREET GRADES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 640 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 641 -
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets 139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance
with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision
or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution, change the
name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or changing
the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County
Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown on
the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this
is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of
Hampton, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official
Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry
on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief
description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 39, dated September 29, 1938, naming or renaming a street
within the City, has not been included in this Code of Ordinances but remains
in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 139 NAMING OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 642 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 643 -
CHAPTER 140
CURB CUTS
140.01 Permit Required 140.06 Joints
140.02 Permit Fee 140.07 Excavations
140.03 Sidewalks 140.08 Inspection
140.04 Curb Removal 140.09 Revocation of Permit
140.05 Curb and Gutter Installation 140.10 Costs
140.01 PERMIT REQUIRED. A written permit shall be obtained before any person
breaks out or removes any City curb and gutter and all costs related to the removal of existing
and installation of a new curb and gutter shall be the responsibility of the property owner. A
written application for the permit shall be filed with the Clerk. The application shall include
the name of the property owner, the address of the property where the work is to be done, the
name and address of the person who will do the work, and the plan of construction or repair
which will be done. The Clerk shall issue the permit if the proposed plan meets all of the
requirements of this chapter, if the permit fee has been paid, if the plan does not create any
substantial hazard in the use of the street or sidewalk for public travel or drainage, and/or
create any defects. Each permit shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance, if the
work is not completed within that time.
140.02 PERMIT FEE. Before any permit is issued, the person who makes application shall
pay twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the Clerk.
140.03 SIDEWALKS. The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by work done under
this chapter except for handicap sidewalk approaches, as approved by the City. All sidewalks
intersecting a driveway shall be maintained at the same grade and level as the existing
sidewalk.
140.04 CURB REMOVAL. When an approach is to be constructed and a curb drop is not
at the location of the proposed approach, the curb may only be cut or removed in such a
manner that maintains the existing flow line of the gutter without introducing any cracks or
seams in the gutter area. If any of the gutter will need to be removed or becomes broken in
creating a curb drop, the entire curb and gutter shall be removed by saw cutting the curb and
gutter perpendicular to the street at both ends of the necessary approach opening, and then the
curb and gutter may be removed.
140.05 CURB AND GUTTER INSTALLATION. After removal of existing curb and
gutter soil shall be compacted and well drained; where soil is not compact and well drained, a
four-inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel must be installed. Two twelve-inch long
number 4 rebar shall be installed at each end; with six inches to be placed in new and six
inches inserted into old curb and gutter and evenly spaced apart. Concrete thickness must be
equal to the existing curb and gutter, but not less than six inches thick and existing flow line
must be maintained.
140.06 JOINTS. One-half (½) inch expansion joint must be installed in a line with the back
of the curb.
CHAPTER 140 CURB CUTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 644 -
140.07 EXCAVATIONS. Excavations to do work under this chapter shall be dug so as to
occasion the least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of water
along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at all times, and warning
lights placed from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise. Any street,
sidewalk or other public property that is affected by the work shall be restored to as good a
condition or better than it was previous to the excavation.
140.08 INSPECTION. The City will inspect all curb and gutter replacements before
concrete is to be poured. An advance notice of not less than twenty-four (24) hours shall be
given to the City before the concrete is to be poured. A final inspection will be made after the
project is completed to insure compliance with this chapter. Failure to comply with this
chapter will result in the removal of the curb and gutter and replacement by the City at the
property owner’s expense.
140.09 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. The City may at any time revoke the permit for any
violation of this chapter and may require that the work be stopped.
140.10 COSTS. If, after thirty (30) days after breaking out or removal of any concrete curb
and gutter, the person so doing shall fail or refuse to replace the curb and gutter, as provided
herein, the City shall have the right to do so without notice and assess the cost thereof as a
special tax against the abutting property and collect the same according to law.
[The next page is 679]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 679 -
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
146.01 Definitions 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property 146.04 Compliance with State Building Code
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or after June 15, 1976,
and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field or tract of land
under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes are
harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any building,
structure or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the
manufactured home community.
3. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the
public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will
permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons;
but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor
vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976,
which was not built to a mandatory building code and which contains no State or
Federal seals.
4. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of
these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit enterprise
with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be construed to
include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily
maintained by any individual, educational institution or company on their own premises and
used exclusively to house their own labor or students. The manufactured home community or
mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or manufactured home
which is located outside a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be
converted to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for
real estate taxes except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
1. Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property
as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human
habitation.
CHAPTER 146 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 680 -
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home which is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS. A mobile home or manufactured home
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be placed on a
permanent frost-free foundation system which meets the support and anchorage requirements
as recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The foundation
system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems of surrounding
residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)
146.04 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BUILDING CODE. Any person wishing to
locate a mobile home within the City limits shall file with the Clerk a certificate showing that
the mobile home is in compliance with the current State Building Code as to mobile home
construction.
[The next page is 685]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 685 -
CHAPTER 147
FIRE ZONE
147.01 Fire Zone Established 147.05 Reconstruction Prohibited
147.02 Plans Submitted 147.06 Special Permit
147.03 Buildings Prohibited 147.07 Removal of Buildings
147.04 Construction Standards 147.08 Storage of Materials Restricted
147.01 FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED. A Fire Zone is established to include all of the
following territory:
Any area zoned B-1 Central
147.02 PLANS SUBMITTED. It is unlawful to build, enlarge or alter any structure,
building or part thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with
a statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who shall, if in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for the proposed work.
147.03 BUILDINGS PROHIBITED. The erection of any building or structure of any
kind, or additions thereto, or substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are
prohibited in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
147.04 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The construction standards for all buildings,
structures, or parts thereof within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum,
Type III fire resistant construction, as specified in the International Building Code.
147.05 RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED. Any building within the Fire Zone not
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which may hereafter be
damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise, shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
147.06 SPECIAL PERMIT. The Council may, by four-fifths vote, issue a special permit
to improve any property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on
condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance or the fire
hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or move in any building or
structure for temporary purposes for a period of time not exceeding six months from the date
of such permission.
147.07 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS. Any person who erects any building in the Fire
Zone, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to
remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within 30
days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the same to be
removed or taken down. The Mayor shall report an itemized bill of the expense to the Clerk,
and the same shall be charged to the person owning such building. The Clerk shall present the
bill to the owner of the property and if the bill is not paid within 10 days from the date it is
presented, the amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the County Treasurer, as a
lien against the property and collected the same as other taxes.
CHAPTER 147 FIRE ZONE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 686 -
147.08 STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED. No person shall have or deposit
any grain stack, pile of rubbish, explosives, hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance
within the Fire Zone, nor shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within
the Fire Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum amount of
such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited on any lot or part of a lot
within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one of the buildings allowed by this chapter.
No person shall build or allow any fires, whether trash fires or otherwise, within the Fire Zone
as described in this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 687 -
CHAPTER 148
SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM MUNICIPAL WELLS
148.01 Purpose 148.03 Definitions
148.02 Establishment of Separation Distances 148.04 Separation Distances Table
148.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish separation distances from
wells for all structures and uses, to protect the public, and to preserve the health and welfare of
the community by protecting water purity.
148.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF SEPARATION DISTANCES. The distances for
separating uses and construction around all wells within the City, including old wells as well
as new wells, have been established by State requirements relative to possible pollutants and
their distances from wells, and the Council has found that the said State requirements shall be
adopted as the minimum acceptable requirements for separation distances from wells, and no
construction or use shall be allowed within said minimum distances to City wells as set forth
herein.
148.03 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined. Use of the
word “building” includes the word “structure.”
1. “Animal enclosure” means a lot, yard, corral or similar structure in which the
concentration of livestock or poultry is such that a vegetative cover is not maintained.
2. “Animal pasturage” means a fenced area where vegetative cover is
maintained and in which the animals are enclosed.
3. “Animal waste” means animal waste consisting of excreta, leachings, feed
losses, litter, washwater or other associated waste.
4. “Animal waste stockpiles” means stacking, composting or containment of
animal wastes.
5. “Animal waste storage basin or lagoon” means fully or partially excavated or
diked earthen structure including earthen side slopes or floor.
6. “Animal waste storage tank” mans a completely fabricated structure, with or
without a cover, either formed in place or transported to the site, used for containing
animal waste.
7. “Cistern” means a covered tank in which rain water from roof drains is stored.
8. “Deep well” means a well located and constructed in such a manner that there
is a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at least five (5) feet thick located
at a depth of at least 25 feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer
from which the water is to be drawn.
9. “Low permeability” means an unconsolidated soil layer of well sorted fine
grain-sized sediments that under normal hydrostatic pressures would not be
significantly permeable. Low permeability soils may include homogeneous clays
below the zone of weathering, mudstone, claystone and some glacial till.
10. “Privy” means a structure used for the deposit of human body wastes.
CHAPTER 148 SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM MUNICIPAL WELLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 688 -
11. “Sanitary sewer pipe” means a sewer pipe complying with the standards of
sewer construction of the Department of Natural Resources.
12. “Septic tank” means a watertight tank which receives sewage.
13. “Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in such a manner that
there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low permeability soil or rock between the
aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal
ground surface.
14. “Water main pipe” means a water main complying with the Department of
Natural Resources standards for water main construction.
148.04 SEPARATION DISTANCES TABLE. No building or use shall be allowed within
the separation distances from City wells as set out on the attached Table A. A building permit
is required for all construction within 1,000 feet of municipal wells. No building permit shall
be issued which is in violation of the separation distances from municipal wells if in violation
of this chapter or a source of contamination for said well. Any use or construction in violation
of this chapter is a nuisance as defined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances and
prohibited pursuant to Section 50.04; and the notice requirements regarding abatement of
nuisances and prohibited conditions and all provisions of this Code of Ordinances in regard to
abatement, costs of collection, hearings and penalties for maintaining a nuisance or prohibited
condition as set forth herein are applicable. Specifically, and in addition to any other remedies
allowed by ordinance or at law, the City shall recover any costs for water treatment which are
created by any source of contamination which is identified, where said source is in violation of
this chapter.
CHAPTER 148 SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM MUNICIPAL WELLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 689 -
TABLE A
Distances (Feet)
Source of Contamination
5 10 25 50 75 100 200 400 1000
Well house floor drains A
POINT DISCHARGE TO Water treatment plant wastes A
GROUND SURFACE Sanitary and industrial discharge A
Well house floor drains to surface ENC WM
A A A SP A ---------------Unknown-------
SEWERS Well house floor drains to sewers A WM A SP A --Unknown--
AND Water plant wastes A WM A SP A --Unknown--
DRAINS Sanitary and storm sewers, drains A WM A SP A --Unknown--
Sewer force mains A WM WM A SP
Land application of solid waste D S
Irrigation of wastewater D S
Concrete vaults and septic tanks D S
LAND DISPOSAL Mechanical wastewater treatment
OF WASTES Plants D S
Cesspools and earth pit privies D S
Soil absorption fields D S
Lagoons D S
Chemical application to ground
CHEMICAL AND Surface D S
MINERAL STORAGE Above ground D S
On or under ground D S
Animal pasturage A
Animal enclosure D S
ANIMAL WASTES Land application of solids D S
Land application of liquid or
Slurry D S
Storage tank D S
Solids stockpile D S
Storage basin or lagoon D S
Earthen silage storage trench
or pit D S
Basements, pits, sumps A
MISCELLANEOUS Flowing streams or other surface
water bodies A
Cisterns D S
Cemeteries A
Private wells D S
Solid waste disposal sites A
KEY
D Deep Well
S Shallow Well
A All Wells
WM Pipe of Water Main Specifications
SP Pipe of Sewer Pipe Specifications
ENCWM Encased in 4 inches of Concrete
CHAPTER 148 SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM MUNICIPAL WELLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 690 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 691 -
CHAPTER 149
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
149.01 Definitions 149.07 Exceptions
149.02 Substances Regulated 149.08 Determination of Locations Within Zones
149.03 Maps of Zones of Influence 149.09 Enforcement
149.04 Restrictions Within the Primary Protection Zone 149.10 Inspections
149.05 Restrictions Within the Secondary Protection Zone 149.11 Notice of Violation
149.06 Restrictions Within the Zone of Sensitivity 149.12 Injunctive Relief
149.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Aquifer” means a rock formation, group of rock formations or part of a rock
formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to yield significant
quantities of water.
2. “Alluvium” means sand, clay, etc., gradually deposited by moving water.
3. “Contamination” means the presence of any harmful or deleterious substances
in the water supply.
4. “Flow system boundaries” means a delineation criterion that uses
groundwater divides, surface water bodies, or other hydrologic/physical features to
delineate a wellhead protection area.
5. “Groundwater” means subsurface water in the saturated zone from which
wells, springs and groundwater runoff are supplied.
6. “Hazardous substances” means those materials specified in Section 149.02 of
this chapter.
7. “Labeled quantities” means the maximum quantity of chemical as
recommended on the label, for specific applications.
8. “Person” means any natural person, individual, public or private corporation,
firm association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency,
political subdivision, public officer, or any other entity whatsoever or any
combination of such, jointly or severally.
9. “Petroleum product” means fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and
mixtures of those products), lubricating oils, motor oils, hydraulic fluids, solvents, and
other similar products.
10. “Pollution” means the presence of any substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) or condition (temperature, pH, turbidity) in water that
tends to degrade usefulness of the water.
11. “Potable water” means water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.
12. “Primary containment” means the first level of product-tight containment, i.e.,
the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its inner
surface with the hazardous material being contained.
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 692 -
13. “Public utility” means any utility (gas, water, sewer, electrical, telephone,
cable television, etc.) whether publicly owned or privately owned.
14. “Secondary containment” means the level of product-tight containment
external to and separate from the primary containment. Secondary containment shall
consist of leakproof trays under containers, floor curing or other containment systems
and shall be of adequate size and design to handle all spills, leaks, overflows, and
precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection
of materials shall be sufficient to preclude any substance loss. Containment systems
shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented.
15. “Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in such a manner that
there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low-permeability soil or rock between the
aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal
ground surface.
16. “Time-related capture zone” means the surface or subsurface area surrounding
a pumping well that will supply groundwater recharge to the well within some
specified period of time.
17. “Toxic substance” means any substance that has the capacity to produce
personal injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption into
the body.
18. “Transit” means the act or process of passing through the wellhead protection
zones, where the vehicle in transit may be parked (within the wellhead protection
area) for a period not to exceed two (2) hours.
19. “Water pollution” means the introduction in any surface or underground
water, of any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such quantities,
proportions, and accumulations that are injurious to human, plant, animal, fish, and
other aquatic life or property or that unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business .
20. “Well” means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a resource supply such
as water.
21. “Well field” means a tract of land that contains a number of wells for
supplying water.
22. “Wellhead protection zones” means zones delineated by fixed radii criterion
around wellheads, within which toxic substances will be regulated to protect the
quality of the underground resource.
23. “Zone of contribution” means the area surrounding a pumping well that
encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to the well.
149.02 SUBSTANCES REGULATED. The materials regulated by this chapter consist of
the following:
1. Substances listed in 40 CFR Section 302.4, List of Hazardous Substance and
Reportable Quantities.
2. Substances listed by the Iowa Labor Commissioner pursuant to Section
89B.12 of the Code of Iowa (Hazardous Chemicals Risks - Right to Know).
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 693 -
3. Substances listed in 40 CFR Section 261, subparts A, B, C and D, Federal
Hazardous Waste List.
149.03 MAPS OF ZONES OF INFLUENCE.
1. Maps. Zone of Protection maps and any amendments thereto are incorporated
by reference and made a part of this chapter. These maps shall be on file at City Hall.
At the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the location of all
wells in Hampton supplying potable water to the City Water System shall be located
on the official Wellhead Protection Map with Primary Zone, Secondary Zone and
Zone of Sensitivity indicated.
2. Map Maintenance. The Zone of Protection Maps may be updated on an
annual basis. The basis for such an update may include, but is not limited to, the
following:
A. Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the aquifer.
B. Changes in permitted pumping capacity of City wells.
C. Addition of wells or elimination of existing wells.
D. Designation of new well fields.
3. Wellhead Protection Zones. The zones of protection indicated on the Zones
of Protection Maps are as follows:
A. Primary Protection Zone. The area within the two year time-related
capture zone of any well supplying potable water to the City water system.
B. Secondary Protection Zone. The area within the five year timerelated
capture zone, excluding the Primary Protection Zone, of any well
supplying potable water to the City water system.
C. Zone of Sensitivity. The area within the 10 year time-related capture
zone, excluding the Primary and Secondary Protection Zones, from any well
supplying potable water to the City water system.
149.04 RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses within the Primary
Protection Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
A. Industrial buildings within the Hampton Air Industrial Park, provided
there are no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated
within this use, and the Iowa DNR Separation Distances For Wells for
sources of contamination is complied with. All sites must comply with the
restrictions and covenants set by the Hampton Air Industrial Park.
B. Playgrounds/Parks.
C. Wildlife areas, open spaces.
D. Lawns and gardens.
E. Non-motorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails.
F. Sewer-residential and commercial.
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 694 -
G. Above ground storage tanks when in compliance with State Fire
Marshal’s regulations.
H. Field cropping activities.
2. Additional restrictions are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to soils, groundwater, or surface water within the
Primary Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a
discharge shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
B. Any person responsible for discharging or causing or permitting such
discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanups costs, and may be subject to fines as specified in this
chapter.
C. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of
fertilizers or pesticides in excess of labeled quantities to the soils, ground
water, or surface water within the Primary Protection Zone. Any person
knowing or having evidence of a discharge shall report such information to
the Wellhead Protection Officer.
149.05 RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONE.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Secondary Protection
Zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
A. All uses listed as permitted in the Primary Protection Zone.
B. Sewer - residential and commercial.
C. Above ground storage tanks when in compliance with State Fire
Marshal’s regulations.
D. Basement storage tanks.
E. Livestock grazing and field cropping activities.
2. Additional restrictions are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance to the soils, groundwater, or surface water within the
Secondary Protection Zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a
discharge shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
B. Any person responsible for discharging or causing or permitting such
discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs, and may be subject to fines specified in this
chapter.
C. Any person who stores, handles, produces or uses chemicals within
the Secondary Protection Zone shall make available the relevant MSDS sheets
to the Wellhead Protection Officer regardless of such person’s status under
Section 149.07(4) of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 695 -
149.06 RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE ZONE OF SENSITIVITY.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Zone of Sensitivity.
Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited.
A. All uses listed as permitted in the Primary Protection Zone.
B. All uses listed as permitted in the Secondary Protection Zone.
C. All uses, handling and storage, when in compliance with, and allowed
by, Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
2. Additional restrictions are as follows:
A. No person shall discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a
hazardous substance, in excess of labeled quantities, to the soils, groundwater,
or surface water within the Zone of Sensitivity.
B. Any person responsible for discharging or causing or permitting such
discharge of hazardous substances will be financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs, and may be subject to fines as specified in this
chapter.
149.07 EXCEPTIONS.
1. The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
A. The transportation of any hazardous substance through the well field
protection zones, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit.
B. The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel
tank or as a lubricant in a vehicle.
C. Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management
center facilities, or public utility transmission facility.
D. Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous substances
for resale in their original unopened containers only in the Secondary
Protection Zone and the Zone of Sensitivity.
E. Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for janitorial or
minor maintenance purposes.
F. Consumer products located in the home which are used for personal,
family, or household purposes.
G. The storage and use of hazardous substances as a fuel or lubricant to
provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field, provided an
enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the hazardous
substance.
H. The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the operation of
the well or plant.
2. The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even though such use may not
conform with the regulations of this chapter. However, the storage and use of
hazardous substances within the primary protection zone, must provide an enclosed
secondary containment system. Such structure or facility may not be enlarged,
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 696 -
extended, reconstructed or substituted subsequent to adoption of said ordinance unless
an exemption is granted by the City Council.
3. Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relating to the storage,
handling, use, and/or production of any toxic or hazardous substances who is exempt
from this chapter by law shall not be subject to the restrictions contained herein.
4. All requests for permits or special exceptions in the Hampton Wellhead
Protection Zones must be made in writing to the Council. All requests must include a
list of all hazardous chemicals (MSDS sheets will be made available upon request) to
be stored, handled, used, or produced under the permit or special exception. All
requests may be required to include an environmental assessment report at the
discretion of the Council. Any exemptions or permits granted will be made
conditional and may include environmental monitoring and cleanup costs. The
exemption or permit will be made void if environmental and/or safety monitoring
indicate that the facility or activity is emitting any releases of harmful contaminants to
the surrounding environment. The facility will be held financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs.
149.08 DETERMINATION OF LOCATIONS WITHIN ZONES. In determining the
location of properties within the zones depicted on the Zone of Protection Maps, the following
rules shall apply:
1. Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the applicable Zone of
Protection Map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that zone.
2. For properties having parts lying within more than one zone as reflected on
the applicable Zone of Protection Map, each part shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to the zone in which it is located.
149.09 ENFORCEMENT.
1. The Water Operator In Charge is designated as the Wellhead Protection
Officer unless another person is specifically designated by the Council to supervise
the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
2. The Wellhead Protection Inspector shall be the Water Operator In Charge.
3. No building permit shall be issued which is a violation of the Iowa DNR
Separation Distance from Wells, a violation of this chapter, or a source of
contamination for a City well.
4. No new underground tanks will be allowed for auxiliary fuel storage in the
Primary or Secondary zones.
149.10 INSPECTIONS.
1. The Wellhead Protection Inspector shall have the power and authority to enter
and inspect all buildings, structures and land within all wellhead protection zones for
the purpose of making an inspection. Failure of a person having authority over a
property to permit an inspection shall be sufficient grounds and probable cause for a
court of competent jurisdiction to issue a search warrant to the Protection Officer or
Inspector to inspect such premises.
2. In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or abandoned, and the
owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an inspection, the
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 697 -
officer or inspector may enter into or upon any open or unsecured portion of the
premises in order to conduct an inspection thereof.
3. The Wellhead Protection Officer or Inspector shall inspect each City well
annually and shall maintain an inventory, if applicable, of all hazardous substances
which exist within the Primary and Secondary Protection Zones. One format that may
be used is Iowa DNR Form, OMB No. 2050-0072. MSDS sheets on these chemicals
will be made available to the Inspector.
149.11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Whenever an officer or an inspector determines that
there is a violation of this chapter, such officer shall give notice thereof which shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Be dated and signed by the officer or inspector;
3. Specify the violation or violations; and
4. State that said violation shall be corrected within 10 days of the date on which
the inspector issued the notice of violation.
149.12 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. If any person who engages in nonresidential activities
stores, handles, uses and/or produces toxic substances within the wellhead protection zones, as
indicated on the Zone of Protection Maps, continues to operate in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, then the City may file an action for injunctive relief in the court of jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 149 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 698 -
[The next page is 705]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 705 -
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Map
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following
numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and
maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to
the street in figures not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and of a
contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the
principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING MAP. The Clerk is responsible for preparing and
maintaining a building numbering map.
CHAPTER 150 BUILDING NUMBERING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 706 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 707 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Purpose 151.08 Duty to Trim Trees
151.02 Definitions 151.09 Removal of Dead or Diseased Trees on Private Property
151.03 Planting Restrictions 151.10 Removal of Dead or Diseased Trees on Public Property
151.04 Distance from Sidewalk 151.11 Removal of Stumps
151.05 Distance from Street Corners and Fire Plugs 151.12 Permitting
151.06 Public Tree Care 151.13 Appeals
151.07 Tree Topping 151.14 Hampton Tree Management Plan
151.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the safe and educated land
stewardship practices within the corporate City limits of the City of Hampton, preserving the
appearance of the City.
151.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following definitions are given.
1. “Hampton Tree Board” means a seven-member board appointed by the Mayor
to serve a term of up to five years, with no term limits.
2. “Parking” means that part of the street not covered by the sidewalk and lying
between the lot line and the curb line.
3. “Park trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
public parks and other areas owned by the City to which the public has free access as
parks.
4. “Street trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on
land owned by the City and lying between property lines on either side of all streets,
avenues, or ways within the City.
5. “Tree Management Plan” means a document utilized for conducting urban
forest management within the corporate City limits.
6. “Tree permit” means a signed document issued by the City, authorizing tree
removal and tree planting on City-owned properties within the corporate City limits.
151.03 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. Tree planting shall be allowed along any street,
avenue, or highway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb, where the curb line is
established, or within any public right-of-way, parking, or street, provided an application for
permit is first submitted, reviewed, and approve by the City.
151.04 DISTANCE FROM SIDEWALK. The distance trees may be planted from
sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species size classes and no trees may be planted
closer to any sidewalk than the following:
1. Small trees (any species with maturity heights of less than 25 feet) – three
feet;
2. Medium trees (any species with projected maturity height between 25 and 50
feet) – four feet;
3. Large trees (any species with projected maturity height of more than 50 feet)
– five feet.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 708 -
151.05 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE PLUGS. No tree shall be
planted closer than 20 feet from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest
intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet from any fire
plug.
151.06 PUBLIC TREE CARE. The City has the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares
and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City may order the removal of any tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to
sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines and other public improvements; provided,
however, such removal shall be conducted in accordance with tree removal policies as defined
within this chapter.
151.07 TREE TOPPING. It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or City
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public or private property. Topping
is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the
tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
section.
151.08 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep
the trees on public or private property trimmed so that all branches will be at least 10 feet
above the sidewalks and 15 feet above streets. If the abutting property owners fail to trim the
trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be
taken within five days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax. Except as allowed in this section, it is unlawful for any property
owner to trim or cut any tree in a public place.
151.09 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The City has the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property
within the City when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or
diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the City. The City will notify
in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their expense
within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply
with such provisions, the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the
costs of removal on the owner’s property tax notice.
151.10 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
See Section 364.12 of the Code of Iowa and Section 135.10 of this Code of Ordinances.
151.11 REMOVAL OF STUMPS. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed
below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump does not project above the surface
of the ground. When the City causes a tree on City property to be removed, the City shall
remove the stump to six inches below ground level.
151.12 PERMITTING. No person shall plant or cause to be removed any tree on any
City-owned property or public right-of-way without first obtaining an approved permit, the
application for which is available at City Hall. Tree species will be monitored as part of the
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 709 -
permitting process and only those species identified on the permit form will be allowed for
planting. This subsection is implemented to encourage the planting of trees promoting safety,
educated land stewardship, and protection of vital infrastructure.
151.13 APPEALS. Any person receiving notice to remove dead or diseased trees and/or
any person denied a permit for removal or planting of trees may appeal the decision of City
staff to the Hampton Tree Board. Appeal must be in writing and received at City Hall no later
than 10 days following date of notice or denial of permit. The Board will then set a date for
public hearing before the Board within 30 days. Persons filing an appeal must appear before
the Board at the scheduled hearing and will be notified no less than five days prior to the
public hearing. In the event the Board denies initial appeal, a secondary appeal may be filed at
City Hall and must be received in writing no later than 10 days following the Board’s
decision. The City Council will then schedule a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the
appeal. Persons filing secondary appeal will be notified of the scheduled date and time of the
City Council hearing no later than 10 days prior to the hearing and must appear before the City
Council at the date and time scheduled.
151.14 HAMPTON TREE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The City adopts and utilizes the
document identified as the 2012 Management Plan, prepared by Bureau of Forestry, Iowa
DNR, as a guide for implementing best practices for land stewardship, and will continue to
update and adhere to this plan no less than once every five year period.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 710 -
[The next page is 715]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 715 -
CHAPTER 152
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
152.01 Adoption of Code 152.06 Contract Properties
152.02 Revisions 152.07 HUD Inspection Certification
152.03 General Provisions 152.08 Rental Permit Required
152.04 Residential Rental Real Estate Registration 152.09 Transferability of Rental Permit
Requirements 152.10 Appeal Process
152.05 Inspection 152.11 Civil or Criminal Penalties
152.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk of the City of Hampton, being marked and designed as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hampton,
in the State of Iowa for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit
for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the City of Hampton are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any, prescribed in Section 152.02 of this Code of Ordinances.
152.02 REVISIONS. The following sections of the adopted International Property
Maintenance Code, 2006, are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: City of Hampton
2. Section 103.5. Insert: See related fee schedule in “Rules and Procedures”
3. Section 302.4. Insert: Allowable height of grass shall be 6" (inches) in
developed Residential, Commercial and Industrial zoned districts. Allowable height
of grass shall be 12" (inches) in undeveloped Residential, Commercial, and Industrial
zoned districts.
4. Section 304.14. Insert: March through November
5. Section 602.3. Insert: January through December
6. Section 602.4. Insert: January through December
152.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS. The provisions of the Housing Code including the
Incorporated International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hampton, Iowa, shall
apply to all residential and non-residential structures and all premises and constitute minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light,
ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, lift safety, safety from
fire, and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibilities of owners,
operators, and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for the
administration, enforcement, and penalties. The Code shall be construed to secure its
expressed intent, which is to insure public health, safety, and welfare and so far as they are
CHAPTER 152 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 716 -
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to
provide a minimum level of health and safety as required by the International Property
Maintenance Code.
152.04 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION
REQUIREMENTS. All residential rental real estate shall be required to register with the
City’s Housing Code Enforcement Officer, within 30 days of the mailing of Notice to Register
by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, City Manager, or City Attorney to the owner or
operator of such residential rental real estate, or within 30 days of conversion of any owneroccupied
real estate to residential rental real estate. A registration fee payable to the City is
due upon registration as follows:
1. Single family or duplex .......................... $20.00 per structure
2. Multiple family dwelling or structure .... $20.00 per structure plus $3.00 per
unit
3. Rooming house ....................................... $20.00 per structure plus $3.00 per
unit
Failure to register as required shall be a violation of this Code of Ordinances and punishable
as a simple misdemeanor or as a municipal infraction as provided in subsection 11 of this
section and each day after the deadline date for registration that the dwelling remains
unregistered is a separate and distinct violation.
152.05 INSPECTION. All residential real estate located within the City limits shall be
subject to inspection. The owner of residential rental housing shall schedule and have
completed an inspection within 60 days of the date Notice to Schedule Inspection is sent to
such owner by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, City Manager, or City Attorney. The
owner or operator of residential rental housing shall within 90 days of the date Notice to
Register is sent to said owner or operator or within 60 days of the date registered schedule and
complete an inspection by the Housing Code Inspectors and shall pay the inspection fee.
Such residential rental real estate shall not be rented nor will a tenant be allowed to occupy
any residential real estate, until such time as the inspection report shows that such real estate is
in compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the City.
Occupation of such residential rental real estate prior to a satisfactory inspection report shall
be a violation of the Hampton Housing Code/International Property Maintenance Code and
the landlord who rents without a satisfactory inspection report commits a simple
misdemeanor, or municipal infraction as provided in subsection 11 of this section and in
addition thereto the City may also obtain an injunction prohibiting occupancy until such time
as a satisfactory inspection report has been made.
If inspection reveals that the property is not in compliance with the International Property
Maintenance Code, the inspector shall provide the owner or operator with a copy of the
inspection report specifying the improvements or repairs required in order to bring the
inspected property into compliance.
A re-inspection shall be completed within 60 days of the initial inspection unless expressed
written consent is obtained from the City Code Enforcement Officer. Properties not in
compliance with the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code within 180 days after
CHAPTER 152 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 717 -
registering as a residential rental housing unit shall be vacated and rent not payable by the
tenant until the property has been inspected and a satisfactory inspection report filed.
Failure to schedule and complete an inspection or re-inspection, if required, is a violation of
Code of Ordinances as provided in section 11 of this chapter and each day said property
remains occupied but not in compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code is a
separate violation.
152.06 CONTRACT PROPERTIES. Any property sold on contract will be considered as
a residential real estate rental dwelling unless the Real Estate Contract has been recorded at
the County courthouse. It is the property owner’s responsibility to insure said contract has
been recorded and to provide proof of recording to the Code Enforcement Officer at City Hall.
152.07 HUD INSPECTION CERTIFICATION. Any properties that have a current
HUD Inspection Certification will be required to be registered, but will be exempt from rental
housing inspection. If the property is no longer utilized or enrolled in the HUD program, the
property will be subject to rental housing inspection under the Housing Code/International
Property Maintenance Code of the City.
152.08 RENTAL PERMIT REQUIRED. The owner or operator of any rental residential
housing shall file an application and registration for a rental housing permit with the Code
Enforcement Officer for the City on an application provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that all applicable provision of the
Housing Code/International Property Maintenance Code have been complied with, or a
variance or modification allowed, a residential rental permit shall be issued to an owner or
operator or residential rental housing upon payment of the required rental permit fees.
The residential rental housing permit shall be a document entitled “Rental Permit,”
establishing satisfactory compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code at the
time of issuance and shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of issuance. The
Rental Permit shall state the date of issuance, permit number, address of the structure to which
it is applicable, and it expiration date. If a Rental Permit is not issues, all residential dwelling
units and rooming units being occupied and/or rented by such owner or operator without such
valid Rental Permit or application for the same on file with the Code Enforcement Officer may
be ordered vacated or the collection of rent prohibited, and notice will be served upon the
owner or operator and any tenant or any other occupant directing that the dwelling unit be
vacated or that rent shall not be payable until such time as said residential rental dwelling unit
is in compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code and a Rental Permit
issued.
152.09 TRANSFERABILITY OF RENTAL PERMIT. The Rental Permit shall be
transferable from an owner or operator to another owner or operator at any time prior to its
expiration, termination, or revocation. The transferor shall notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any change of interest or ownership or management of property within 30 days of
any conveyance or transfer of interest affecting the property and provide the name and address
of all persons who have acquired an interest in or become managers of such property. If the
Code Enforcement Officer has not been notified of such conveyance or transfer within the
designated time period, the Rental Permit shall not be transferred unless a fee of $20.00 for
each residential rental dwelling structure has been paid for each structure.
CHAPTER 152 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 718 -
152.10 APPEAL PROCESS. Any person directly affected by decision of the Code
Official or a notice or order issued under the Housing Code/Residential Housing Code shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a written application for appeal
within 20 days after the day of the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Housing Code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder had been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Housing Code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of the Housing Code are adequately satisfied by other
means. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within 20 days of the filing of
an appeal, or at a stated periodic meeting, and notice shall be given to the appellant within 10
days of the date and time scheduled for hearing by ordinary mail.
Any person shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a Writ of Certiorari to
correct errors of law, and such applications for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law, following the filing of decision in the office of the Chief Administrative
Officer of the City.
152.11 CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PENALTIES. Any violation of the Hampton Housing
Code/International Property Maintenance Code shall be punishable as a simple misdemeanor
or may be charged as a municipal infraction. If charged as a municipal infraction, the
following schedule of civil penalties shall apply:
1. 1st Offense ........................................................... $100.00
2. 2nd Offense ......................................................... $250.00
3. 3rd Offense .......................................................... $500.00
4. 4th Offense .......................................................... $750.00
Each and every day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate infraction or violation
and may be charged as a second, third, or fourth offense accordingly.
[The next page is 725]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 725 -
CHAPTER 153
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
153.01 Adoption of Code 153.02 Revisions
153.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the Hampton City Hall, being marked and designed as the International
Building Code, 2006 edition, including Appendix Chapters “C” and “J” as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Hampton,
Iowa, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the
office of the City of Hampton are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 153.02.
153.02 REVISIONS. The following sections of the adopted International Building Code,
2006, are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: City of Hampton
2. Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Hampton
3. Section 1612.3. Insert: May 1, 1979
4. Section 3410.2. Insert: February 1, 2008
CHAPTER 153 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 726 -
[The next page is 735]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 735 -
CHAPTER 154
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
154.01 Adoption of Code 154.02 Revisions
154.01 ADOPTION OF CODE. A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk of City of Hampton, being marked and designated as the
International Residential Code, 2006 edition, including Appendix Chapters “C”, “E”, “G”,
“J”, “N” and “Q” as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of the City of Hampton, in the State of Iowa for regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location,
removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code
on file in the office of the City of Hampton are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Section 154.02 of this chapter.
154.02 REVISIONS. The following sections of the adopted International Residential
Code, 2006, are hereby revised:
1. Section R101.1. Insert: City of Hampton
2. Table R301.2 (1) Insert: (Attachment “A” to Ordinance No. 305 is on file at
City Hall.) Ground Snow Load 35 psf, Wind Speed 90 mph, Seismic Design
Category “A”, Weather “Severe”, Frost Depth Line 42", Termite Moderate to Heavy,
Winter Design Temp -10 degrees, Ice Barrier Underlayment Required “Yes”, Flood
Hazards – Local Amendments, Air Freezing Index 2000, Mean Annual Temperature
45 Degrees F.
3. Section P2603.6.1 Insert: 60" (sixty inches)
4. Section P3103.1 Insert: 6" (six inches), 6" (six inches)
CHAPTER 154 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 736 -
[The next page is 775]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 775 -
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 776 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
and have not been included as a part of this Code of Ordinances but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ORDINANCE NO. DATE
259 May 13, 2003
262 November 25, 2003
266 February 24, 2004
269 June 8, 2004
272 June 22, 2004
273 September 28, 2004
291 May 9, 2006
301 August 28, 2007
312 June 9, 2009
333 June 26, 2012
362 January 14, 2016
[The next page is 825]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 825 -
CHAPTER 167
ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN
MANAGEMENT
167.01 Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose 167.13 Application for Permit
167.02 Definitions 167.14 Action on Application
167.03 Lands to Which Chapter Applies 167.15 Construction and Use to Be as Provided in
167.04 Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries Application and Plans
167.05 Compliance 167.16 Variances
167.06 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 167.17 Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances
167.07 Interpretation Shall be Based
167.08 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 167.18 Conditions Attached to Variances
167.09 Flood Plain Management Standards 167.19 Nonconforming Uses
167.10 Special Floodway Provisions 167.20 Amendments
167.11 Administration 167.21 Penalties for Violation
167.12 Flood Plain Development Permit Required
167.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
1. Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Code of Iowa
Chapter 364, as amended, delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and to
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents.
2. Findings of Fact.
A. The Flood Hazard Areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
B. These flood loses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
(i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated
or otherwise protected from flooding, and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the flood plain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
3. Statement of Purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience
of its residents by minimizing these flood loses described in subsection 2, paragraph A
of this section with provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 826 -
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
167.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. “Base flood” means the flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. (See 100-year flood.)
2. “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest floor.”
3. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
4. “Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as “existing structure.”
5. “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain
management regulations.
6. “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
7. “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential use which
is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site.
For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile homes,
manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes “recreational vehicles”
which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed
for and ready for highway use.
8. “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9. “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers
or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 827 -
10. “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year
flood.
11. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both
the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
12. “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as
a result of a flood.
13. “Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood
plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
14. “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities
which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
15. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one foot.
16. “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other than the
floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17. “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in
the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or,
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
18. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 828 -
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section 167.09(4)(A) of this Code of Ordinances;
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry-walled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage;
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level;
D. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above, the
lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the
criteria above.
19. “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for filling,
grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500,000.
20. “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
21. “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.
22. “100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled
or exceeded at least once every 100 years.
23. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
24. “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the
structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
A. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
countertops, and similar finish work;
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 829 -
C. Basement ceiling;
D. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or aid
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
25. “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject to the
“100-year flood.” This land is identified as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
26. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
27. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factorybuilt
homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
28. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
29. “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% percent of the market value of the structure
either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the
structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of an “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude
the structure’s designation as an “historic structure.”
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25% percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be added to any proposed addition in
determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed
twenty-five percent.
30. “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
flood plain management regulations.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 830 -
31. “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
167.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands and uses which have significant flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Franklin County and Incorporated Areas, City of Hampton, Panels
19069C0163C, 0164C, 0168C, 0251C, 0252D, 0256C, 0275C, dated December 18, 2012,
which were prepared as part of the Franklin County Flood Insurance Study, shall be used to
identify such Flood Hazard Areas and all areas shown thereon to be within the boundaries of
the 100-Year Flood shall be considered as having significant flood hazards. Where
uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of the 100-Year Flood Boundary, the
location shall be determined on the basis of the 100-Year Flood Elevation at the particular site
in question. The Flood Insurance Study for Franklin County is hereby adopted by reference
and is made a part of this Ordinance for the purpose of administering Flood Plain Management
Regulations.
167.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on
the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The
Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
167.05 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
this chapter.
167.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
167.07 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
State statutes.
167.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards required by
this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the designated special flood hazard areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
167.09 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS. All uses must be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where 100-year flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 831 -
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make such determination.
1. All development within the special flood hazard areas shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
D. Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and
extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to
favorable consideration by the City Council, where existing topography, street grades,
or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be
adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a
means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year
flood.
3. Nonresidential buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential
buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be flood-proofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a
professional engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the
structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the
specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any
structures are flood-proofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4. All new and substantially improved structures:
A. Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 832 -
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
B. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
C. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
5. Factory-built Homes.
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities other than on-site systems shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious
to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot
above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 833 -
movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the
time available after flood warning.
8. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall provide,
at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3 feet of design
freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural
flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations
or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
10. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with
subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the
applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for
residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than
five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for
those areas located within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
11. Accessory Structures.
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a
residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level.
B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section
167.09(5) of this Code of Ordinances regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days, and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 834 -
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements
of Section 167.09(5) of this Code of Ordinances regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering.
167.10 SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS. In addition to the general Flood Plain
Standards, uses within the floodway must meet the following applicable standards. The
floodway is that portion of the Flood plain which must be protected from developmental
encroachment to allow the free flow of flood waters. Where floodway data has been provided
in the Flood Insurance Study, such data shall be used to define the floodway. Where no
floodway data has been provided, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
provide a floodway delineation. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such
determination.
1. No use shall be permitted in the floodway that would result in any increase in
the 100-Year Flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood
level shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.
2. All uses within the floodway shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage;
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of
any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or
system.
4. Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet
the applicable General Flood Plain Standards and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not
be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may
be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the time available after
flood warning.
7. Water course alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications)
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 835 -
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks
or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and
meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
167.11 ADMINISTRATION. The Zoning Administrator shall implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. Duties and
responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
1. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the
provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
2. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources
for flood plain construction.
3. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures in the special flood hazard area.
4. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which all new or substantially improved structures have
been flood-proofed.
5. Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
6. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and
correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
167.12 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A Flood Plain
Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain
development (any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.
167.13 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a Flood Plain Development
Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following
information:
1. Work To Be Done. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is to be made.
2. Location. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify
and locate the work to be done.
3. Use or Occupancy. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the
proposed work is intended.
4. Flood Elevation. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 836 -
5. Floor Elevation. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be flood-proofed.
6. Cost of Improvement. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated
cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
7. Other. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
167.14 ACTION ON APPLICATION. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time,
make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the
applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For
disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The
Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Council.
167.15 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION
AND PLANS. Flood Plain Development Permits, issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved
plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, building floor elevations,
floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
167.16 VARIANCES. The Council may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result
in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards:
1. Cause. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
2. Required To Afford Relief. Variances shall only be granted upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
3. Notice To Applicant. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of
flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that (i)
the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such
construction increases risks to life and property.
167.17 FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES
SHALL BE BASED. In passing upon applications for variances, the Council shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 837 -
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the
injury of others.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
6. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood
plain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the flood water expected at the site.
12. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
13. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
167.18 CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES. Upon consideration of the
factors listed in Section 167.17 of this Code of Ordinances, the Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
1. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
2. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and
other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural
Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purposes of
this chapter.
5. Floodproofing measures.
167.19 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 838 -
A. If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the
cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building
or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its
continued designation.
167.20 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval from the Department of
Natural Resources.
167.21 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of the requirements shall constitute a simple misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined no more than $625.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Nothing herein contained prevents the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
[The next page is 885]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 885 -
CHAPTER 169
AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
169.01 Definitions 169.08 Board of Adjustment Procedures
169.02 Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations 169.09 Powers of Board of Adjustment
169.03 Use Restrictions 169.10 Vote on Variations or Orders
169.04 Lighting 169.11 Judicial Review
169.05 Variances 169.12 Administrative Agency
169.06 Board of Adjustment Established 169.13 Conflicting Regulations
169.07 Board of Adjustment 169.14 Penalties
169.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Airport” means the Hampton Municipal Airport.
2. “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be 1,175 feet.
3. “Airport hazard” means any structure or tree or use of land which would
exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in fourteen (14) Code of
Federal Regulations Sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25 and which obstructs the airspace
required for the flight of aircraft and landing or takeoff at an airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
4. “Airport primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a
runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal
Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for
either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the
same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
5. “Airspace height” means for the purpose of determining the height limits in
all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
6. “Control zone” means airspace extending upward from the surface of the
earth which may include one or more airports and is normally a circular area of five
(5) statute miles in radius, with extensions where necessary to include instrument
approach and departure paths.
7. “Decision height” means the height at which a decision must be made, during
an ILS instrument approach, to either continue the approach or to execute a missed
approach.
8. “Instrument runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment, for
which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
9. “Minimum descent altitude” means the lowest altitude expressed in feet above
mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-toland
maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no
electronic glide slope is provided.
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 886 -
10. “Minimum en route altitude” means the altitude in effect between radio fixes
which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction
clearance requirements between those fixes.
11. “Minimum obstruction clearance altitude” means the specified altitude in
effect between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airways routes, or route segments
which meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and
which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within twenty-two (22)
miles of a VOR.
12. “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
13. “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on a FAA approved airport layout plan,
military services approved airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted
to the FAA by competent authority.
169.02 AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. In order to
carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby created and established certain zones
which are depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map. A structure located in more
than one (1) zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
1. Horizontal Zone. The land lying under a horizontal plane one hundred fifty
(150) feet above the established elevations, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the
primary surface of runways 17 and 35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. No structure shall exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet
above the established airport elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
2. Conical Zone. The land lying under a surface extending outward and upward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet to one (1)
for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. No structure shall penetrate
the conical surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height
Zoning Map.
3. Approach Zone. The land lying under the surface longitudinally centered on
the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of
the primary surface.
(Note: An approach surface is applied to each end of each runway based upon the
type of approach available or planned for that runway end.)
A. The inner edge of the approach surface is five hundred (500) feet for
runways 17 and 28.
B. The outer edge of the approach zone is two thousand (2,000) feet for
runway 17 and one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet for runway 35.
C. The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for runways 17 and 35.
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 887 -
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
4. Transitional Zone. The land lying under those surfaces extending outward
and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the sides of the primary surface and
from the sides of the approach surfaces. No structures shall exceed the transitional
surface, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
5. Increase in Elevation of Structures. No structure shall be erected in the
County that raises the published minimum descent altitude or decision height for an
instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be erected that causes the
minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased
on any Federal airway in the County.
169.03 USE RESTRICTIONS. Notwithstanding any other provisions of 169.02, no use
may be made of land or water within the City or County in such a manner as to interfere with
the operation of any airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use:
1. Lighting. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with streets, parking,
signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner
that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the Municipal Airport
or in the vicinity thereof.
2. Visual Hazards. No operation from any use shall produce smoke, glare or
other visual hazards within three (3) statute miles of any usable runway of the
Municipal Airport.
3. Electronic Interference. No operation from any use in the City or County
shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft.
169.04 LIGHTING. Notwithstanding the provisions of 169.03, the owner of any structure
over two hundred (200) feet above ground level must install on the structure lighting in
accordance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-1D and
amendments. Additionally, any structure constructed after the effective date of this chapter
and exceeding nine hundred forty-nine (949) feet above ground level, must install on that
structure high intensity white obstruction lights in accordance with Chapter 6 of FAA
Advisory Circular 7460-1D and amendments. Any permit or variance granted may be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or growth in question to permit the City or
County at its own expense to install, operate and maintain thereto such markers or lights as
may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard.
169.05 VARIANCES. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or to permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in violation of any section of this
chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for variance from such regulations. No
application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to Hampton Airport Manager
for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance. If the Airport Manager does
not respond to the Board of Adjustment within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of
the application, the Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 888 -
169.06 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created a Board
of Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
1. Appeals. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the administrative agency in the enforcement of this
chapter.
2. Special Exemptions. To hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of
this chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be
required to pass.
3. Variances. To hear and decide specific variances.
169.07 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of two (2)
members selected by the Council, two (2) members selected by the County Board of
Supervisors; and one (1) additional member to act as Chairperson and to be selected by a
majority vote of the members selected by the Council and the County Board of Supervisors.
Members are removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges, after a
public hearing. Vacancies are filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office
becomes vacant in the same manner in which the member was selected. The terms of the
members are for five (5) years, and are staggered.
169.08 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES. The Board of Adjustment shall
adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, and other official
actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the offices of the Clerk and County Auditor,
and on due cause shown.
169.09 POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment shall have
the powers established in the Code of Iowa, Section 414.12.
169.10 VOTE ON VARIATIONS OR ORDERS. The concurring vote of a majority of
the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant,
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variations of
this chapter.
169.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment, may appeal to the court of record as provided in the
Code of Iowa, Section 414.15.
169.12 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. It is the duty of the City’s Zoning Administrator
or the County Zoning Administrator, herein referred to as the administrative agency, to
administer the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the appropriate authority upon a furnished form. Applications required by this
chapter to be submitted to the administrative agency shall be promptly considered and granted
or denied. Application for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted
by the administrative agency.
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 889 -
169.13 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. Where there exists a conflict between any of
the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to
the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height of structures, the use of land, or
any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
169.14 PENALTIES. Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 890 -
[The next page is 921]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 921 -
CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
170.01 Purpose 170.09 Minimum Standards of Design and Development
170.02 Application and Jurisdiction 170.10 Inspection of Improvements
170.03 Improvements Required 170.11 Maintenance of Improvements
170.04 Definitions 170.12 Utilities
170.05 Plat Approval and Acceptance 170.13 Monumentation
170.06 Information Required in Plats 170.14 Resubdivision of Land
170.07 Attachments to Plat 170.15 Variations
170.08 Design Standards Are Minimum 170.16 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
170.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
design, development and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions so that
existing developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public
services and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare.
170.02 APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION. A subdivision plat shall be made when a
tract of land within the City limits or within two miles of the corporate limits of the City,
pursuant to Section 354.9, Code of Iowa, is subdivided by repeated divisions or simultaneous
division into three or more parcels, any of which are described by metes and bounds
description for which no plat of survey is recorded. A subdivision plat is not required when
land is divided by conveyance to a governmental agency for public improvements.
170.03 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED. The subdivider shall install and construct all
improvements required by these regulations in accordance with the specifications and under
the supervision of the Council and to its satisfaction.
170.04 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
1. “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street.
2. “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways,
or corporate boundaries.
3. “Bond” means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the
Council.
4. “Building” means any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
5. “City Engineer” means the person designated by the Council to furnish
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
6. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of Hampton,
Iowa.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 922 -
7. “Cul-de-sac” means a municipal service street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
8. “Developer” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the
owner’s agent.
9. “Easement” means a grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the
property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or
entity.
10. “Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
11. “Lot” means a tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat.
12. “Plat” means the graphical representation of the division of land or rights in
land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for right-of-way purposes
by an agency of the government or other persons having the power of eminent
domain.
13. “Proprietor” means a person who has a recorded interest in land, including a
person selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons holding a
mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
14. “Public improvement” means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement,
or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for
which local government responsibility is established.
15. “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage
of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way
hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or
areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such
right-of-way is established.
16. “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and
where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
17. “Street” means a general term used to describe a public right-of-way which
provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and may provide for
vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may also
provide space for the location of utilities (both above and below ground).
18. “Subdivider” means any person, firm, corporation, or legal entity undertaking
the subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land.
19. “Subdivision” means a tract of land divided into three or more lots.
20. “Subdivision plat” means the graphical representation of the subdivision of
land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation for
each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for the County
where the land is located.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 923 -
21. “Surveyor” means a registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 542B.
170.05 PLAT APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE. Procedures for plat approval and
acceptance are as follows:
1. Preliminary Approval by Commission. Whenever the owner of any tract or
parcel of land is required by law to secure the approval of the Commission or of the
Council to any plat or subdivision, said owner shall file said preliminary plat in
triplicate, together with any other required information, with the Clerk. Two (2)
copies of said plat and other information shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Commission for its preliminary study and approval. Such preliminary plat shall
contain such information and data as outlined in Section 170.06(1).
2. Study of Preliminary Plat by the Commission. The Commission shall study
such preliminary plat and other information submitted to see if it conforms with the
requirements of this chapter and shall approve or reject such plat and plan within
thirty (30) days after the date of the submission thereof to the Commission. The
approval of the preliminary plat and plan constitutes authorization to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat, but the final plat must be submitted to the Commission
and the Council for approval as provided in the following subsection.
3. Final Plat of Subdivision. The subdivider shall also file with the Clerk for
submission to the Commission, for its approval or rejection, the final plat and plan of
the subdivision which shall contain the data and information outlined in Section
170.06(2) of this chapter. If the Commission approves the final plat and plan, such
approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat and plan over the signatures of
both the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Commission.
4. Approval by the Council. After the approval of the final plat and plan by the
Commission, it shall be submitted to the Council for final approval and for acceptance
of all streets, alleys, easements, parks, or other areas preserved for or dedicated to the
public.
5. Approval by the Council after the Disapproval of the Commission. If the
Commission does not approve the final plat and plan of the subdivision, the Council
may approve said plat and plan and accept the streets, alleys, easements, parks, or
other areas preserved for or dedicated to the public by said plat or plan, only by a
four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire membership of the Council.
6. Filing in Office of Clerk. After approval of the final plat and plan by the
Council, two (2) copies of such final plat and plan shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk.
170.06 INFORMATION REQUIRED IN PLATS. Plat information requirements are as
follows:
1. Preliminary Plan. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale and shall
show the proposed location and width of streets, lot lines, building lines, and areas of
each proposed lot. The plan shall also show surrounding streets, lots, water courses,
sewers and water mains. The scale of such preliminary plans shall not be less than
one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet. Wherever the land is so rolling or rugged that
the preliminary location and grades of streets and sewers cannot be properly
considered without the aid of a topographical map, the Commission may require the
developer to provide a topographical map of the property showing contour intervals of
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 924 -
not less than five (5) feet. Any plan not containing all information specified above
shall not be considered by the Commission. A filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be required to cover processing costs.
2. Final Plan. The final map on a reproducible original (mylar) and two (2)
prints thereof shall be submitted to the Commission. It shall show:
A. The boundaries of the property.
B. The lines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their widths and
names, and any other areas intended to be dedicated to public use; the names
of the streets shall be a continuation of the existing method of naming streets
in the City.
C. The lines of adjoining streets and alleys, with their widths and names.
D. All lot lines, building lines, and easements, with figures showing their
dimensions.
E. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of the subdivided area or of the lots, streets, alleys, easements, and
building line setbacks, and any other similar public or private uses. The linear
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
F. Radii, arcs, and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
circulinear streets, and radii for all rounded corners.
G. All monuments, together with their description. (See Section 170.13
for details).
H. Title and description of property subdivided, showing its location and
extent, points of compass, scale of plan, classification of property under
zoning law, and name of subdivider and of registered land surveyor staking
the lots.
I. Profiles may be required of any streets.
J. Any private restrictions shall be shown on the plat or reference made
to them thereon; and plats shall contain proper acknowledgments of owners
and mortgagees accepting said platting and restrictions.
170.07 ATTACHMENTS TO PLAT. Final plats shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
1. A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is
prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds.
The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all
lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school
property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council.
2. A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is
prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. An
affidavit and bond as provided for in Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be
recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or
lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded
for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 925 -
3. An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of the
land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of
mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the
encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Utility easements
shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section.
4. A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes
and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that
the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
5. A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for signatures of
the Mayor and Clerk.
6. A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots.
7. The performance bond and maintenance bond, if any.
170.08 DESIGN STANDARDS ARE MINIMUM. The standards and details herein
contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and
layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. In the design and
development of the subdivision, however, the subdivider shall use standards consistent with
the site conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant and durable neighborhood.
170.09 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. No
preliminary or final plat or plan of a subdivision shall be approved by either the Commission
or by the Council unless it conforms to the minimum standards and requirements contained in
this chapter.
1. Acre Subdivision. Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one (1)
or more acres and there are indications that such lots will eventually be subdivided
into small building plots, consideration must be given to the street and lot arrangement
of the original subdivision so that additional streets can be opened which will permit a
logical arrangement of smaller lots.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System. The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets
in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not
subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. The width of
such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street widths
established herein. The street and alley arrangement must also be such as to cause no
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to
provide for convenient access to it. Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted halfstreet
or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley
shall be platted.
3. Streets in Relation to Railroads. When the area to be subdivided adjoins a
railroad right-of-way, no street shall be dedicated which is parallel or approximately
parallel to the railroad, unless it is one hundred (100) feet or more from the line of the
railroad right-of-way.
4. Street Right-of-way Width. The minimum width of street right-of-ways shall
be sixty-six (66) feet.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 926 -
5. Street Width. The minimum width of streets shall be thirty-one (31) feet,
except in those cases where topographical conditions, existing streets, or special
conditions make a street of less width more suitable. Under these conditions the
Commission may waive the minimum requirements.
6. Street Jogs at Intersections. At street intersections, street jogs with centerline
offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited, except
where topographic or other physical conditions make such jogs unavoidable.
7. Street Angles at Intersections. Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles
as possible, and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less than sixty (60)
degrees.
8. Dead-end Streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited except where a street is
planned to continue past the subdivider’s property. A dead-end street shall terminate
in a temporary circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of ninety (90) feet,
unless the Commission approves an equally safe and convenient space. No dead-end
street shall be longer than six hundred (600) feet in length and shall be provided with
a turn-around with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred twenty (120)
feet. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along its centerline from the turnaround
to the intersecting point.
9. Alleys. The minimum width of an alley in a residential block shall be sixteen
and one-half (16.5) feet (alleys are not recommended for residential districts except
under unusual conditions). Alleys will be required in the rear of all business lots and
shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
10. Easements Where There Are No Alleys. Where alleys are not provided,
easements of not less than five (5) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all
rear lot lines and on those side lines where necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm
and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains. Easements of greater width may be
required along lines or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers
and similar utilities.
11. Length of Blocks. No blocks shall be longer than one thousand (1,000) feet
between street lines. Blocks over seven hundred fifty (750) feet in length shall
provide a cross walk near the center of the block. The right-of-way through such
blocks shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width.
12. Width of Blocks. The width of blocks shall not be less than two hundred
(200) feet and not more than three hundred (300) feet, except that when such
requirement would entail unusual and substantial difficulties or hardship or when it is
desired to provide a development containing large residential lots, the Commission
and the Council may modify such requirements and allow the subdivider to plat
blocks of other widths.
13. Lot Lines. All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation of this rule will give a better street
and lot plan. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided.
14. Size and Shape of Lots. The minimum dimensions for lots shall be sixty-six
(66) feet for width and one hundred (100) feet for depth, and in no case shall a lot that
is to be used for residential purposes contain less area than is required by the lot area
regulation of the zoning district in which the property is located. In laying out an
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 927 -
arrangement of lots, the subdivider should, whenever possible, arrange for wide,
shallow lots and avoid long, narrow lots.
15. Corner Lots. All corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
maintenance of building lines on both the front end and side streets as required by any
applicable zoning regulations.
16. Building Lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for
residential use of any character, and on commercial lots immediately adjoining
residential areas. Such building lines shall not be less than required by any applicable
zoning regulations.
17. Character of Development. The Commission shall confer with the subdivider
regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted in the
subdivision, and may require that certain minimum deed restrictions be placed upon
the property, which restrictions would prevent such construction which would clearly
depreciate the character and value of adjoining property. The Commission may also
require that the deed restrictions provide for the creation of a property owners’
association which would be responsible for the enforcement of the restrictions and for
the protection and improvement of the general welfare of the subdivision.
18. Improvements. Before any portion of the final plat of any subdivision is
finally approved for recording, the subdivider shall make and install improvements as
required in paragraphs A – H of this subsection, in that portion of the plat which is to
be finally recorded. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before
the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may post a bond, approved by the City
Attorney, with the City, which bond will insure to the City that the improvements
(with the exception of the concrete surfacing of streets) will be completed by the
subdivider within one (1) year after final approval of the plan. The amount of the
bond shall be not less than the estimated cost of the improvements, and the amount of
the estimate must be approved by a registered engineer. If the improvements are not
completed within the specified time, the Council may use the bond or any necessary
portion thereof to complete the same.
A. Grading and Improving Streets. The subdivider shall grade and
improve all streets and alleys (if any) within the subdivision. The surfacing of
such streets and alleys shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected
traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas,
but in no case shall it consist of less than a minimum granular base of six (6)
inches of crushed rock. The street design shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer. When fifty percent (50%) of the lots within the
subdivision have sold, but not sooner than two (2) years from the installation
of utilities within the right-of-way, the subdivider shall surface or cause to be
surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said
surfacing shall be of Portland concrete with integrated curb. Adequate
provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. The design and
specifications for all road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and
structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall be approved by the City.
B. Grading and Improving Lots. The subdivider shall, whenever
necessary, grade any portion of the property subdivided into lots so that each
lot that is to be offered for sale will be usable and suitable for the erection of
residential or any structure thereon.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 928 -
C. Sanitary Sewers. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and
provide a connection for each lot. Such installations shall be in accordance
with good engineering practices, shall be shown on plans drawn by a
registered engineer and shall meet the sanitation provisions of the City,
County, State Health Department and the State Department of Natural
Resources.
D. Storm Sewers. Were deemed necessary by the Commission, the
developer shall install a storm sewer adequate to serve the platted area. The
design of the storm sewer system shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer.
E. Water Mains. The subdivider shall install water mains and fire
hydrants in the subdivided area. Such installations shall be in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the City Water Department and the
State Department of Natural Resources, and fire hydrant locations should
meet the approval of the City Water Department. The design of the water
mains shall be certified by a registered professional engineer.
F. Other Improvements. It is also desirable to install other
improvements such as sidewalks, electric lines, street lights, gas mains and
similar facilities in any subdivision. Whenever the Commission deems it
necessary, they may require that such improvements shall be installed before
the plat is approved.
G. Trees. The subdivider may plant trees in subdivisions whenever there
are no existing woodlands. In order to protect sidewalks, sewers and water
mains, the Commission may prevent the planting of trees on the parking area
and certain species that are subject to disease or pests or which may
eventually become nuisances because of the growth of their roots in the
service utilities.
H. Sump Pumps. Where storm sewers are required, all lots adjacent
thereto shall be provided with connections for sump pumps to the main prior
to approval of any plat, the inlet for which connections shall be installed on
each lot and not in the right-of-way. The location of such connections shall
be shown on either the preliminary or final plat.
The subdivider may request the Council to provide the materials necessary for the water,
sanitary sewer, and storm sewer systems within the subdivision to be developed.
170.10 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS. The Council shall provide for inspection
of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The
subdivider shall pay to the City an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits or certificates
of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivider shall furnish the Council
with a construction schedule prior to the commencement of any and all construction, and
notify the City not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of readiness for required
inspections.
170.11 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements shall be maintained and
a maintenance bond provided as follows:
1. Maintenance of Improvements Before Acceptance. The subdivider shall be
required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 929 -
for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of said
improvements by the Council. If there are any residents of the subdivision residing on
a street not dedicated to the City, the City may on twelve (12) hours’ notice plow the
street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to subdivider.
2. Maintenance Bond. The subdivider shall be required to file a maintenance
bond with the governing body, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate
by the Council and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure the
satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of two (2) years after
the date of their acceptance by the governing body and dedication of same to the City.
170.12 UTILITIES. The following shall apply to the provision of utilities:
1. Location. The Council may require that all utility facilities, including, but not
limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, be located underground
throughout the subdivision. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the
subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections
to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider’s
expense. At the discretion of the Council, the requirement for service connections to
each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership
and intended to be developed for the same primary use.
2. Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
A. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities.
Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Proper coordination shall
be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for
the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties.
B. Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along
side lot lines with satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
170.13 MONUMENTATION. Monuments shall be in conformance with the following
requirements:
1. The surveyor shall confirm the prior establishment of control monuments at
each controlling corner on the boundaries of the parcel or tract of land being surveyed.
If no control monuments exist, the surveyor shall place the monuments. Control
monuments shall be constructed of reasonably permanent material solidly embedded
in the ground and capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic or electronic
equipment. The surveyor shall affix a cap of reasonably inert material bearing an
embossed or stencil cut marking of the Iowa registration number of the surveyor to the
top of each monument which the surveyor places.
2. Control monuments shall be placed at the following locations:
A. Each corner and angle point of each lot, block, or parcel of land
surveyed.
B. Each point of intersection of the outer boundary of the survey with an
existing or created right-of-way line of a street, railroad, or other way.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 930 -
C. Each point of curve, tangency, reversed curve, or compounded curve
on each right-of-way line established.
3. If the placement of a monument required by this section at the prescribed
location is impractical, a reference monument shall be established near the prescribed
location. If a point requiring monumentation has been previously monumented, the
existence of the monument shall be confirmed by the surveyor.
4. At least a minimum number of two survey control monuments are required to
be placed before the recording of a subdivision provided the surveyor includes in the
surveyor’s statement a declaration that additional monuments shall be placed before a
date specified in the statement or within one year from the date the subdivision is
recorded, whichever is earlier.
170.14 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND. The following requirements shall govern the
resubdividing of land.
1. Procedure for Resubdividing. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map,
or area reserved for public use indicated on the map, or any lot line, or if it affects any
map or plan legally established prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the same procedure, rules, and
regulations as for a subdivision.
2. Acreage Lots. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision
plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites,
the Commission and Council may require that such parcel of land allow for future
opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing
for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the
plat.
170.15 VARIATIONS. Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or
shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of
this chapter would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships, the Commission may
vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop the property in
a reasonable manner, but at the same time the public welfare and interests of the City are
protected and the general intent and spirit of this chapter are preserved.
170.16 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. No plat or subdivision
within the City or within two (2) miles thereof shall be filed or recorded with the County, nor
shall any plat or subdivision have any validity until it complies with the provision of these
regulations, has been approved by the Council as herein set forth, and further:
1. Building Permits. The City shall not issue building or repair permits for any
structure located on a lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared after
the date of the adoption of this Code of Ordinances but which has not been approved
in accordance with the provisions contained herein. An original tract may be divided
into two (2) lots or tracts and not be subject to the provisions of this section. If an
original tract shall be divided into more than two (2) lots or tracts after the date of the
adoption of this Code of Ordinances, no building or repair permits shall be issued for
any structure located or proposed to be located on any of such tracts or lots, unless or
until a plat as required by this chapter has been fully approved by the Council.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 931 -
2. Public Improvements. The Council shall not permit any public improvement
over which it has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in
any area that has been subdivided or upon any street that has been platted after the
date of the adoption of this Code of Ordinances unless such subdivision or street has
been approved in accordance with the provisions contained therein.
3. Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter may, in
addition to other sanctions or remedies available, be cited for a municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 932 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-i-
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1 - CODE OF ORDINANCES ........................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER 2 - CHARTER ..................................................................................................................... 9
CHAPTER 3 - BOUNDARIES ............................................................................................................ 11
CHAPTER 4 - MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS .................................................................................. 15
CHAPTER 5 - OPERATING PROCEDURES .................................................................................. 21
CHAPTER 6 - CITY ELECTIONS .................................................................................................... 29
CHAPTER 7 - FISCAL MANAGEMENT ......................................................................................... 35
CHAPTER 8 - INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS .................................................. 45
CHAPTER 9 - URBAN RENEWAL ................................................................................................... 49
CHAPTER 10 - URBAN REVITALIZATION .................................................................................. 55
CHAPTER 11 - SPECULATIVE BUILDING PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION.......................... 57
ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 15 - MAYOR ..................................................................................................................... 71
CHAPTER 16 - MAYOR PRO TEM .................................................................................................. 75
CHAPTER 17 - CITY COUNCIL ....................................................................................................... 77
CHAPTER 18 - CITY CLERK ........................................................................................................... 83
CHAPTER 19 - CITY TREASURER ................................................................................................. 87
CHAPTER 20 - CITY ATTORNEY ................................................................................................... 89
CHAPTER 21 - CITY MANAGER ..................................................................................................... 91
CHAPTER 22 - LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES ..................................................................... 101
CHAPTER 23 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ....................................................... 105
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-ii-
ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (continued)
CHAPTER 24 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ................................................... 107
CHAPTER 25 - MUNICIPAL COMMUNICATIONS UTILITY .................................................. 111
POLICE, FIRE AND EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 30 - POLICE DEPARTMENT ....................................................................................... 135
CHAPTER 31 - RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS ............................................................................. 141
CHAPTER 35 - FIRE DEPARTMENT ............................................................................................ 145
CHAPTER 36 - FIRE SERVICE FEES ............................................................................................ 149
CHAPTER 37 - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS .................................................................. 155
PUBLIC OFFENSES
CHAPTER 40 - PUBLIC PEACE ...................................................................................................... 185
CHAPTER 41 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ........................................................................ 189
CHAPTER 42 - PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY ................................................................. 193
CHAPTER 43 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA .................................................................................... 197
CHAPTER 45 - ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION ....................................... 225
CHAPTER 46 - MINORS ................................................................................................................... 229
CHAPTER 47 - PARK REGULATIONS .......................................................................................... 231
CHAPTER 48 - EXPLOSIVES .......................................................................................................... 233
NUISANCES AND ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 50 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE .......................................................... 241
CHAPTER 51 - JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES ............................................................................. 251
CHAPTER 55 - ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL ........................................................ 265
CHAPTER 56 - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS .......................................................... 271
CHAPTER 57 - DOG AND CAT LICENSES REQUIRED ............................................................ 277
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-iii-
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 60 - ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE ......................................................... 285
CHAPTER 61 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ......................................................................... 289
CHAPTER 62 - GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS .............................................................. 291
CHAPTER 63 - SPEED REGULATIONS ....................................................................................... 301
CHAPTER 64 - TURNING REGULATIONS ................................................................................. 305
CHAPTER 65 - STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED ............................................................................. 307
CHAPTER 66 - LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ............................................................ 321
CHAPTER 67 - PEDESTRIANS ....................................................................................................... 323
CHAPTER 68 - ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ............................................................................................ 325
CHAPTER 69 - PARKING REGULATIONS ................................................................................. 327
CHAPTER 70 - TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES ........................................ 341
CHAPTER 75 - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES ........................................ 351
CHAPTER 76 - BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS ................................................... 355
CHAPTER 77 - BICYCLE LICENSING ......................................................................................... 359
CHAPTER 78 - ROLLING PRAIRIE TRAIL REGULATIONS .................................................. 361
CHAPTER 80 - ABANDONED VEHICLES ................................................................................... 375
CHAPTER 81 - RAILROAD REGULATIONS .............................................................................. 379
WATER
CHAPTER 90 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM ............................................................................... 395
CHAPTER 91 - WATER METERS .................................................................................................. 405
CHAPTER 92 - WATER RATES ..................................................................................................... 407
CHAPTER 93 - PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS .................................................... 411
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-iv-
SANITARY SEWER
CHAPTER 95 - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM .............................................................................. 431
CHAPTER 96 - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS ..................................................... 435
CHAPTER 97 - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS ................................................................................... 441
CHAPTER 98 - ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS ................................................................. 445
CHAPTER 99 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.............................................................................. 447
GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 105 - SOLID WASTE CONTROL ................................................................................ 461
CHAPTER 106 - COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE ................................................................... 467
FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES
CHAPTER 110 - NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE ............................................................................ 485
CHAPTER 111 - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE- MID AMERICAN ENGERY ................................ 489
CHAPTER 112 - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE - FRANKLIN
RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE .......................................................... 493
CHAPTER 113 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS.......................... 497
CHAPTER 115 - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ...................................................................................... 551
CHAPTER 116 - CEMETERY .......................................................................................................... 553
REGULATION OF BUSINESS AND VOCATIONS
CHAPTER 120 - LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS .............................. 575
CHAPTER 121 - CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS ........................................................ 579
CHAPTER 122 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS ..................... 583
CHAPTER 123 - HOUSE MOVERS ................................................................................................. 591
CHAPTER 125 - LICENSING OF TREE SERVICE PROFESSIONALS .................................... 595
CHAPTER 126 - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS ........................... 601
CHAPTER 127 - HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX ................................................................................ 605
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-v-
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 135 - STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE ............................................................... 625
CHAPTER 136 - SIDEWALK REGULATIONS ............................................................................ 631
CHAPTER 137 - VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS ................................................... 637
CHAPTER 138 - STREET GRADES ............................................................................................... 639
CHAPTER 139 - NAMING OF STREETS ...................................................................................... 641
CHAPTER 140 - CURB CUTS .......................................................................................................... 643
BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 146 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES ................................................... 679
CHAPTER 147 - FIRE ZONE ........................................................................................................... 685
CHAPTER 148 - SEPARATION DISTANCES FROM MUNICIPAL WELLS .......................... 687
CHAPTER 149 - PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS .......................................... 691
CHAPTER 150 - BUILDING NUMBERING .................................................................................. 705
CHAPTER 151 - TREES ................................................................................................................... 707
CHAPTER 152 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ............................ 715
CHAPTER 153 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ............................................................. 725
CHAPTER 154 - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ...................................................... 735
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 165 - ZONING REGULATIONS .................................................................................. 775
CHAPTER 167 - ZONING REGULATIONS – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT .................... 825
CHAPTER 169 - AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS ........................................................... 885
CHAPTER 170 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ........................................................................ 921
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
-vi-
INDEX
APPENDIX:
USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES .................................................... 1
SUGGESTED FORMS:
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - FIRST NOTICE................................................................................... 7
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - NOTICE OF HEARING ..................................................................... 8
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - RESOLUTION AND ORDER............................................................ 9
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE ...................................................................................................... 11
NOTICE OF REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION ......................................................................... 12
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION .............................................. 13
RESOLUTION AND ORDER ............................................................................................................. 14
SIDEWALK DEFECTS REQUIRING A NOTICE ........................................................................... 16
MAIN STREET HAMPTON DISTRICT ........................................................................................... 17
NOTICE OF REQUIRED WATER CONNECTION ........................................................................ 18
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REQUIRED WATER CONNECTION ............................................. 19
RESOLUTION AND ORDER – REQUIRED WATER CONNECTION ........................................ 20

ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 165 - ZONING REGULATIONS .................................................................................... 775
CHAPTER 167 -WNING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ..................... 825
CHAPTER 169 - AIRPORT HEIGHT REQlJIREMENTS ............................................................. 885
CHAPTER 170 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ......................................................................... 921
CHAPTER165
ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 775 -
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULA TTONS
EDITOR'S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
and have not been included as a part of this Code of Ordinances but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ORDINANCE NO.
259
262
266
269
272
273
291
301
312
333
362
May 13, 2003
November 25, 2003
February 24, 2004
June 8, 2004
June 22, 2004
September 28, 2004
May 9, 2006
August 28, 2007
June 9, 2009
June 26, 2012
January 14, 2016
[The next page is 825]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 776 -
DATE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - SHORT TITLE AND JlJRISDICTION .................................................................. 5
ARTICLE 2 - INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS ............................................................ 6
ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................... 7
A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES ..................... 20
B GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES ................... 21
C GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES ....................... 26
D GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CMC USE TYPES .................................... 27
ARTICLE 4 - DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................ 30
BOUNDARIES, OFFICIAL MAP, GENERAL REGULATIONS ....................... 31
ARTICLE 5 - AGRICULTURAL (A-1) DISTRICT ...................................................................... 34
ARTICLE 6 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT .......................................... 36
ARTICLE 7 - TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT ............................................... 39
ARTICLE 8 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) DISTRICT ........................................... .42
ARTICLE 9 - MOBILE HOME (M-11) DISTRICT ....................................................................... 45
ARTICLE 10 - DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT ................................................ 50
ARTICLE 11 - ARTERIAL TRANSITIONAL (AT) DISTRICT ................................................... 53
ARTICLE 12 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (1-1) DISTRICT ................................................................. 56
ARTICLE 12b- RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL (RIC) DISTRICT .................... 58.l
ARTICLE 13 - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (1-2) DISTRICT ................................................................ 59
ARTICLE 14 - FLOODPLAIN I GREENSPACE (F-G) DISTRICT ............................................. 62
ARTICLE 15 - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS .......................................................................... 63
2
ARTICLE 16 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENT •....•.•.•........ 75
ARTICLE 17 SIGNS AND AWNINGS REGULATIONS ......................•...........•................ 80
ARTICLE 18 CONDITIONAL USES .................................................................................... 90
ARTICLE 19 NONCONFORMING USES-............................................................................ 93
ARTICLE 20 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................. 96
ARTICLE 21 VIOLATION AND PENALTY ....................................................................... 97
ARTICLE 22 BOARD OF ADJlJSTMENT ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••.••• 98
ARTICLE 23 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS ............................................... 101
ARTICLE 1
SHORT TITLE AND JURISDICTION
Section 1. SHORT TITLE. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as
the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton, Iowa", to the same effect as if the full title were
stated.
Section 2. JURISDICTION. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa and amendatory acts thereto, this Ordinance is adopted by the City of Hampton, Iowa,
governing the zoning of all lands within the corporate limits of the City.
5
( ARTICLE 2
INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS
Section 1. INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this Ordinance imposes greater
restrictions than is imposed or required by oth~r provisions of law or other rules or regulations or
ordinances, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
6
ARTICLE 3
DEFINITIONS
Section 1. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of interpreting this Code, certain words, terms and
expressions are herein defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular;
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory; the word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation as well as an individual; the words "used" or "occupied" include the
words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied; and the word "he" includes the
word she.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: (see Building, Accessory)
ACCESSORY USE: A use on the same lot with, and or a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use.
AGRICULTURE: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products, such as
vegetables, fruit, trees and grain and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising, feeding
or breeding thereon the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep and
swine. "Farming" includes the operating of such an area for one or more or the above uses,
including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, that the operation of such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal farming activities, and provided further, that farming does not include large scale
commercial feeding of livestock.
ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
ALTERATIONS. STRUCTURAL: Any change in the load-bearing members of a building, such
as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders. The enlargements of the size or height of
a building shall be construed to be a structural alteration.
APARTMENT: A single room or set or rooms occupied as a dwelling which is part or a multifamily
structure.
AUTO LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed
commercially, or equipment is rented for the same purpose.
AUTOMOBILE SALES ROOM: A building or portion thereof, where automobiles and vehicles
are sold by a franchised dealer either with or without storage, parts sales, and repair facilities
providing all such repair activities are enclosed within a structure.
BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than one-half (Y2) of its height below grade as
measured at the front of the structure. A basement is counted as a story for the purposes of
height regulations.
7
BED AND BREAKFAST HOME: A structure containing a single dwelling unit, which provides
lodging and meals for overnight guests only, in which no more than five (5) sleeping rooms are
available for guests and is the principal residence (as defined in the Internal Revenue Code) of a
person owning not less than 30 percent of the fee title to the property. Each sleeping room in a
bed and breakfast home shall be at least one hundred forty (140) square feet in area.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A structure ,containing a single dwelling unit with a full-time
resident owner or resident manager which provides lodging and meals for overnight guests only
and has no more than nine (9) sleeping rooms available. Each sleeping room shall be at least one
hundred forty (140) square feet in area.
BILLBOARD: "Billboard" as used in this Ordinance shall include all structures, regardless of
the material used in the construction of the same that are erected, maintained or used for public
display of posters, painted signs, or wall signs, whether the structure be placed on the wall or
painted itself, pictures or other pictorial reading material which advertise a business or attraction
which is not carried on, manufactured, grown or sold on the premises where said signs or bill
boards are located.
BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street, and lying within the two nearest
intercepting or intersecting streets or lying within the nearest intercepting or intersecting streets
and unsubdivided acreage or railroad right-of-way.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals, or lodging
and meals are provided for six (6) or more persons, not to exceed ten ( 10) persons; and is not
open to transient guests.
BUILDING: A building that is completely enclosed by a roof and by a solid exterior wall along
whose outside faces constitute a minimum of three (3) sides of the structure, which is
permanently affixed to a lot or lots, and used or intended for the shelter, support, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property of any kind.
The connection of two buildings by means of an enclosed porch, enclosed breezeway, enclosed
passageway, enclosed carport, or other such enclosed structures, with a roof, shall make them
one building. Such structures attached to the principal building shall be deemed a part of the
principal building.
BUILD ABLE AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
BUILDING. ACCESSORY: A building which is subordinate to the main building on the lot, not
attached thereto and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main building.
Private garages are accessory buildings.
BUILDING. HEIGHT OF: The perpendicular distance measured in a straight line from the curb
level to the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs, and to the average of the
height of the roof in the case of pitched roofs; the measurement in all cases to be taken through
the center of the front of the house. Where a dwelling is situated on ground above the curb level
8
such height shall be measured from the level of the adjoining ground. Where a dwelling is on a
comer lot and there is more than one grade or level, the measurements shall be taken from the
main entrance elevation.
BUILDING LINE: The setback distance from the front property line, rear lot line, and side lot
lines as provided in this Code.
BUILDING. PRINCIPAL: The principal building is a nonaccessory building m which a
principal use of the lot, on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING WALL: The wall of a building forming a part of the main structure. The foundation
walls of unenclosed porches, steps, walks and retaining wall or similar structures, shall not be
considered as building walls under the provisions of this Code.
BUSINESS: The word "business" or "commercial" when used herein refers to the engaging in
the purchase, sale or exchange of goods or services, or the operation for profit of offices or
recreational amusement enterprises.
CARPORT: Space for the housing or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than
two (2) sides by walls, and is attached to and considered a story for the purpose of this
Ordinance.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height of all walls below the highest
level of the a~joining ground. A cellar shall not be considered as a story for the purpose of this
Code.
CENTERLINE: The true centerline of a street which has been fully dedicated to its required
width. Where all of the required width .of public right-of-way has not been dedicated or such
public right-of -way exists in an offset or angular manner, the city engineer shall determine the
alignment of the centerline.
CITY: City of Hampton, Iowa.
CLINIC: An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for
examination and treatment by physicians or dentists practicing medicine together.
CLUB OR LODGE (PRIVATE): An association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit
object, who are bonafied members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building,
or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall
be permissible to serve food and meals to members and their guests on such premises provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available and are operated in compliance
with state and municipal laws.
COMMISSION: The Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission.
COUNCIL: The Hampton City Council.
9
CONDOMINIUM: A multi-family dwelling or townhouse as defined herein where the fee title
to each dwelling is held independently of the others and title to common areas is held jointly by
dwelling unit title holders.
DAY NURSERY OR NURSERY SCHOOL: Any private agency, institution, establishment or
place which provides, for compensation, supplemental parental care and/or educational work,
other than overnight lodging, for six (6) or more unrelated children of preschool age.
DECK: A non-roofed structure open on two (2) or more sides projecting from the side or rear
wall of a building.
DETACHED: Fully separated from any other structure; not attached.
DRIVEWAY: An area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or
loading area.
DISTRICT: Any part or parts of Hampton, Iowa, wherein regulations of this Ordinance are
uniform.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used primarily for residential
purposes but not including a tent or trailer. All structures intended to be used as dwellings for
residential occupancy placed, erected, assembled or constructed in the City after the effective
date of this Cpapter shall meet and comply with the minimum requirements set out below.
Structure Size: Each such structure shall have a "main body" with a minimum exterior
dimension of at least twenty two (22) feet measured from the outside of the exterior
walls.
Minimum Floor Area: Each structure should have a minimum floor area of not less than
eight hundred (800) square feet. (In order to comply with the provisions of the foregoing
section, the minimum exterior dimensions of a residential structure shall not be less than
22 feet by 36Yz feet. A structure may include porches, sun rooms, garages and "wings" of
lesser dimensions and area, so long as the "main body" meets the minimum
requirements).
Foundation: All residential structures shall have a continuous and complete frost
protected perimeter foundation, except that a perimeter foundation shall not be required
for a manufactured home if a perimeter foundation is incompatible with the structural
design of the manufactured home. For such a manufactured home, a permanent
foundation may be a pier footing foundation system designed and constructed to be
compatible with the structure and the conditions of the site. Foundation materials may be
masonry, poured concrete, wood or metal and must extend below the normal frost line.
The structure must be permanently attached to the foundation.
lO
Exterior Wall and Roof Material:
1. Exterior wall covering shall be wood or masonry finish; vertical or horizontal
grooved siding or lap siding, or the appearance thereof.
2. Roofing materials shall be shingles (asphalt, fiberglass, or wood), slate, ceramic,
concrete, or metal of a type customarily used for residential roofing materials, such as
"standing seam" or embossed or textured metal.
3. Smooth, unfinished or corrugated metal or fiberglass shall not be used for exterior
wall or roof covering.
4. Soffits, eaves, window and door trim, roofs and coverings over bay and bow
windows and doors bay be smooth finished metal, vinyl or wood or unfinished metal,
such as copper, customarily used for residential structure trim.
Ceiling Height: A minimum finished interior ceiling height of not less than seven and
one-half (7lh) feet is required.
Entrance and Exit Doors: Not less than two (2) functional entrance and exit doors shall
be provided.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A residence designed for the occupancy by three (3) or more
families with housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
DWELLING. SINGLE FAMILY: A detached residence designed for or occupied by one (1)
family only and having no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY: A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families with
separate entrances, housekeeping, and cooking facilities for each.
DWELLING, UNIT: A room or group of rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living
quarters for the occupancy of one (1) family and contain independent cooking facilities for the
family.
ENGINEER CJTY: A duly qualified individual or firm designated by the City Council.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by developers,
public utilities, or governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, telephone, television,
electrical, wastewater, water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and
other similar equipment and in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for public health or safety
or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EXPLOSIV S: Any substance able or likely to explode, but excluding farm chemicals and
fertilizer.
11
FAMILY: A group of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption and not more than
three (3) unrelated individuals living together and occupying a dwelling unit; a group of not
more than five (5) unrelated persons living together by joint agreement; the residents of an elder
family home as defined in Section 231A.2 of the Iowa Code; or residents of a family home as
defined in Section 414.22( 4)( c) of the Iowa Code. Only one family may reside in any dwelling
unit.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables,
fruits and grains and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals. The term farming includes the operating of such area for one (1) or
more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce,
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal farming activity and such accessory uses do not include the feeding of animals or poultry
in confined lots or buildings.
FEEDLOT: A commercial venture under corporate partnership, or individual ownership
involving the assemblage of livestock for the express purpose of preparation for market in the
least time possible, purchasing over seventy-five percent (75%) of its feed, and typified by rapid
turnover of livestock; the absence of dwelling unit or structure for housing livestock, and
presence of other uses normally associated with a farm.
FENCE: Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected
to enclose or screen areas of land.
FIREARMS: Rifles, pistols or other portable gun.
FIREWORKS: Any device containing specific chemicals that are known to produce spectacular
effects and explosions, and includes, but is not limited to, "sparklers," "snakes," pop bottle or
other devices that launch to provide a "sky display," "firecrackers," or any other device
containing combustible chemicals ignited to produce explosions or spectacular effects.
FLOOR AREA: The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls, including the
total of all space on all floors of a building. Floor area shall not include porches, garages or
space in a basement or cellar.
RONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing
or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, than all of the
property abutting one ( 1) side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. The
front of a double fronted lot shall face the street upon which the lot will be addressed.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of a building and/or used only for the
shelter or storage of vehicles by the occupants of the premises or the leasing of space as provided
therein, including covered parking space or carport.
GARAGE, COMMERCJAL: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage
garage, operated for commercial purposes and/or designed, intended or used for the equipping,
servicing, selling, hiring, storing, care or repair of motor vehicles.
12
GASOLINE SERVJCE STATION: Any building or premises used for the retail sale of
automotive fuels, oils and other items customarily associated with the sale of such products, but
not for the purpose of making other than minor repairs. When the dispensing, retail sale or
offering for retail sale is incidental to the conduct of a commercial garage, the premises shall be
classified as a commercial garage.
GRADE: The average level of finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building except when any wall approximately parallels and is not more than five (5) feet from a street
line, then the elevation of the centerline of the street at the center of the wall adjoining the street shall
be grade.
HOBBY LIVESTOCK: Livestock limited to Equine or Bovine species raised and maintained
principally for pleasure and/or recreation purposes excluding Poultry, Fowl, Swine, or the
assemblage of livestock for the express purpose of preparation for market.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a customary,
incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of
the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. Home occupations:
A. Are customarily carried on in a dwelling unit, and;
B. Are carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
C. Are clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential
purposes, and;
D. Does not employ more than one (1) person outside the immediate family, and;
E. Has no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior
indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal
building, other than one (1) exterior sign, mounted flush with the exterior of the building,
which sign shall not exceed 2 foot by 2 foot (2' x 2') in area, and shall not have flashing
lights, and;
F. Does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of one (1) floor of the
dwelling unit, and;
G. Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare rendering
such building or premises objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of the
neighborhood, and;
H. Does not generate traffic in sufficiently greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential area.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging, are provided and offered to the
public as more or less a temporary abiding place of individuals for compensation and which is open
to a transient guest provided no provisions have been made for cooking in any individual room in
contradistinction to a boarding house or lodging house as herein defined.
INSTITUTION: A building or premises occupied by a nonprofit corporation or establishment for
public use.
13
JUNK YARD OR SALVAGE YARD: Any open area of any lot or parcel where discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, kept, stored, or
handled, including scrap metals or scrap materials, or the abandonment or dismantling of machinery,
motor vehicles, or parts thereof. A solid waste transfer station is not considered a junk yard or
salvage yard for purposes of this ordinance.
JUNK VEHICLE OR JUNK MACHINERY: Any vehicle or portion thereof not in running
condition and/or not licensed for the current year as provided by law and not legally placed in
storage with the treasurer of Franklin County, or any vehicle or machinery, which because of its
defective or obsolete condition, or rotted, rusted or loose parts, or in any other way constitutes a
threat to the public health or safety.
KENNEL: An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household
pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals is conducted as a
business, in which four ( 4) or more domestic animals or pets, at least four months of age, are
harbored.
KENNEL, PRIVATE: Any building or buildings or land designed or arranged for the care of
dogs and cats belonging to the owner of the principal use, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or
as pets.
LOADING SPACE: An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle m
connection with the use of the site on which such space is located.
LODGING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation, lodging is
provided for six ( 6) or more people.
LOT: A parcel ofland under one (1) ownership on which a principal building and its accessories
are, or may be placed, together with the required open spaces, having its frontage upon one (1) or
more dedicated streets.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, but
excluding any portion of a flag (panhandle) lot providing access to a street and excluding any
public or private easement or right-of-way providing access to another lot.
LOT CORNER: the lot fronting on two (2) intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE OR BUILDING COVERAGE: The area of a lot covered by buildings or
ground level paving, but excluding incidental projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features
and excluding landscaping and open recreational facilities.
LO , INTERIOR: A lot other than a comer lot.
LOT LINES : The lines bounding a lot.
14
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot abutting on only one street, the "front lot line"
is the street line of such street. In the case of any other lot, it may be such street line as is
selected by the owner as the "front lot line" for the purpose of this Code, provided that the
principal entrance to such building shall be on the street so selected.
LOT LINE. REAR: That boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary line not a front line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a legal subdivision of the City of Hampton, Iowa, the
plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Hancock County, Iowa,
or a lot or parcel of land, the deed or valid contract of sale which was recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Hancock County, Iowa, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
LOT. THROUGH: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel
streets and also known as a double fronted lot.
LOT, WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines. In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the
mean width shall be the lot width.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: As defined by Section 435.1(1) of the Code of
Iowa; Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its
being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed,
or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but shall also include and such vehicle with motive power not registered as a
motor vehicle. A mobile home shall not be considered a dwelling unless converted to real
property as described in Section 435.26 of the Code oflowa.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME CONVERTED TO REAL ESTATE: An
unencumbered mobile home which has been attached to a permanent foundation on real estate
owned by the mobile home owner and entered on the tax roles of the county.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which two (2) or more occupied manufactured or mobile homes are parked and connected to
utilities, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any buildings, structure,
tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home
park.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed according
to the Hampton Subdivision Regulations, and is designed only for the location of manufactured
or mobile homes on lots owned by the manufactured or mobile home owner.
MINI STORAGE: Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within
enclosed storage areas having individual access. Typical uses include mini warehousing, also
referred to as convenience storage or personal storage.
15
MODULAR HOME: A Modular Home as defined in Section 435.1(3) of the Code of Iowa is
defined as a factory-built structure which is manufactured or constructed to be used as a place for
human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other
device allowing it to be attached or towed behind a motor vehicle, and which does not have
permanently attached to the body or frame any wheels or axles.
MOTEL: A permanent building or group of buildings so arranged or designed primarily for
temporary occupancy, so laid out as to provide space for parking vehicles used by the traveling
public. Such building or group of buildings may include living quarters for the use of operating
personnel.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawful use of any land, building, or structure, other than a sign,
that does not conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complied with use
regulations in effect at the time the use was established.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A building or structure having accommodations
and where care is provided for invalid, infirmed, aged, convalescent, or physically disabled or
injured persons in which three (3) or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept
and provided with food and shelter for compensation. This shall not include insane, mental
cases, inebriate or contagious cases.
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING FACILITY: An area on a lot or within a building, or both, including one or more
parking spaces together with driveways, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, clearances, and
similar features, and meeting the requirements established by this Ordinance. The term "parking
facility" shall ·include parking lots, garages, and parking structures.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, having an area of not less than
two hundred (200) square feet plus necessary maneuvering space for the parking of a motor
vehicle, and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords satisfactory
ingress and egress for automobiles. Space for maneuvering, incidental to parking or unparking,
shall not encroach upon any public right-of-way.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use ofland or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Any building or part thereof used by one (1) or more persons
engaged in the practice of law, accounting, architecture, medicine, engineering or other
occupation customarily considered as a profession.
PUBLIC WAY: An open or unoccupied public space more than thirty feet (3 O') in width which
is permanently reserved for the purpose of access to abutting property.
PORCH, OP N: A roofed structure, open on two (2) or more sides, projecting from the front,
side or rear wall of the building.
16
PUBLIC NOTICE: The publication of the time and place of any public hearing not less than
four ( 4) days and not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of said hearing in one
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
RETAIL STORE: An enterprise offering for sale to the ultimate consumer for direct
consumption and not for resale.
ROAD OR STREET LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous road, street or alley.
ROAD JDE STAND: A temporary structure, unenclosed, and so designed and constructed so
the structure is easily portable or can be readily moved, and which is adjacent to a road and used
for a sale of farm products produced or grown on the premises.
SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNA: An accessory structure often called a "dish" or "earth
station antenna" the purpose of which is to receive communication, including but not limited to
radio and television or other signals from satellite and other extraterrestrial sources whether
affixed to the ground as a permanent structure or a mo bile unit such as a trailer or vehicle.
SIGN: An identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to a product,
place, activity, persons, institution or business; provided, however that the following shall not be
included in the application of the regulations herein:
A. Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area bearing only property numbers,
post box numbers, names of occupants of the premises or other identification of premises
or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations;
B. Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with
commercial promotion;
C. Legal notices: identification, informational, or directional signs erected or
required by government bodies;
D. Integral decoration or architectural features of buildings, except letters,
trademarks, moving parts, moving lights;
E. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
advertising matter.
SIGN AREA: The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a
regular geometric form or combination of such forms comprising all of the display area of the
sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members
not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area.
SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, all of
the buildings, structures and uses, and principal site development features including parking,
access, and landscaping and screening, proposed for a specific parcel of land.
17
ST ABLE: Detached accessory structure including, but not limited to a corral or paddock for the
keeping of one ( 1) or more hoofed animals owned or controlled by the occupants of the premises
and which are kept for pets, board, propagation, ~ale or lease.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement will be considered a story if it is
used for dwelling purposes.
STREET. LINE: The right of way line of a street, road or highway.
STREET. PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare more than twenty-four feet (24') in width.
STREET. WALL: The wall of the building nearest the street under consideration.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any replacement or changes in the type of construction or in
the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, beyond ordinary.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached
to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include
buildings, mobile homes, billboards, decks, poster panels, and carports. Attached uncovered
steps and planters are not considered a structure.
STRUCTuRE. ACCESSORY: A subordinate structure customarily incidental to the main
structure or building and located on the same lot therewith, e.g., satellite dishes, radio and
television towers, masts and aerials, swimming pools, solar energy collectors, etc.
TEA HOUSE: A public house or restaurant where tea, light refreshments, and limited menu
meals are served, generally during midday.
TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjoining
dwelling units in a townhouse group.
TRAILER CAMP OR TOURIST GROUND: Any area providing spaces for two (2) or more
travel trailers, camping trailers, or tent sites for temporary occupancy with necessary incidental
services, sanitation and recreation facilities to serve the traveling public.
USE: The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a
structure.
1. Accessory Use: A use or activity which is incidental to and customarily associated
with a specific principal use on the same site.
2. Principal Use: A use which is a primary function of a lot or structure.
18
3. Permitted Use: Any use defined by the individual district and listed by the regulations
for any particular district as a permitted use within that zone, and permitted therein as a
matter of right when conducted in accordance with the regulations established by this
Ordinance.
4. Conditional Use: Any use defined by the individual district and listed by the
regulations for any particular district as a conditional use within that district and
allowable therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional basis subject to a Conditional
Use Permit, and to all other regulations established by this Ordinance.
UTILITY. PUBLIC: A utility owned and operated by the City of Hampton, Iowa.
VALUATION: The one hundred percent (100%) valuation of a building or structure, as
determined by the Franklin County Assessor.
V ARJANCE: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where owning to conditions peculiar to the
property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this Ordinance, a variance is
authorized only for height, area and size of structure, or size of yards and open spaces.
Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance nor
shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformity's in the zoning district or
uses in adjoining zoning districts.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building or structure unoccupied and unobstructed
by any portion of a structure from twenty-four (24) inches above the general ground level of the
graded lot upward. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard,
the least distance between the lot line and the nearest permitted building shall be used. A yard
shall be measured exclusive of any public right-of-way.
YARD. FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the
front lot line and the building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual
steps and eaves. In the case of corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as the yard adjacent
to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear
lot line and the structure or any projections other than uncovered steps, balconies or eaves. On
both corner lots and interior lots the opposite end of the lot from the front yard shall be
considered the rear yard.
YARD. SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the
side lot lines and nearest building.
ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The individual(s) appointed by the City Council of
Hampton, Iowa to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
19
ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT OR ZONING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Zoning
Administrative Officer, authorizing the use of land in the manner and for the purpose specified in
the application.
Section 2. USE CLASSIFICATIONS. The purpose of the Use Classifications shall be to
provide a consistent set of terms encompas~ing and defining uses permitted or specifically
permitted in the various districts, and to provide a procedure for determination of the applicable
use classification of any activity not clearly within any defined use classification.
In the event of any question as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or proposed
use or activity, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authorization to determine the
appropriate classification, subject to the right of appeal pursuant to Article 20. In making such
determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in
question, and shall consider any functional, product, service, or physical facility requirements
common with or similar to uses cited as examples of use classifications.
A. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES: Residential use types
include the occupancy of living accommodations on a wholly or primarily non-transient basis but
exclude institutional living arrangements involving those providing twenty-four (24) hour skilled
nursing or medical care and those providing forced residence, such as asylums and prisons.
1. Single Family Re-sidential: The use of a site for only one dwelling unit.
2. Duplex Residential: The use of a site for two (2) dwelling units within a single building.
3. Two Family Residential: The use of a site for two (2) dwelling units, each in a separate
building._
4. Townhouse Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more townhouse dwelling units,
constructed with common or adjacent walls and each located on a separate ground parcel
within the total development site, together with common area serving all dwelling units.
5. Condominium Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more dwelling units intended
for separate ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units.
6. Multiple Family Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more dwelling units,
within one or more buildings.
7. Mobile Home Residential: The residential occupancy of mobile homes by families on a
weekly or longer basis. Uses only include mobile home parks or mobile home
subdivisions.
20
B. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES: Commercial use types include
the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods; and the provision of services other than those classified
as Industrial or Civic uses.
1. Administrative and Business Offices: Office of private firms or organizations which are
primarily used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical
uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, photocopy
and reproduction, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, or other
use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with administrative
office services.
2. Agriculhll"al Sales and Services: Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the
premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of
agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Typical uses include nurseries; hay, feed or grain stores; and tree service firms.
3a. Agricultural Animal Husbandry (Limited): The raising of cattle, swine, poultry, horses, sheep,
goats or similar farm animals for reproductive stock or for slaughter. Such uses shall be
conducted completely within enclosed structures.
3b. Agricultural Animal Husbandry (General): The raising of cattle, swine, poultry, horses, goats or
similar farm animals for reproductive stock or for slaughter.
4. Auction Houses: An indoor location where new or used goods are auctioned. Goods to be
auctioned are to be kept inside the Auction House, with the exception of large items, such as
vehicles, which may be stored outside temporarily (meaning no more than one week at a time and
no more than 10 days in any calendar month).
5. Automotive and Equipment Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
automotive-related or equipment sales or services. The following are automotive and equipment
use types:
A. Automotive Washing: Washing and cleaning of automobiles and related light equipment.
Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.
B. Service Station: Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental
services to motor vehicles.
C. Commercial Off-Street Parking: Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a
privately owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use.
Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking garages.
D. Automotive Rentals: Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, trailers, and
recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles available for
rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies, trailer rental agencies and taxi
parking and dispatching.
E. Automotive Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental
21
'·.
storage, maintenance, and serv1cmg. Typical uses include new or used car
dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and; boat, trailer and recreational vehicle
dealerships.
F. Equipment Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including
incidental storage, maintenanc~, and serv1cmg. Typical uses include truck
dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and mobile homes sales
establishments.
G. Automotive Repair Services: Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale,
installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include new and
used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer and recreational
vehicle dealerships.
H. Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck
repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but
excluding dismantling or salvage.
I. Vehicle Storage: Long term storage of operational or non-operational vehicles.
Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yards, but
. exclude dismantling or salvage.
6. Building Maintenance Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include
janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.
7. Business Support Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and
service establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but exclude
automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and
supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms.
8. Commercial Recreation: Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of
sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The following are
commercial recreation use types.
A. Indoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted within an enclosed building.
Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks,
and penny arcades.
B. Outdoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or
screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses,
golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, and racquetball courts.
22
(
\ ·.
c. Indoor Entertainment: Predominately spectator uses conducted within an
enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, meeting halls
and dance halls.
D. Outdoor Entertainment: Predominately spectator uses conducted in open
facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, and amusement
parks.
9. Communication Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the prov1s1on of
broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of
electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Major Utility
Facilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers or
telegraph service offices.
10. Construction Sales and Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as
well as the retail or wholesale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of
buildings or other structures other than retail sales of paint, fixtures and hardware; but
excludes those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Service use types.
Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, or
building contractors.
11. Consumer Repair Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair
services to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding Automotive and
Equipment use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry
repair, or musical instrument repair firms.
12. Convenience Storage: Storage services primarily for personal effects and household
goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding use as
workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include
mini warehousing.
13. Convenience Store: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of food and household
products, including gasoline. However, the repair, storage or servicing of vehicles shall
be prohibited.
14. Crop Production: The growing of the usual farm crops for animal feed or for sale for the
manufacturing of food products. Typical uses include corn, soybean or wheat fields.
15. Financial Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and
banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and
lending activities, and similar services.
23
16. Food Sales: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of
food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries,
delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
17. Funeral Services: Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the
human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral
homes or mortuaries.
18. General Retail Sales: Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for
personal or household use, but excludes those classified more specifically in this section
inclusive. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or
establishments providing the following products or services: household cleaning and
maintenance products, drugs, cards, and stationary, notions, books, tobacco products,
cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, fabrics, and like items; cameras, photography
services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils,
home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and
wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, interior decorating services, office supplies;
bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).
19. Kennels: Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical
uses include boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog training centers.
20. Laundry Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry
cleani~g or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical use
types include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply services.
21. Liquor Sales: Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption
off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops,
or any licensed sales for off-site consumption.
22. Medical Offices: A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or
corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental
laboratories, and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans, licensed for
such practice by the State of Iowa.
23. Personal Improvement Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional
nature. Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, health or
physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
24. Personal Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or
recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber
shops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and self-service laundry or apparel cleaning
services.
24
25. Pet Services: Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small
animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing
and clipping salons, or pet grooming shops.
26. Professional Office: A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of
law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and similar professions.
27. Research Services: Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or
scientific nature but excludes product testing. Typical uses include electronics research
laboratories, space research and development firms, or pharmaceutical research labs.
28. Restaurant (Convenience): A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and
beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages, for on premise consumption. Typical uses
include soda fountains, ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, cafes, and coffee shops,
29. Restaurant (General): A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and
beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or
secondary feature and producing less than 50 percent of the gross income. A general
restaurant may include live entertainment. Typical uses include restaurants, coffee shops,
dinner houses and similar establishments with incidental alcoholic beverage service.
30. Riding Academy: A use engaged in the provision of equestrian riding, lessons or for the
quartering of horses. Typical uses include saddle clubs, riding stables or liveries.
31 . Tavern: A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, including bars, and similar uses.
32. Veterinary Services: Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses._include pet clinics,
dog and cat hospitals, and veterinary hospitals.
33. Visitor Habitation: Establishments primarily engaged in the prov1s1on of lodging
services on a less-than-weekly basis with incidental food, drink and other sales and
services intended for the convenience of guests. The following are visitor habitation use
types:
A. Campground: Campground facilities providing camping or parking areas and
incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses
include recreational vehicle parks.
B. Hotel/Motel: Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board
offered for occupancy to the general public. Typical uses include hotels, motels
or transient boarding houses.
C. Bed & Breakfast Home/Inn: A structure containing a single dwelling unit which
provides sleeping rooms for rent to the general public. The only meal to be
25
provided to guests is breakfast, and it shall only be served to those taking lodging
in the facility.
D. Cottage/Resort Entemrise: Any group of buildings containing guest rooms
offered for rent primarily for temporary occupancy. Such buildings may include
quarters for the boarding of employees.
E. Commercial Cottage: A single dwelling unit rented to the general public for
periods not exceeding one calendar month.
C. GENERAL DESCRJPTION OF INDUSTRJAL USE TYPES: Industrial use types include
the on-site extraction or production of goods by non-agricultural methods, and storage and
distribution of products.
1. Basic Industry: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of,
or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive materials, or storage or
manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
2. Custom Manufacturing: Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of
goods by hand manufacturing which involve only the use of hand tools or domestic
mechanical equipment not exceeding two (2) horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding
eight . (8) kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods
produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle making shops or jewelry.
3. Light Manufacturing: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously
prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and
distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
4. Resource Extraction: A use involving the on-site extraction of surface mineral products
or natural resources. Typical extractive uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel
operations, oil and gas extraction, and mining operations.
5. Scrap & Salvage Services: Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale,
dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for
reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards
or paper salvage yards.
6. Stockyards: Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for
slaughter, market or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards or animal sales and
auction yards.
26
\
7. Warehousing and Distribution: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than
live animals and plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution types:
A. Limited Warehousing and Distribution: Wholesaling, storage and warehousing
services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors,
storage warehouses or moving and storage firms.
B. General Warehousing and Distribution: Open-air storage, distribution and
handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone
yards, grain elevators or open storage yards.
D. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CIVIC USE TYPES: Civic use types include the
performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, protective,
governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance.
1. Administrative Services: Offices, administrative, clerical or public contact services that
deal directly with the citizens, together with incidental storage and maintenance of
necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county or municipal offices.
2. Club or Lodge: A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private or
non-profit association, primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include
private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
3. Community Recreation: A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a
particular residential development, planned unit development or limited residential
neighborhood, including both indoor and outdoor facilities.
4. Convalescent Services: A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons
requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or
emergency medical services, and excluding a facility providing care of alcoholism, drug
addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease.
5. Cultural Services: A library, museum, art gallery, or similar non-profit use affording
display, preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in one or more of the
arts and sciences.
6. Day Care Services (Limited): A facility, or use of a building or portion thereof, for the
care of six (6) or fewer individuals. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools, day
care centers for children or adults, and similar uses.
7. Day Care Services (General): A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or portion thereof, for
the care of seven (7) or more individuals. This term includes nursery schools, preschools,
day care centers for children or adults, and similar uses.
27
\
8. Game Refuge: A use of land providing natural habitat for animals and plant species.
Typical uses include prairies, marshes, woodlands and wetlands.
9. Local Utility Services: Services which are necessary to support principal development
and involve only minor structures such as lines, poles, transformers, control devices and
junction boxes which are necessary to support principal development.
10. Maintenance and Service Facilities: A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular
or equipment servicing, materials storage, and similar activities, including corporation
yards, equipment service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial
services or contracting or industrial activities.
11. Major Utility Facilities: Generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary
substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants,
and similar facilities of public agencies or public utility firms having potentially
significant impact upon surrounding uses.
12. Park and Recreation Services: Publicly owner and operated parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas or open spaces.
13. Postal Facilities: Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting
centers, operated by the United States Postal Service.
14. Primary Educational Facilities: A public, private or parochial school offering instruction
at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught
in the public schools in the State of Iowa.
15. Public Assembly: Publicly owned and operated facilities for major public assembly,
recreation, sports, amusement or entertainment, including civic or community
auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and exhibition facilities.
16. Railroad Facilities: Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
17. Religious Assembly: A use located in a permanent building and providing regular
organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding
primary or secondary educational facilities.
18. Residential Care Services: A use, other than a hospital or convalescent facility, providing
care for ambulatory persons in a residential environment, including over-night occupancy
or care for extended periods of time.
19. Safety Services: Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services, including
police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
28
20. Secondary Educational Facilities: A public, private, or parochial school offering
instruction at the junior I middle school and senior high school levels in the branches of
learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State oflowa.
29
ARTICLE4
DISTRICTS
Section 1. DISTRICTS. For the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, the City of Hampton, Iowa, is
hereby divided into zoning district classifications as follows:
"A-1"
"R-1"
"R-2"
"R-3"
''MII''
"C-1"
"AT"
"I-1"
"RIC"
"I-2"
"F-G"
Agricultural District
Single-Family Residential District
Two-Family Residential District
Multi-Family Residential District
Mobile Home District
Downtown Commercial District
Arterial Transitional District
Light fudustrial District
Restricted fudustrial Commercial District
Heavy fudustrial District
Flood Plain I Greenspace District
Section 2. BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL MAP. The boundaries of these districts are indicated and
established as shown upon maps designated as the Official Zoning Map of Hampton, Iowa, which, with
all their notations, designations, references, and other matters shown thereon, shall be as much a part of
this Ordinance as if fully described and set forth herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by
the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk under the following words:
This is to certifY that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article 4 of the
Hampton Zoning Ordinance adopted on this __ day of , 2002.
Amendments, supplements or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map
shall be made by an ordinance amending Ordinance No. _. The amending ordinance shall refer to the
Official Zoning Map and shall set out the identification of the area affected by legal description and
identify the zoning district as the same exists and the new district designation applicable to said property.
Said ordinance shall, after adoption and publication, be recorded by the City Clerk as other ordinances
and a certified copy thereof shall be attached to the Official Zoning map. Such amendatory ordinance
shall, however, not repeal or reenact said map, but only amend it. The Official Zoning Map, together
with amending ordinances, shall be the final authority as to current zoning status of land and water areas,
buildings and other structures in the City.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret
because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Council may, by resolution, adopt a new
Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map
may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction
shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.
30
Section 3. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. Where uncertainty exists
as to boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
3.1 Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways,
alleys or other public right-of-ways shall be construed to follow such center lines;
3.2 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines;
3.3 Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter section lines, or
quarter-quarter section lines shall be construed as following such lines;
3.4 Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as
following such city limits;
3.5 Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 3.1 -
3.5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
3.6 Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those.
shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections
3.1 - 3.5 above, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall interpret the district
boundaries.
Section 4. ROAD OR PUBLIC WAY VACATION. Whenever any road, street, or other
public way is vacated by the official action of the City Council, the Zoning Districts(s) adjoining
each side of such road or public way shall automatically extend to the center of such vacation and
all area included in such vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended district.
Section 5. ANNEXED TERRITORY. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the
City of Hampton shall be in the (A-1) Agricultural District; unless otherwise recommended to
the City Council by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be annexed as an appropriate zone
for the existing land use on the property to be annexed.
Section 6. GENERAL REGULA TIO NS.
Except as herein provided:
6.1 No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with
31
\
all of the district regulations established by this Ordinance for the district in which the
building or land is located.
6.2 No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum required by this Ordinance. No part of a yard or
other open space, or off street parking or loading space provided about any building,
structure, or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall
be included as part of a yard, open space, or off street parking or loading space required
under this Ordinance for another building, structure, or use.
6.3 Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein
defined and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
6.4 No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided
hereinafter except in conformity with the off street parking and loading regulations of this
Ordinance.
6.5 No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for any other building.
6.6 Minimum Requirements for Residential Structures in the City of Hampton:
6.6-1 ' All structures intended for residential occupancy placed, erected, assembled, or
constructed in the City after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet and
comply with the minimum requirements set out below.
6.6-2 Structure size: Each such structure shall have a "main body" with a minimum
exterior dimension of at least twenty two feet (22') measured from the outside of
the exterior walls.
6.6-3 Minimum Floor Area: Each structure should have a minimum floor area of not
less than eight hundred (800) square feet. (In order to comply with the provisions
of the foregoing section, the minimum exterior dimensions of a residential
structure shall not be less than 22 feet by 36.5 feet. A structure may include
porches, sun rooms, garages, and "wings" of lesser dimensions and area, so long
as the "main body" meets the minimum requirements.)
6.6-4 Foundation: All residential structures shall have a continuous and complete frost
protected perimeter foundation, except that a perimeter foundation shall not be
required for a manufactured home if a perimeter foundation is incompatible with
the structural design of the manufactured home. For such a manufactures home,
a permanent foundation may be a pier footing foundation system designed and
constructed to be compatible with the structure and the conditions of the site.
32
Foundation materials may be masonry, poured concrete, wood, or metal and must
be extended below the normal frost line. The structure must be permanently
attached to the foundation.
6.6-5 Exterior wall and Roof Material:
A) Exterior wall covering shall be wood, vinyl, or masonry finish, vertical or
horizontal grooved siding or lap siding, or the appearance thereof.
B) Roofing materials shall be shingles (asphalt, fiberglass, or wood), slate,
ceramic, concrete, or metal of a type customarily used for residential
roofing material, such as "standing seam" or embossed or textured metal.
C) Smooth, unfinished or corrugated metal or .fiberglass shall not be used for
exterior wall or roof covering.
D) Soffits, eaves, window and door trim, roofs and coverings over bay and
bow windows and doors may be smooth finished metal, vinyl, or wood or
unfinished metal, such as copper, customarily used for residential structure
trim.
6.6-6 Ceiling Height: A minimum finished interior ceiling height of not less than seven
and one-half feet (7Y2') is required
6.6-7: Entrance and Exit Doors: Not less than two (2) functional entrance and exit doors
shall be provided.
33
ARTICLES
AGRICULTURAL (A-1) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of the Agricultural District is to preserve land best suited for
agriculture (especially prime agricultural soils) from the encroachment of incompatible uses and
to preserve in agricultural use land suited to eventual development in other uses until such time
as streets, utilities and other community facilities may be provided or programmed as to ensure
the orderly and beneficial conversion of these lands to nonagricultural use. ·
Section 2. PRINCJP AL PERMITTED USES. Only the following uses and structures shall be
permitted in the (A-1) District:
2.1 Agriculture shall be restricted to the raising of crops and horticultural uses unless Hobby
Livestock conditional use if permitted by the Board of Adjustment;
2.2 Single family detached dwellings;
2.3 Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities including substations, transfer
stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, and storage facilities.
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:
3 .1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures permitted as exceptions;
3 .2 Home occupations;
3 .3 Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the premises;
3.4 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
3 .5 Essential Services.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses may be
permitted in the Agricultural District (A-1) subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment as
provided for in Articles 18 and 20 of this Ordinance.
4.1 Churches, chapels, temples, and similar places or worship;
4.2 Private educational institutions having a curriculum comparable to that of the public
school;
34
4.3 Private parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, camping grounds, golf courses, country clubs, golf
driving ranges, archery ranges and swimming pools;
4.4 Private airport and landing fields;
4.5 Agricultural service establishments primarily engaged in performing agricultural, animal
husbandry or horticultural services on a fee or contract basis including com shelling, hay baling,
horticultural services such as plant nurseries; landscape gardening, landscape contracting; farm
equipment service and repair; veterinary services; commercial auction yards and barns; bulk
storage or petroleum products for distribution or direct sales to agricultural consumers;
4.6 Sand and gravel extraction and processing sites;
4. 7 Substations, transfer stations, gravel plants, asphalt or concrete batch plats, and sanitary landfills
conducted in a manner and method approved by the State Health Department;
4.8 Radio and television broadcasting studios and transmitting structures;
4.9 Stables and kennels;
4.10 Hobby Livestock. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt the rules and regulations regarding the
conditional use "Hobby Livestock" including, but not limited to, the type of livestock that may be
raised and maintained under such conditional use, the number of such livestock that may be
raised and maintained in any particular area, provisions that may be required for odor abatement,
removal of manure and dead animals, provisions regarding the expiration of the conditional use,
and any other rules or regulations the Board believes appropriate to regulate Hobby Livestock
operations so it does not become a nuisance to neighboring property owners.
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject
to modifications contained in Article 15.
5.1 Lot Area: 20,000 square feet per family
5.2 Lot Width: 120 feet at building line
5.3 Front Yard Setback: 50 feet
5.4 Side Yard Setback: 20 feet
5.5 Rear Yard Setback: 50 feet
5.6 Maximum Building Height: No structure shall be permitted to extend into the approach zones,
clear zones or other restricted air space required for the protection of any public airport.
5.7 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 6. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
35
ARTICLE6
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of the Single Family Residential District is to provide for low to
medium density residential development with a limited number of institutional and recreational facilities
permitted.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only the following principal uses and structures shall be
permitted in the (R-1) District:
2.1 Single family dwellings;
2.2 Churches, chapels, temples and similar places of worship;
2.3 Schools and colleges;
2.4 Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, excluding substations, transfer stations,
treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and regular stations.
2.5 Publicly owned parks, playgrounds or other public recreational uses.
2.6 No raising or pasturing oflivestock, poultry or other commercial domestic animals or birds.
2.7 Recreational facilities that are on at least a 3-acre site, maintain a 40-foot setback and landscape
buffering between any residential properties and structures or recreational equipment, and
maintain a 20-foot setback and opaque screening of fence, hedge or similar materials between any
residential property and parking area.
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the R-1 District:
3 .1 Private garage or carport;
3 .1-1 Private detached garages or carpots not intended for temporary purposes shall be required
to have a roof and walls which comply with the requirements set forth in Article 4, Section 6.6-5.
3 .2 Private swimming pools and tennis courts;
3 .3 Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
3.4 Essential services;
3.5 Home occupations;
3.6 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed
upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
36
3. 7 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures and to uses and structures pemiitted as exceptions.
3.7-1 Utility or garden sheds for wholly residential uses shall be no larger than one
hundred-twenty (120) square feet. Setback requirements for residential shed and
storage units is three feet (3 ') side setback and three feet (3 J rear setback.
3.7-2 Maximum height of accessory structures and uses in residential properties shall
not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
3.8 Parking within the front yard of a residential property may be temporarily allowed for a
travel trailer, camping trailer, a pick-up truck coach, auto camper ·or motorized home
belonging to a guest of the property owner. A vehicle may park and occupy for
temporary lodging on the same lot but not more than seven (7) days in a calendar quarter,
only upon obtaining a special temporary permit from the chief of police or his/her
designee.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures
may be permitted in the (R-1) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 of this
Ordinance and with the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
4.1 Two family dwellings (duplexes);
4.2 Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, nursing homes and convalescent homes;
4.3 Boarding or lodging houses;
4.4 Private club.s or fraternities;
4.5 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities, and
regular stations;
4.6 Day nursery or nursery school;
4. 7 Bed and Breakfast Home
4.8 Tea House
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to modification contained in Article 15.
5.1 Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be:
Single family dwelling - twelve thousand ( 12,000) square feet per family
Other uses - twelve thousand ( 12,000) square feet minimum
37
5.2 Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be eighty (80) feet,
5.3 Front Yard: The minimum front yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
5.4 Side Yard: The minimum side yard shall be eight (8) feet.
5.5 Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
5.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet, unless
otherwise provided.
5.8 Percent of Developed Rear Yard: Accessory buildings and/or structures which are not a
part of the main building shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear
yard; however, this regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a
four hundred forty ( 440) square foot garage in a rear yard.
5.9 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 6. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
38
ARTICLE 7
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ( R-2) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of the Two-Family Residential District is to provide for
medium density residential development and neighborhoods with a limited number of
institutional and recreational facilities permitted.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only the following principal uses and structures
shall be permitted in the ( R-2 ) District:
2.1 Single family dwellings;
2.2 Two-family dwellings;
2.3 Churches, chapels, temples and similar places of worship;
2.4 Schools and colleges;
2.5 Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, excluding substations, transfer
stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and regular stations;
2.6 Publicly owned park, playgrounds or other public recreational uses
\ Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following
accessory use·s and structures shall be permitted in the R-2 District:
3.1 Private garage or carport;
3 .1.1 Private detached garages or carports not intended fo{temporary purposes shall be
required to have a roof and walls which comply with the requirements set forth in
Article 4, Section 6.6-5.
3.2 Private swimming pools and tennis courts;
3.3 Private green houses not operated for commeercial purposes;
3.4 Essential services;
3.5 Home occupations;
3.6 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon completion or avandonment of the construction work;
3. 7 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions.
39
\
3. 7-1 Utility or garden sheds for wholly residential uses shall be no larger than one
hundred-twenty ( 120 ) square feet. Setback requirements for residential shed
and storage units is three ( 3 ) feet side setback and three ( 3 ) feet rear setback.
3. 7-2 Maximum height of accessory structures and uses in residential properties shall
not exceed fifteen ( 15 ) feet in height.
3.8 Parking within the front yard of a residential property may be temporarily allowed for a
travel trailer, camping trailer, a pick-up truck, coach, auto camper or motorized home
belonging to a guest of the property owner. A vehicle may park and be occupied for
temporary lodging on the same lot but not more than seven ( 7 ) days in a calendar
quarter, only upon obtaining a special temporary permit from the chief of police or his I
her designee.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures
may be permitted in the ( R-2 ) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 of this
Ordinanceand
with the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
4.1 Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, nursing homes and convalescent homes;
4.2 Boarding or lodging houses;
4.3 Private-clubs or fraternities;
4.4 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities,
and regular stations;
4.4 Day nursery or nursery school;
4.5 Bed and Breakfast Home;
4.6 Tea House
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
Subject to modification contained in Article 15
5 .1 Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be:
Single Family Structures: eight thousand four hundred ( 8,400) square feet.
Two-Family and Multi-Family Structures: ten thousand ( 10,000 ) square feet per two
( 2 ) family dwelling units, and a maximum of six ( 6 ) dwellings per acre
5.2 Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be:
40
Two-Family and Multi-Family Structures: one hundred (100) feet.
5.3 Front Yard: The minimum front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
5.4 Side Yard: The minimum side yard shall be seven (7) feet.
5.5 Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
5.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet, unless
otherwise provided.
5.7 Percent of Developed Rear Yard: Accessory buildings and I or structures which are not a
part of the main building shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear
yard; however, this regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a
four hundred forty ( 440) square foot garage in a rear yard.
5.8 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 6. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
41
ARTICLE 8
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ( R-3) DISTRICT
Section l. INTENT. The intent of the Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for living
areas within the City for development of multiple family dwellings and single family dwellings
which are compatible in character and density with the multiple family residential environment.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and structures
shaUbe permitted in the (R-3) District:
2.1 Single family dwellings;
2.2 Two family dwellings (duplexes);
2.3 Multi-family dwellings;
2.4 Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, excluding substations, transfer
stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and regular stations.
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:
3.1 Private garage or carport;
3 .1-1 Private detached garages or carports not intended for temporary purposes shall be
required to have a roof and walls which comply with the requirements set forth in
Article 4, Section 6.6-5.
3.2 Private swimming pools and tennis courts;
3.3 Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
3 .4 Essential services;
3.5 Home occupations;
3.6 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
3.7 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures permitted as exceptions.
3. 7-1 Utility or garden sheds for wholly residential uses shall be no larger than one
hundred twenty (120) square feet. Setback requirements for residential shed and
storage units is three feet (3 ')side setback and three feet (3 ')rear setback.
42
\.
(,
3.7-2 Maximum height of accessory structures and uses in residential properties shall
not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
3.8 Parking may be temporarily allowed for a travel trailer, camping trailer, a pick-up truck
coach, auto camper or motorized home belonging to a guest of the property owner. A
vehicle may park and be occupied for temporary lodging on the same lot, but not more
than seven (7) days during a three ( 3 ) month period, only upon obtaining a special
temporary permit; the vehicle shall norbe parked in the front yard area.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures
may be permitted in the (R-3) District subject to provisions of Articles 18 and 20 of this
Ordinance and with the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
4.1 Medical or dental clinics;
4.2 Mortuaries or funeral parlors;
4.3 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and
regulator stations;
4.4 Day nursery or nursery school;
4.5 Private parking lot.
4.6 Bed and Breakfast Inn
4. 7 Boarding or lodging houses;
4.8 Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes or nursing homes;
4.9 Private clubs or fraternities whose chief activity is not carried on as a business;
4.10 Churches, chapels, temples and similar places of worship;
4.11 Schools and colleges;
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to modifications contained in Article 15.
5.1 ·Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be:
Single family dwelling: seven thousand (7,000) square feet
Two ( 2 ) family dwellings: two thousand four hundred ( 2,400 ) square feet per dwelling
Multi-family dwellings: maximum of twelve ( 12) dwelling units per acre
43
5.2 Lot Width:
Single-family dwelling: sixty (60) feet;
Two-family dwellings: add twenty (20) feet of building line frontage per unit;
Multi-family dwellings: add twenty (20) feet of building line frontage per unit, up to one
hundred sixty (160) feet maximum.
5.3 Front Yard: The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
5.4 Side Yard: The minimum side yard setback shall be six (6) feet.
5.5 Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet.
5.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet unless
otherwise provided.
5.7 Percent of Developed Rear Yard: Accessory buildings and/or structures which are not a
part of the main building shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear
yard; however, this regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a
four hundred forty ( 440) square foot garage in a rear yard.
5.8 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 6. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
44
ARTICLE 9
MOBILE HOME ( M-H) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The Mobile Home District ( M-H ) shall provide for mobile home
subdivisions in areas of the community where such use, is compatible with existing and future
development. This district shall be well served by arterial streets to provide adequate access and
planned development that is compatible with the character of neighboring land uses.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the ( M-H) District.
2.1 Mobile homes located within planned mobile home subdivisions; and with the provisions
of this section, regulations of the Franklin County Board of Health, applicable State
Statutes, and Hampton standards;
2.2 Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, excluding substations, transfer
stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and regular stations.
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:
3.1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
3.1-1 Accessory structures and uses may include but not limited to: utility and garden
sheds, storage units, detached garage(s), decks, porches, gazebos, swimming-_
pools, kennels, satellite receiver dishes, wood piles, compost piles, and gardens.
3.1-2 Utility or garden sheds for wholly residential uses shall be no larger than one
hundred twenty (120) square feet. Setback requirements for residential shed and
storage units is three (3 ') side setback and three (3 ') rear setback.
3.1-3 Maximum height of accessory structures and uses in residential properties shall
not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
3.2 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
3.3 Home occupations;
3.4 Essential services;
3 .5 Sale of mobile homes for use on the premises only, provided that such mobile homes are
suited and connected to all utilities.
45
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses may be
permitted in the Mobile Home District (R-4) subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment as
provided in Articles 18 and 20 of this Ordinance.
4.1 Substations, transfer station, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities, and
regulator stations;
4.2 Churches, chapels, temples and similar places of worship.
Section 5. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS. Mobile homes within the M-H District shall be
subject to the following special requirements;
5.1 In all mobile home parks, except as provided in this Ordinance there shall be one (1) or
more recreation areas which shall be safe and easily accessible to all residents. The size
of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square
feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
5 .2 Each mobile home shall be served with water and sanitary sewer utilities, service
facilities for bathing, laundry, etc. as required by state and local health regulations, and
current city standards;
5 .3 Exceptions:
A) A travel trailer, camping trailer, a pick-up truck coach, a1:1to camper or motorized
home belonging to a guest of the property oW1ler may park and occupy for
temporary lodging on the same lot but not more than seven (7) days in a calendar
quarter, only upon obtaining a special temporary permit;
B) A trailer or mobile home may be used as a temporary office incidental to the
construction of a building development for duration of the construction provided
the trailer is located on the same lot as the construction project.
Section 6. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to modifications contained in Article 15:
6.1 Minimum lot area for mobile home park:
A) Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres;
B) Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be three-hundred (300) feet;
46
C) Front Yard: The minimum front yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
D) Side Yard: The minimum side yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
E) Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
F) Maximum Height: The maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet unless
otherwise provided.
6.2 Individual trailer lot requirements:
A) Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet per
trailer.
B) Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be thirty-five (30) feet.
C) Front Yard: The minimum front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
D) Side Yard: The minimum side yard setback shall be five (5) feet, with a
minimum aggregate of fifteen (15) feet; side yards adjacent to any other zone
district shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
E) Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet; no building
shall be within thirty (30) feet of any rear lot line which abuts any other zone
district.
F) Maximum Height: The maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
6.3 Supplementary Regulations. See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 7. GENERAL PROVISIONS. All mobile home parks shall be located within the
Mobile Home (R-4) District subject to the following requirements:
A) No mobile home shall be connected to water, sewer, or electrical services unless
the mobile home complies with the standards and requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association, the City of Hampton, and State and local
Departments of Health. Compliance with these standards shall be determined by
the administrative officer.
B) No mobile home shall be located in any Mobile Home Park, until a Mobile Home
Park Development Plan is officially approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the required licensing provisions of the Code of Iowa are
complied with.
47
C)
l •,
D)
E)
F)
1. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less
than five (5) acres may submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission a
plan for the use and development of all such tracts of land for Mobile
Home purposes.
2. In acting upon and approving mobile home parks, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall consider the iocation, size, height, spacing, use
of any mobile homes and their appurtenances, access and circulation for
vehicles and pedestrians, streets, parking areas, yards and open spaces and
the relationship to adjacent property. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall not recommend a mobile home park development plan
unless such plan conforms to all applicable provisions provided in this
Ordinance, and any state, federal, or local city policy.
If said mobile home park development plan contains no dedication to the City
streets or utilities, or should it be contemplated that the facilities of the City shall
not be used for maintenance· of streets, sidewalks, and water and sewer lines,
garbage collection, or other related functions, then the owner shall be required to
record with the Mobile Home Park Plan a covenant, as follows:
"That (Name of owner). being the owner or owners of the real estate contained in
the above attached mobile home park development plan, hereby consent that if
they or their assignees, heirs, or those holding or owning said land through
owners, fail to maintain the streets, sidewalks, water or sewer mains according to
and in compliance with the minimum standards for the maintenance of streets,
sidewalks, water or sewer mains as established by the City of Hampton, Iowa, that
after twenty-four (24) hours notice in writing to the owner of said land as shown
upon the records of the County Auditor's office of Franklin County, Iowa, and at
the address therein shown, then said owner, assignees, heirs, and those holding or
owning through said owners, hereby authorize the City of Hampton, Iowa to make
all necessary repairs and perform all necessary maintenance, and further authorize
the City of Hampton, Iowa, to file a mechanic's lien other lien or encumbrance
against said real estate, and enforce said lien pursuant to laws then applicable."
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved,
covered with stone screening, or other solid material, or protected with a
vegetative growth or other material capable of preventing soil erosion and
objectionable dust.
Adequate provisions shall be made to handle all surface and storm drainage water
as determined by the City Engineer.
The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by
permanent steel or iron rods driven into the ground with the top of said rods flush
with the finish lot grade. Location of lot limits in the ground shall be
approximately the same as shown on the approved plans. The degree of accuracy
48
•'
G)
H)
I)
obtainable by working with a scale on the plan and then a tape on the ground is
acceptable. Precise engineering of lot limits is not required either on the plans or
on the ground. This is not to be construed as permitting lots of a lesser size than
the required minimum, or permitting lesser yard or separation dimensions than set
forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except
such uses that are required for services, well-being of park residents, and for the
management and maintenance of the park. Nothing contained in this section shall
be deemed to prohibit the sale by an owner of a mobile home located on a mobile
home stand connected to the pertinent utilities. Any sale of mobile homes in
place on the mobile home stand shall in no way relieve any parties involved from
complying with all regulations of this Ordinance.
In all mobile home parks there shall be one or more recreation area which shall be
safe and easily accessible to all park residents. The size of such recreation areas
shall be based upon a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each
lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet. The required recreational area shall be computed in addition to any
other common space required by this Ordinance.
All mobile home parks shall conform to the above requirements in addition to all
current City specifications and standards.
J) · · Minimum Lot Area for Mobile Home Park: Refer to Article 8/Mobile Home
District.
K) Individual Trailer Lot Requirements: Refer to bulk regulations in this Article.
L) Minimum Design Criteria:
1. Roads and streets shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide;
2. All streets shall be hard surfaced, of which may contain concrete, asphalt,
or crushed rock;
3. The minimum space between trailers shall be fifteen (15) feet;
Section 8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
49
ARTICLE 10
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL. ( C-1 ) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of the Central Business District is lo provide for a commercial
area to serve the general shopping needs of the trade area and to permit uses which will
strengthen the central business area as the center of trade, service, governmental and cultural
activities.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the ( C-1 ) District:
2.1 Antique shops; 2.31 Hotel;
2.2 Art shops; 2.32 Hospital, clinics, and infinnarics;
2.3 Automobile service station; 2.33 Jewelry store;
2.4 Bakery. retail; 2.34 Launderette;
2.5 Bank, including drive-in 2.35 Leather goods store;
establishments, savings and loans; 2.36 Music store;
2.6 Barber shop, beauty parlor; 2.37 Newsstand;
2.7 Billiards-pool hall; 2.38 Office equipment and supply store;
2.8 Bookstore; 2.39 Optical goods store;
2.9 Broadcasting and receiving station; 2.40 Paint store;
2.10 Camera shop; 2.41 Public parking lots
2.11 Candy store; 2.42 Phannacy;
2.12 Catering; 2.43 Photography store;
2.13 Cigar-tobacco store; 2.44 Plumbing, heating and sheet metal
2.14 Clothing or apparel store; 2.45 Publicly owned and operated
2.15 Conservatory commercial; buildings and facilities, excluding
2.16 Convention building for private substations, transfer stations,
display; treatment facilities, pumping
2.17 Dairy store; stations, storage facilities, and
2.18 Department store; regulator stations;
2.19 Drug store; 2.46 Printing, newspaper, commercial;
2.20 Dry cleaning; 2.47 Professional offices;
2.21 Dry goods and notion store; 2.48 Retail pet shops;
2.22 Eating and drinking establishment; 2.49 Shoe store and repair shop;
2.23 Electrical equipment, appliance 2.50 Sporting goods store;
supply and repair; 2.51 Theater;
2.24 Florist store; 2.52 Upholstery shop;
2.25 Furniture store; 2.53 Variety store;
2.26 Gift shop; 2.54 Video store;
2.27 Grocery store; Supermarket; 2.55 Other downtown commercial uses as
2.28 Gymnasium, private; determined by the Zoning Adminis-
2.29 Hardware store; trator to be of the same general char-
2.30 Heating-air conditioning supplies; actor as the uses pennitted in the
District.
50
\
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURE. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:
3.1 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
3.2 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and to uses and structures permitted as 'exceptions;
3.3 Essential service.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures
may be permitted in the (CB) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 ofthis Ordinance
and with the approval of the Board of Adjustment.
4.1 Two family and Multi-family dwellings; and apartments;
4.2 New farm implement and equipment open air display and storage;
4.3 Open air auto sales display and storage;
4.4 Private parking lots;
4.5 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and
regulator stations;
4.6 Churc}J.es, chapels, temples and similar places of worship;
4. 7 Day nursery or nursery school;
4.8 Lumber yard and building materials -open storage;
4.9 Auditorium, exhibition hall, club;
4.10 Automobile washing;
4.11 Book magazine publishing and sales;
4.12 Bowling alley;
4.13 Carpentry shop;
4.14 Commercial nurseries and greenhouses;
4.15 Commercial recreation or amusements;
51
4.15 Commercial recreation or amusements;
4.16 Drive-in establishment;
4.17 Garden supplies store;
4.18 Motels;
4.19 Private clubs;
4.20 Churches, chapels, temples and similar places of worship;
4.21 Woodworking shop, small;
4.22 Veterinary clinics;
4.23 Other commercial uses determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the same
general character as the uses permitted in the District.
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
subject to modifications contained in Article 15.
5.1 Lot Area: No minimum lot area shall be required.
5.2 Lot Width: No minimum lot width shall be required.
5.3 Front Yard: No minimum front yard shall be required.
5.4 Sjde Yard: No minimum side yard shall be required.
5.5 Rear Yard: No building shall be within twenty (20) feet of the rear lot line.
5.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
5.6 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 6. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
52
ORDINANCE NO. 346
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 165, ARTICLE 11,
ARTERIAL TRANSITIONAL (A-T) ZONING DISTRICT, BY ADDING
NEW SUBSECTION 4.3, MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS THERETO.
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Hampton, Iowa:
SECTION I.
SECTION II.
SECTION III.
SECTION IV.
SECTION V.
SECTION VI.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Section 4
of Article 11 (A-T) of Chapter 165 of the Hampton Municipal Code
to provide for a new Subsection allowing Multi-Family Dwellings as
a Conditional Use.
AMENDMENT. Section 4 of Article 11 (A-T) of Chapter 165 of the
Hampton Municipal Code is amended by adding thereto Section
4.3, "Multi-Family Dwellings" as defined herein below.
DEFINITIONS: The term Multi-Family Dwelling shall be defined
as a residence designed for occupancy by three (3) or more
families with separate facilities for housekeeping and cooking for
each, as defined as Dwelling, Multi-Family under Article 3, Chapter
165, Hampton Municipal Code.
REPEALER: All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: If any Section, provision or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudications hall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole or any Section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional.
EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA, ON
THE 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014, AND APPROVED
THIS 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY , 2014.
Broo~ ATTEST: n
&be Ron Dunt, City Manager
ARTICLE 11
ARTERIAL TRANSITIONAL (AT) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. This district is intended to provide for certain areas of the City for the development
of service, retail, and other nonresidential uses which because of certain locational requirements and
operation characteristics are appropriately located in close proximity to arterial and other main
thoroughfares. Residential type structures are also permitted. The district is further characterized by a
typical need for larger lot sides, off-street parking, adequate setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and
egress, and access to the other adjacent thoroughfares.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only the following principal uses and structures shall be
permitted in the (AT) District:
2.1 Antique shops 2.31 Florist shops
2.2 Art galleries 2.32 Furniture store
2.3 Arts, crafts, hobby shops 2.33 Garden supply store
2.4 Auditorium, exhibition hall, private clubs 2.34 Gift shops
2.5 Automobile service station 2.35 Governmental office buildings
2.6 Automobile washing 2.36 Grocery store
2.7 Auto body repair 2.37 Hotel, motel
2.8 Automobile, trailer, motorcycle, boat and farm 2.38 Insurance and real estate offices
implement establishments for display, hire, rental 2.39 Law offices
and sales (including sales lots) 2.40 Liquor store
2.9 Bank, including drive-in establishments, savings 2.41 Lumber and building materials
and loans 2.42 Massage therapy offices and clinics
2.10 Barber and beauty shops 2.43 Mortuaries
2.11 Bed and breakfast inns 2.44 Personal improvement services
2.12 Bicycle shops, sales and repairs 2.45 News dealers
2.13 Book and stationery shops, but not adult books 2.46 Newspaper office, but not including industrial
2.14 Bowling alley printing shops
2.15 Business and management consulting services and 2.47 Opticians offices
business offices in which goods, wares or 2.48 Photographer, art, sculptor and composer studios
merchandise are not displayed or sold on premises 2.49 Physicians offices and clinics
2.16 Carpentry shop 2.50 Radio and television broadcast, sales and service
2.17 Catering establishments shops (Towers are governed by Section 16 or
2.18 Chiropodists, chiropractors and osteopaths offices Article 15 of this Zoning Code)
and clinics 2.51 Retail print shop
2.19 Commercial nurseries and greenhouses 2.52 Research and testing services but not industrial
2.20 Convenience store laboratories
2.21 Credit reporting services and collection services 2.53 Restaurants
2.22 Dairy store 2.54 Retail pet shop
2.23 Day care centers 2.55 Single-family detached dwellings
2.24 Dentists offices and clinics 2.56 Sporting good store
2.25 Drive-in 2.57 Tailors and dressmakers
2.26 Drug store 2.58 Toy stores
2.27 Dry cleaning and coin operated laundry 2.59 Travel bureaus
2.28 Educational, charitable religious and similar public 2.60 Two-family dwellings
or quasi-public office buildings 2.61 Religious assembly (churches)
2.29 Employment services 2.62 Commercial Storage Building consisting of storage
2.30 Engineers and architects offices units for enclosed indoor storage only
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the (AT) District:
3 .1 Private recreational facilities;
53
3.2 Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a
separate dwelling;
3 .3 Private garages;
3 .4 Parking lots;
3.5 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and to
uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
3 .6 Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Section 4. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures may be
permitted in the (AT) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 of this Zoning Ordinance and
with the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
4.1 Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc.
4.2 Auction houses.
4.3 Multi-Family Dwellings.
Section 5. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject
to modifications contained in Article 15.
5.1 Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be: 6,000 square feet minimum (all uses).
5.2 Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet.
5.3 Front Yard: The minimum front yard shall be 30 feet.
5.4 Side Yard: The minimum side yard if adjacent to a residential district shall be equal to the
minimum side yard required in the adjacent district; but in no instance less than 6 feet.
5.5 Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard if adjacent to a residential district shall be equal to the
minimum rear yard required in the adjacent district; but in no instance less than 6 feet.
5.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of35 feet or three stories, whichever is less,
unless otherwise provided.
Section 6. GENERAL REGULATIONS. The following general regulations shall apply in the AT
District.
6.1 All required yards, including those which may be used for off-street parking shall be landscaped.
They shall be landscaped attractively with natural lawn, living trees and/or shrubs, etc. Any areas
left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition.
6.2 All business shall be conducted within an enclosed yard or building, except by special exceptions.
6.3 New additions and conversions from residential to commercial shall:
a) Preserve significant historic material and features. Building finishes used for the addition
should be similar in material, color and dimension to those used on the existing structure.
b) Preserve the character of the building. The scale of the addition should be compatible
with the original building.
c) Make a visual distinction between old and new construction based on location of new
construction and its visual appeal to the neighborhood.
54
Section 7. DESIGN REVIEW BOARD. The following regulations shall apply in the AT District.
7 .1 Powers and Duties:
a) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be responsible for reviewing all applications
for design review required under this section.
b) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to approve or deny
applications with or without conditions. If an application is denied the reasons for the denial shall
be stated.
c) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall create and maintain a list of design
guidelines which it shall apply to all applications. Said guidelines may be amended by a majority
vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section 8. DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE. The following procedures shall apply in the AT
District.
8.1 Application for Design Review.
a) The applicant shall obtain a design review application from the Administrative Official
who shall be responsible for the overall coordination and administration of the design
review process. Once the application and appropriate sets of plans have been received
and determined to be complete, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall within 20
working days conduct a review and approval or disapproval or modification of the
application.
b) Should a question arise as to compliance with the conditions as outlined by the Design
Review Board, a clarification review before the Board may be called by any City
Department having jurisdiction or by the applicant.
c) Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the applicant shall be notified of the
time and place the review will be held. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have
full power and authority to consider any application subject to design review under this
section.
d) The Planning and Zoning Commission may require such changes in said plans and
specifications as in its judgment may be requisite and appropriate to the maintenance of a
high standard of design and architecture.
e) No zoning/building permit shall be issued unless all the plans, including amendments,
notes, revisions or modifications have been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Minor modifications to plans that have been approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission will be permitted when approved by the Administrative Official.
t) An applicant may submit an application for a zoning/building permit simultaneously with
a design plan review in order to expedite processing. However, no zoning/building
permit shall be issued until the final design plan has been approved.
Section 9. LANDSCAPING. The applicant shall submit the following:
9 .1 A general concept of the intended landscaping, graphic or written.
9.2 A listing of existing vegetation by type, number, size and location.
9 .3 Proposals to protect and preserve trees during and after construction.
9 .4 A proposed plan showing number, size, type and location of plant materials.
9.5 Any maintenance needs or landscape construction plans.
55
ORDINANCE NO. 348
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3(E) OF ARTICLE 12,
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT (I-1) AND SECTION 3(D) OF
ARTICLE 13, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT (I-2),
CHAPTER 165, REMOVING THE WORDS "GUN POWDER" FROM
PROHIBITED INDUSTRIAL USES, HAMPTON MUNICIPAL CODE.
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Hampton, Iowa:
SECTION I.
SECTION II.
PURPOSES: The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Section
3(E) of Article 12 (I-1) and Section 3(D) of Article 13 (1-2) of
Chapter 165 of the Hampton Municipal Code to remove the words
"gun powder" leaving the words "fireworks or other explosives".
AMENDMENT: Section 3(D) of Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165, and
Section 3(E) of Article 12 (1-1), Chapter 165, Hampton Municipal
Code are with amended to read as follows:
Section 3(D) of Article 13 (I-2), Chapter 165 of the Hampton
Municipal Code shall be, "Manufacture or storage of fireworks or
other explosives as defined herein."
Fireworks are defined as any device containing specific chemicals
that are known to produce spectacular effects and explosions, and
includes but is not limited to "sparklers", "snakes", "pop bottle or
other devices that launch to provide a "sky display", "firecrackers",
or any other device containing combustible chemicals ignited to
produce explosions or spectacular effects.
Explosives are defined as any substance able or likely to explode,
but excluding farm chemicals and fertilizer."
Section 3(E) of Article 12 (I-1), Chapter 165, Hampton Municipal
Code shall be "Manufacture or storage of fireworks or other
explosives as defined herein."
Fireworks are defined as any device containing specific chemicals
that are known to produce spectacular effects and explosions, and
includes but is not limited to "sparklers", "snakes", "pop bottle or
other devices that launch to provide a "sky display", "firecrackers",
or any other device containing combustible chemicals ignited to
produce explosions or spectacular effects.
Explosives are defined as any substance able or likely to
explode, but excluding farm chemicals and fertilizer."
SECTION IV.
SECTION V.
SECTION VI.
SECTION VII.
PENAL TY: Anyone including an individual, Corporation, Limited
Liability Company or Partnership not complying with any of the
provisions of the Municipal Code shall be charged with a Simple
Misdemeanor and upon conviction subject to imprisonment not
exceeding thirty (30) days, or a fine not exceeding $625.00, or both.
REPEALER: All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SEVERABIUTY CLAUSE: If any Section, provision or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudications hall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole or any Section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional.
EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA, ON
THE 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY ___J 2014, AND APPROVED
THIS 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY , 2014.
Br~r
Ron Dunt, City Manager
CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA - ORDINANCE NO. 348
ORDINANCE NO. 347
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 4, ARTICLE 12, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
ZONING DISTRICT (I-1), CHAPTER 165, HAMPTON CODE AND SECTION 4,
ARTICLE 13, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT (I-2), CHAPTER 165,
HAMPTON CODE ALLOWING FIREARM MANUFACTURING AND
ASSEMBLY AS A PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE.
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Hampton, Iowa:
SECTION I.
SECTION II.
SECTION III.
SECTION IV.
SECTION V.
SECTION VI
SECTION VII.
PURPOSES: The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Section 4
of Article 12 (1-1), Chapter 165, Hampton Municipal Code and
Section 4, Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165 of the Hampton Municipal
Code to allow firearm manufacturing and assembly as a principal
permitted use.
AMENDMENT. Section 4 of Article 12 (I-1), and Section 4 of
Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165, Hampton Municipal Code are
amended as follows: Section 4 of Article 12 (I-1) of Chapter 165 is
amended by adding new Section 4.28 to read as follows: "4.28
Firearm Manufacturing and Assembly."
Section 4 of Article 13 (I-2) of Chapter 165 is amended by adding
new Subsection 4.13 to read as follows: "4.13 Firearm
Manufacturing and Assembly."
DEFINITIONS: Firearms are defined as rifles, pistols or other
portable gun.
PENAL TY: Any individual, Corporation, firm, Limited Liability
Company or Partnership shall upon violating any of the provisions of
the Municipal Code will be charged with a Simple Misdemeanor,
upon conviction, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding thirty
(30) days, or a fine not exceeding $625.00, or both.
REPEALER: All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: If any Section, provision or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudications hall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole or any Section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional.
EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA, ON
THE 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014, AND APPROVED
THIS 27t h DAY OF FEBRUARY I 2014.
B~r ATTZ
Ron Dunt, ~ager
CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA - ORDINANCE NO. 347
ORDINANCE NO. 349
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 6, ARTICLE 12, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
ZONING DISTRICT {I-1), CHAPTER 165, HAMPTON MUNICIPAL CODE AND
SECTION 6, ARTICLE 13, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT {I-2),
CHAPTER 165, HAMPTON MUNICIPAL CODE TO PROVIDE
AMMUNITION MANUFACTURING AS A CONDITIONAL USE.
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Hampton, Iowa:
SECTION I.
SECTION II.
SECTION III.
SECTION IV.
SECTION V.
SECTION VI.
PURPOSES: The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Section 6,
Article 12 (1-1), by adding a new Section 6.7 to Article 12, Chapter
165 of the Hampton Code of Ordinances, renumbering current
Section 6. 7 to 6.8, and adding new Subsection 6. 7 and renumber
current Section 6.7 to Section 6.9 to Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165
of the Hampton Municipal Ordinances by adding new Subsections
to provide that Ammunition Manufacturing may be a conditional
use in Light and Heavy Industrial Districts.
AMENDMENTS: Section 6, Article 12 (I-1), Chapter 165 and
Section 6, Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165 of the Hampton Municipal
Code are hereby amended by adding thereto Section 6.7 in said
Article 12 (1-1), renumbering current 6.7 to 6.8 and adding Section
6.7 to Article 13 (I-2), Chapter 165, Hampton Municipal Code and
renumbering current Subsection 6.7 to Section 6.9 which
amendments will each read as follows: Sections 6.7 Article 12 (1-
1), Chapter 165 and Section 6.7 Article 13 (1-2), Chapter 165,
"Manufacturing ammunition, commonly defined as bullets or shells,
to be used in pistols, rifles, shotguns, or other means of projectile."
PENAL TY: Any person, firm, Corporation upon violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction, be subject to
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or a fine not exceeding
$625.00.
REPEALER: All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: If any Section, provision or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudications hall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole or any Section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional.
EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA, ON
THE 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014, AND APPROVED
THIS 27th DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014.
Broo~
Ron dlJflt/City Manager
CITY OF HAMPTON, IOWA - ORDINANCE NO. 349
Section 10. APPEAL. The following regulations shall apply in the AT District.
10.1 The applicant or any City Department having jurisdiction may appeal any decision of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to the Board of Adjustment.
Section 11. ZONING PERMITS REQUJRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with
the provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
56
ARTICLE 12
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of this District is to provide space for certain commercial and a wide
range of industrial uses and structures which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect
nearby non-industrial uses from undesirable environmental conditions.
Section 2. PROHIBITED NON-INDUSTRIAL USES. In industrial districts, no building may
hereafter be used in whole or in part for any of the following purposes:
A. Residential uses or any dwelling use including hotels and motels; excluding a caretakers unit;
B. Retail store, service shop, theater or other place of commercial recreation or amusement,
filling station, restaurant or tavern;
C. School, church, hospital, sanitarium, correctional institution or other institutional use;
D. Cemetery.
Section 3. PROHIBITED INDUSTRIAL USES. The following industrial uses are prohibited in
industrial districts:
A. Acid manufacture, or storage except on a limited scale as an accessory to a permitted industry
and under conditions specified by the Board of Adjustment;
B. Slaughterhouse and stockyard;
C. Manufacture of fertilizers;
D. Garbage, waste materials, offal, dead animal, or refuse incineration or storage;
E. Manufacture or storage of fireworks or other explosives as defined herein.
Section 4. PRJNCIP AL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and structures shall be
permitted in the (I-1) District, except those uses which by reason of the emission of odor, dust, fumes,
smoke, noise and other obnoxious characteristics would be injurious to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community:
4.1 Assembly or fabrication of metal products,
inside a building;
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
Baggage, transfer, storage warehouses;
Bakery, wholesale and manufacture;
Building material storage and sales yard;
Boot and shoe manufacture;
Broom manufacture;
Cabinet maker;
Candy manufacture;
Canning and preserving manufacture;
Cap and hat manufacture;
Clothing manufacture;
Cold storage and delivery station;
Commercial or industrial storage building;
57
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
Concrete and cement products manufacture;
Dairy products manufacture;
Dry goods, wholesale or storage;
Express storage and delivery station;
Food products manufacture;
Ice cream manufacture;
Moving company;
Popcorn processing;
Private parking lots;
Produce warehouse;
4.24 Publicly owned and operated buildings and
facilities, excluding substations, transfer pumping
stations, storage facilities, and regulator stations;
4.25 Storage of farm and agricultural products,
inside a building, including grain elevators;·
4.26
4.27
4.28
Transfer company, storage warehouse;
Warehouse and wholesale establishments;
Welding shop, inside a building;
4.29 Wood products, manufacture, inside a
building;
4.30 Firearm manufacturing and assembly.
Section 5. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted:
5 .1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and
structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
5.2 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed
upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
5.3 Essential services;
5.4 Living quarters used by custodians or watchmen of the property.
Section 6. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures may be
permitted in the (1-1) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 of this Ordinance and with the
approval of the Board of Adjustment:
6.1 Agricultural farming and the usual agricultural and farming buildings and structures;
6.2 Fertilizer manufacture, storage, or processing;
6.3 Fuel storage;
6.4 Gas manufacture;
6.5 Radio and television towers and transmitter or receiver facilities;
6.6 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and
regulator stations;
6. 7 Manufacturing ammunition, commonly defined as bullets or shells, to be used in pistols, rifles,
shotguns, or other means of projectile;
6.8 Other uses determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the same general character as
the uses permitted in the District.
Section 7. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject
to modifications contained in Article 15:
7.1 Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
7.2 Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
7.3 Front Yard: Minimum front yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
7.4 Side Yard: Minimum side yard shall be twenty (20) feet; however, on lots adjacent to a
residential district, all buildings and incidental areas shall be located as to provide a minimum
side yard of fifty (50) feet on the side adjacent to the residential district.
7.5 Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
7.6 Minimum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet unless otherwise
provided.
7.7 Supplementary Regulations. See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
58
ARTICLE 12b
RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL (RIC) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of this district is to provide space for certain commercial and a limited
range of industrial uses and structures which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect
residential uses that are in close proximity.
Section 2. PROIDBITED NON-INDUSTRIAL USES. In industrial districts, no building may be used
in whole or in part for any of the following purposes:
2.1 Residential uses or any dwelling use including hotels and motels; excluding a caretaker's unit;
2.2 Theater or other place of commercial recreation or amusement, filling station, restaurant or
tavern;
2.3 School, church, hospital, sanitarium, correctional institution or other institution use;
2.4 Cemetery.
Section 3. PROIDBITED INDUSTRIAL USES. The following industrial uses are prohibited in
industrial districts:
3.1 Acid manufacture or storage, except on a limited scale as an accessory to a permitted industry and
under conditions specified by the Board of Adjustment;
3 .2 Slaughterhouse and stockyard;
3 .3 Manufacture of fertilizers;
3 .4 Garbage, waste materials, offal, dead animal or refuse incineration or storage;
3 .5 Manufacture or storage of gun powder, fireworks or other explosives.
Section 4. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and structures shall be
permitted in the Restricted Industrial Commercial (RIC) District:
4.1 Assembly or fabrication of metal products, inside a
building
4.2 Auction houses
4.3 Automobile repair and service station (repair work
permitted only inside a building)
4.4 Baggage, transfer, storage warehouses
4.5 Bakery, wholesale and manufacture
4.6 Building material storage and sales yard
4.7 Boot and shoe manufacture
4.8 Broom manufacture
4.9 Cabinet maker
4.10 Candy manufacture
4.11 Cap and hat manufacture
4.12 Catering and commercial kitchen establishments
4.13 Clothing manufacture
4.14 Cold storage and delivery station
4.15 Commercial or industrial storage building
4.16 Dry goods, wholesale or storage
4.17 Express storage and delivery station
4.18 Ice cream manufacture
4.19 Moving company
4.20 Private parking lots
4.21 Publicly owned and operated buildings and
facilities, excluding substations, transfer pumping
stations, storage facilities and regulator stations
4.22 Storage of packaged farm and agricultural products
inside a building (bulk storage NOT permitted)
4.23 Transfer company, storage warehouse
4.24 Warehouse and wholesale establishments
4.25 Welding shop, inside a building
4.26 Wood products manufacture inside a building.
Section 5. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the (RIC) District:
5 .1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and
structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
58.1
5.2 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed
upon completion or abandonment of the construction work;
5 .3 Essential services;
5.4 Living quarters used by custodians or watchmen of the property.
Section 6. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures may be
permitted in the Restricted Industrial Commercial (RIC) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and
20 of this Zoning Ordinance and with the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
6.1 Administrative and business offices (but not 6.15 Garden supply sales
professional offices or medical offices) 6.16 Gas manufacture
6.2 Assembly 6.17 Ice cream manufacture
6.3 Automobile and truck washing 6.18 Lumber and building materials
6.4 NEW automobile, trailer, motorcycle, boat and farm 6.19 Machine shop work if limited to indoors (no
implement sales punching or other processes that are greater than 55
6.5 Building maintenance services decibels at the property line)
6.6 Carpentry shop 6.20 Outlet sales of items manufactured on the premises
6.7 Construction sales and services 6.21 Radio and television broadcast, sales and service
6.8 Commercial nurseries and greenhouses shops
6.9 Communication services 6.22 Radio and television towers and transmitter or
6.10 Custom manufacturing receiver facilities
6.11 Exhibition hall and convention facilities 6.23 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities,
6.12 Fertilizer storage pumping stations, storage facilities and regulator
6.13 Food products manufacture stations
6.14 Fuel storage 6.24 Veterinary services
Section 7. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject
to modifications contained in Article 15.
7.1 Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
7.2 Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet.
7.3 Front Yard: Minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.
7.4 Side Yard: Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet; however, on lots adjacent to a residential district,
all buildings and incidental areas shall be located as to provide a minimum side yard of 50 feet on
the side adjacent to the residential district.
7 .5 Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet.
7.6 Maximum Height: No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet unless otherwise provided.
7.7 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
Section 9. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Properties in the Restricted Industrial Commercial (RIC)
District shall comply with the following regulations:
9 .1 New mechanical equipment shall not be located in front of a building or in the front yard. If it is
located on the roof of a building, equipment must be screened by a parapet or other screening that
is of the same material or appearance as the building fai;:ade or roof. If equipment is on the
58.2
ground, it shall be screened from view of any adjacent residential district with 100% opaque
landscaping or a 100% opaque screening fence that is as high as the equipment.
9.2 The outside storage of pipe, lumber, forms, machinery or other occupational materials shall be
screened from view of any adjacent residential district with 100% opaque landscaping or a 100%
opaque screening fence that is as high as the items stored.
9.3 Vehicles parked in the front yard may only be parked in areas that are surfaced with either
asphalt, concrete or crushed rock so as to provide a durable surface.
9.4 The front fa<;ades of the new buildings and substantial additions (over 50% new) shall either (i)
meet the standards of Article 4, Section 6.6-5, or (ii) be at least 30% masonry or other finished
material (such as adobe) that is not metal.
9.5 Lighting of signs shall be directed away from residential districts. futemally lit signs shall face
and illuminate in a direction perpendicular to the road upon which the business is located as to
prevent illumination toward residentially zoned districts.
9.6 No new monopole signs shall be allowed. New free-standing signs must be either ground or
monument signs. The height of new free-standing signs shall be limited to eight feet from
surrounding grade. The width of new free-standing signs shall be limited to eight feet.
9.7 No flashing, portable or moving signs shall be permitted.
9.8 Except for security lighting facing buildings, new outside lighting shall have 180° cut-off type
fixtures.
9.9 After such time that the use on a property changes or after a new building or addition is built that
expands the area of the buildings existing on site in 2004 by more than 50%, the following
conditions shall apply:
a) Trash containers shall not be located in the front yard and shall be screened on three sides
with a fence or wall of at least six feet in height. The fence or wall shall either be of
wood or masonry construction or be of the same style and material as the primary
building fayade. A gate shall be provided for the fourth side.
b) To provide adequate screening, in yards adjacent to residential districts, at least 5 shrubs,
3 small trees or one large tree shall be planted for every 40 feet along the boundary with
the residential district. Shrubbery must be of a type that grows a minimum of six ( 6) feet
high at maturity. Rear yard plantings must be evenly spaced, but plantings in the front
yard need not be. Rather, plantings in the front yard may be placed in groupings.
58.3
ARTICLE 13
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (I-2) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of this District is to provide space for a certain range of
industrial uses and structures which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect
nearby non-industrial uses from undesirable environmental and physical conditions. This is the
least restrictive zoning District. In the best interest of the City, certain uses in the I-2.District
shall be subject to final approval of the Board of Adjustment or conditional approval, or denial to
assure that proper safeguards are taken.
Section 2. PROHIBITED NON-INDUSTRIAL USES. In industrial districts, no building may
hereafter be used in whole or in part for any of the following purposes:
A. Residential uses or any dwelling use including hotels and motels; excluding a
caretakers unit;
B. Retail store, service shop, theater or other place of commercial recreation or
amusement, filling station, restaurant or tavern;
C. School, church, hospital, sanitarium, correctional institution or other institutional use;
D. Cemetery.
Section 3. PROHIBITED INDUSTRIAL USES. The following industrial uses are prohibited
in industrial districts:
A. Acid manufacture, or storage except on a limited scale as an accessory to a permitted
industry and under conditions specified by the Board of Adjustment;
B. Slaughterhouse and stockyard;
C. Garbage, waste materials, offal, dead animal, or refuse incineration or storage;
D. Manufacture or storage of fireworks or other explosives as defined herein.
Section 4. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. Only the following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the (1-2) District, except those uses which by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, noise, vibration, and other obnoxious characteristics
would be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare of the community:
4.1
4.2
Automotive assembly;
Auto truck repair, including body shop;
4.3 Bottling works;
4 .4 Blacksmith;
4.5 Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of
Paris manufacturer, warehouse;
59
4.6 Concrete and cement products
manufacture;
4.7 Grain elevator and storage;
4.8 Open air new and used autos, trucks,
farm implement and machinery sales and
storage;
4.9 Sheet metal shop;
4.10 Solid waste transfer station;
4.12 Truck and freight terminals;
4.11 Storage offarm and agricultural products;
4.13 Firearm manufacturing and assembly.
Section 5. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted, subject to approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
5.1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and
structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
5.2 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed
upon completion or abandonment of the construction work;
5.3 Essential services;
5.4 Living quarters used by custodians or watchmen of the property.
Section 6. CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following uses and structures may be
permitted in the (1-2) District subject to provisions of Article 18 and 20 of this Zoning Ordinance and with
the approval of the Board of Adjustment:
6.1 Agricultural farming and the usual agricultural and farming buildings and structures;
6.2 Fertilizer manufacture, storage, or processing;
6.3 Fuel storage;
6.4 Gas manufacture;
6.5 Radio and television towers and transmitter or receiver facilities;
6.6 Substations, transfer stations, treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage facilities and
regulator stations;
6. 7 Manufacturing ammunition, commonly defined as bullets or shells, to be used in pistols, rifles,
shotguns, or other means of projectile;
6.8 Other uses determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the same general character as
the uses permitted in the District;
6.9 Adult-Oriented Businesses as defined in Chapter 126 of the Hampton Code of Ordinances.
Section 7. BULK REGULATIONS. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject
to modifications contained in Artjcle 15.
7.1 Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
7.2 Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
7.3 Front Yard: Minimum front yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
7.4 Side Yard: Minimum side yard shall be twenty (20) feet; however, on lots adjacent to a
residential district, all buildings and incidental areas shall be located as to provide a minimum
side yard of fifty (50) feet on the side adjacent to the residential district.
7.5 Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
60
7.6 Minimum Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet unless otherwise
provided.
7.7 Supplementary Regulations: See regulations prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.
Section 8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of Article 20 of this Ordinance.
61
( ARTICLE 14
FLOOD PLAIN I GREENSPACE ( F-G) DISTRICT
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of this District is to protect from encroachment, watershed
areas subject to flooding, backwater, spreading of floodwater or overflow of streams or rivers.
Land use within the District shall be those of a type not endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation, or shall not produce unsanitary or unsafe living conditions. This shall exclude the
construction of a permanent building and overnight habitation of any building.
Section 2. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED. The following uses are permitted:
2.1 Agricultural purposes such as crop production, raising of livestock or not requiring a
farm residence;
2.2 Public parks, playgrounds, private recreation, shooting range, campgrounds, or other
open space uses.
Section 3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:
3.1 Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions;
3.2 Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work;
3.3 Essential services.
Section 4. AREA REGULATIONS. There are no area regulations.
Note: Additional information is available from the City Zoning Administrator regarding the
exact location of flood plain and greenspace areas identified by the City and other agencies.
Also, see Chapter 167 in the Hampton City Code of Ordinances: Flood Plain Management.
62
ARTICLE 15
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
Section 1. INTENT. The general use regulations set forth in this Article qualify, supplement
or modify the regulations set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Section 2. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. A zoning use permit shall be
issued for the principal building before one shall be issued for an accessory building. Occupancy
of an accessory building shall be allowed for a maximum period of one year only, prior to
beginning construction of the principal building. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses
customarily incidental to that of the main building may be erected or established as permitted,
provided they comply with the following:
2.1 No accessory building or structure shall be located within three (3) feet of any side or rear
lot line;
2.2 No accessory building or structure is permitted within the limits of the front yard;
2.3 No accessory building or structure shall be used for dwelling purposes;
2.4 An open unenclosed uncovered steps, ground level patio, or concrete slab driveway may
project into a required yard;
2.5 No accessory building or structure shall be erected within a required lot line easement.
2.6 No accessory building or structure in any district shall be erected within six (6') feet of
any principal building on the same lot or adjacent lots, and shall not occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard in a residential district; however, this regulation
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a four hundred forty (440) square
foot garage in a rear yard.
2.7 All accessory buildings and structures will be securely anchored to the ground.
Section 3. BUILDINGS TO HA VE ACCESS and STREET FRONT AGE.
3 .1 Every principal use building hereafter erected or structurally altered, shall be on a lot or
parcel having frontage on a public street or road of not less than fifty (50) feet except in
the Central Business District.
3.2 All lots to contain a building shall abut a public street for the required frontage in the
district in which it is located; one single family dwelling may utilize a private easement
of not less than twenty ( 20 ) feet wide and abutting upon a public street, if approved
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
63
Section 4. HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
4.1 In residence districts, no building shall exceed thirty-five ( 35 ) feet in height, provided
that such height limits may be exceeded by one ( I ) foot for each foot by which the width
of each side yard is increased beyond minimum side yard requirements, up to a maximum
of fifty ( 50 ) feet. In commercial and industrial districts, no building shall exceed fifty
( 50 ) feet in height, provided that such height limits be exceeded when authorized by the
Board of Adjustment. Structures supporting utility facilities are exempted from the
provisions of this section.
4.2 The height regulations shall not apply to television and radio towers, church spires,
belfries, monuments, farm buildings, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery
lofts, cooling towers, grain elevators, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator
bulkheads, drilling rigs, conveyors, flagpoles and other pertinent mechanical apparatus
which may be erected to any height not in conflict with any other applicable regulations.
Section 5. CONVERSION TO TWO OR MULTIPLE FAMILY. The Board of Adjustment
may recommend a variance to permit the conversion of any building into a· two family or
multiple family dwelling in any permissible residential district, provided that the lot area per
family shall not be reduced thereby to less than the lot area required for such conversion in each
of the respective residential districts, and provided further that such conversion is in accordance
with the applicable health code.
Section 6 TEMPORARY BUILDING. Temporary building(s) with construction work may be
permitted in· any district during the period that the construction work is in progress, but such
temporary building(s) shall be removed within thirty days after completion or abandonment of
the construction work.
Section 7 LOT AREA AND WIDTH. Any lot of record at the time of passage of this
Ordinance having less area or width than herein required may be used for a single family
dwelling where such uses are permitted as provided in this Ordinance and subject to further
provisions of Article 19, Section 2.
Section 8. REDUCTION OF LOTS AND PARTS OF OTHERS. No lot shall be sold,
divided, or set off in such a manner that either the portion sold, divided, or set off, or the portion
remaining shall be less than the minimum size prescribed by the regulations relating to the
district in which it is situated, unless it becomes a part of an adjacent lot meeting the
requirements.
Section 9. YARDS.
9.1 Where thirty (30) percent or more of the block front is improved with buildings, then
no part of any new building shall project beyond a line joining the two adjacent comers of
the buildings on either side thereof, or, where there is a building on only one side, beyond
a line projected from the corresponding adjacent comers of the two nearest buildings,
except that no building shall be required to provide a front yard greater than forty (40)
64
(
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
feet. Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a
street upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured
from such official line;
Buildings on through lots shall provide the required front yard on both streets;
In the case where the block front imprqved with buildings amounts to less than thirty (30)
percent of the total number oflots, including vacant Lots, on one side of the street between
two intersecting streets, the required minimum yards of the district shall be observed;
The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be the same as the required
front yard on such street, and no accessory building shall project beyond the required
front yard on either street;
On a corner lot in any district, except the Central Business District (CB), no fence, wall,
hedge, tree or other planting or structure that will obstruct vision between a height of
three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the ground shall be erected, placed or maintained
within the triangular area formed, by connecting the right-of-way lines at points which
are twenty (20) feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, and measured
along the right-of-way lines;
The ordinary projections from buildings including eaves, sills, cornices, or other similar
architectural features (but not including uncovered patios, uncovered carports, or other
concr~te slab structures) may project or extend not more than three (3) feet into a required
yard.
Section 10. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. No portion of the public road, street or
alley right-of-way shall be used, or occupied by an abutting use of land or stntcture for storage or
display purposes, or to provide any parking or loading space required by this Ordinance.
Section 11. VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS. On any corner lot at a street intersection
which has some form of traffic controls in all districts, there shall be no obstructions to traffic
visibility within the clear sight triangle which is formed by the intersection of the centerline of
two ( 2 ) intersecting streets and a straight line joining the two ( 2 ) said centerlines at points
fifty-five ( 55 ) feet distant from their point of intersection. On any comer lot at a street
intersection which does not have any form of traffic control in all districts, there shall be no
obstructions to traffic visibility within the clear sight triangle which is formed by the intersection
of the centerline of two ( 2 ) intersecting streets and a straight line joining the two ( 2 ) said
centerlines at points a given number of feet distant from their point of intersection. The distances
from this point of intersection are given in the following table for various speeds in miles per
hour of enforced speed limit:
____ DISTANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
Miles Per Hour
20
25
30
65
Distance Measurements
73 feet
99 feet
126 feet
Section 12. HEDGES, FENCES. and WALLS.
12,1 Hedges, fences, or walls not exceeding thirty ( 30) inches in height may be erected on
any part of a lot in any residential zone district except as further regulated on corner lots,
between the front lot line and the front building line for structures; and on any other part
of the lot they may be erected to a height not exceeding six ( 6 ) feet. The height of such
hedges, fences, or walls shall be determined by measurement from the ground level at the
lowest grade level within three ( 3 ) feet on either side of such hedges, fences, or walls.
Any fence, or wall more than six ( 6 ) shall be considered a structure.
12.2 If a residential lot faces into a commercial or an industrial zone district, the height of the
fence or wall in front of the building and I or structures may be four ( 4 ) feet high. On
corner lots, that part of a backyard fence or wall which extends to the side property line
many be five ( 5 ) feet high.
12.3 Security or screening fences are permitted in all districts except residential districts, but
shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Fences in excess of six ( 6 ) feet will be allowed
in the case of tennis courts and swimming pools.
Section 13. MOTELS.
13.1 Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre and the access and egress
shall be located not closer than thirty ( 30 ) feet to the side lot lines. The setback of any
structµres shall be fifty ( 50 ) feet from the front lot line on the street on which the
property fronts.
13.2 Yard Requirements. A minimum of twenty-five ( 25) feet shall be provided for both side
yards and a thirty ( 30) foot rear yards.hall be provided.
13.3 Lot Area Per Unit. A minimum of one thousand ( 1,000) square feet shall be required for
each bedroom unit.
13.4 Parking, Height and Sign Regulations as described elsewhere in this ordinance shall
apply.
Section 14. SERVICE STATIONS. In any district where permitted, a service station shall be
subject to the regulations set out in this section.
1. Areas used by motor vehicles: The area for use by motor vehicles, except access
drives thereto, as well as any structures, shall not encroach on any required yard
area.
2. Location of fuel pumps: No fuel delivery pump shall be located within twenty
( 20) feet from any side lot line nor with thirty-five ( 35 ) feet of any right-of-way
line and no fuel pump shall be located within fifty ( 50 ) feet of the side or rear lot
line which lies next to a residence.
66
3. Repair work: All major repair work shall be done within a completely enclosed
building.
4. Storage of parts and vehicles after hours: All vehicle parts, dismantled vehicles
and merchandise shall be stored with the confines of the building during the hours
when the business is not operating.
Section 14. DESIGNED RESIDENTlAL SUBDIVISIONS. In the case of a designed
residential subdivision or group of two ( 2 ) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of
ground, not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided,
or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance to the individual building units in such group housing, the
application of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance may be varied by the Board of Adjustment in a
manner which will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood; however, in no case
shall the Board of Adjustment authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the housing is to
be located, or a smaller area per dwelling unit than the minimum required in such district, or a
greater height than the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance permit in such district.
Section 14. DESIGNED SHOPPING CENTERS. In the case of a designed shopping center,
upon examination of the plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission, if such plan meets all
other requirements, the side yard requirements for each individual building may be waived. In
no case, however, shall any portion of such a combined structure be located nearer than thirty
( 30 ) feet to any side lot line of the tract on which a building is erected.
Section 15. SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNAS.
Location Requirements:
A. Any satellite rece1vmg antenna hereafter constructed, erected or installed in a
residential zoning district shall be mounted at a height no greater than the peak of
the roof of the residence located on the lot on which the antenna is to be located. If
there is no residence on the lot in which the antenna is to be located, the height shall
be controlled by the residence on the lot nearest to the lot on which the antenna will
be located, and in no event shall the height be greater than fifteen ( 15 ) feet. The
height of the antenna shall be measured vertically from the highest point of the
signal receiving apparatus, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base
which supports the antenna.
B. No satellite receiving antenna shall be mounted, located or placed permanently or
temporarily in any residential zoning district in any front yard that is adjacent to the
principal structure on the lot, and not within five ( 5 ) feet of the lot lines in the· side
or rear yards .
C. No satellite receiving antenna in residential districts shall be greater than twelve
( 12 ) feet in diameter.
67
D. Satellite receiving antennas mounted on trailers or vehicles may be allowed for a
period not to exceed fifteen ( 15 ) days. All others shall be permanently placed.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a satellite receiving antenna may be
mounted to a residential dwelling so long as any and all of the structural
requirements of the current adopted addition of the Uniform Building Code are
adhered to and followed; however, the top of such satellite receiving antenna shall
not be higher than the peak of the roof of such building, and such satellite receiving
antenna shall not be located on the front of the residence.
F. The location of a satellite receiving antenna existing at the time of enactment of this
ordinance that is not in conformance with the provisions of this section may
continue during the period of time as such satellite receiving antenna is in use by the
entity owning the property at the adoption time of this ordinance; however, when
such satellite receiving antenna is replaced, or when title to the property upon which
· such satellite receiving antenna is located is changed or transferred in any manner,
or the nonconforming use as specified herein has been discontinued for a period of
sixty ( 60 ) days, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished and any future use
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section.
Section 16. COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
16.1.1 INTENT: In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the City
finds that these regulations are necessary in order to:
A. Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the City;
B. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and
siting standards;
C. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers to accommodate new
wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers
needed to serve the community.
D. Minimize the construction of said tower facilities in and near residential
neighborhoods to ensure the safety of residents and to protect and preserve the
general character of these neighborhoods.
16.2 DEFINITIONS:
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
68
antennas ( e.g., panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes ), and omnidirectional
antennas such as whip antennas.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: Licensed
commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal
communication services ( PCS ), specialized mobilized radio ( SMR }, enhanced
specialized mobilized rc~dio ( ESMR ), paging, and similar services.
TOWER: Any ground or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof
taller than fifteen ( 15 ) feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts,
intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or
similar apparatus above grade.
16.3 GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Towers in Residential Zoning Districts: Towers shall be allowed only in
the following areas of residential districts:
1. Towers supporting amateur radio antennas, television antennas,
broadcast radio antennas, citizen band radio antennas, and short-wave
listening antennas, etc., and conforming to all applicable provisions of this
section shall be allowed only in the rear yard and/or side yard of
residentially-zoned parcels.
2. Towers supporting commercial antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this Section shall be allowed only in the following
sites in residentially zoned parcels of land:
a. Church sites, when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers;
b. Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and
c. Government, school, utility, and institutional sites.
B. Co-Location Requirements: A proposal for a new commercial wireless
telecommunication service tower shall not be approved unless it can reasonably
be documented by the applicant that the telecommunications equipment planned
for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or building within a one-half mile search radius of the proposed tower due
to one or more of the following reasons:
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a registered
engineer licensed by the State of Iowa;
2. The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower
69
or building as documented by a registered engineer licensed by the State
of Iowa;
3. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a registered engineer licensed by
the State of Iowa;
4. In spite of best efforts, within ninety ( 90 ) days, the applicant is
unable to negotiate reasonable business terms regarding the lease or
purchase of space on an existing tower; or
5. Other reasons affecting technical performance, system coverage,
and system capacity that make it impractical to place or locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved
tower.
C. Tower Design Requirements: Proposed .construction or modification of
towers shall meet the following design requirements:
1. Towers shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the
maximum extent possible through the use of color, except in instance where the
color is dictated by federal or state authorities. Such as the Federal Aviation
Administration ( FAA ).
2. Towers shall be designed to support at least three ( 3) carriers,
with up to twelve ( 12 ) eight ( 8 ) foot panels per carrier.
3. Any entity intending to build a communication structure solely for
the leasing of antenna space shall provide proof of a lease agreement
with a wireless communication company for the location of an antenna on
the proposed structure.
D. Permitted Locations: Towers may be located in the Agricultural District if it
is intended for future Commercial or Industrial development as indicated in the
Future Land Use Plan, as contained within the City's Comprehensive Plan.
E. Tower Setbacks: Towers shall conform with each of the following
minimum setback requirements:
1. The tower or antenna in the Commercial or Industrial Districts shall
not encroach upon any easements. The minimum distance to the
nearest property line shall be equal to the height of the tower. The
minimum distance to the nearest residential structure shall be two
( 2 ) times the height of the tower.
70
,.. ..
2. The tower or antenna in any Residential Districts shall not
encroach into any easements or required front yard, side yard, or
rear yard areas in said residential districts as specified in this
zoning ordinance.
3. The setback shall be. measured between the base of the tower
located nearest the property line and the actual property line. A
lesser setback distance may be used if a registered engineer
licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the collapse of
the tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
4. Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street, with the following exceptions:
a. In industrial zoning districts, towers may be placed within a
side yard abutting a private street or driveway.
b. ~On sites adjacent to public streets on all sides, towers may
be placed within a side yard abutting a public local street if
the setbacks are met from property lines as specified by this
ordinance.
. 5. A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied at the sole discretion of the Zoning
Administrator to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or
proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power
line support device, or similar structure.
F. Tower Lighting: Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and
shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the
Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) or other federal or state authority for a
particular tower, or if required by the Zoning Administrator for security or safety
reasons. This provision shall not preclude the placement of an antenna on an
existing or proposed lighting standard.
G. Signs and Advertising: The use of any portion of a tower for signs other
than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. Upon completion of
tower site construction, a placard containing the name, address, and telephone
number of the principal owner or operator of the tower structure is required. This
placard shall be affixed in a location so that it is clearly visible at the perimeter of
the site. Said placard shall not exceed four ( 4 ) square feet in area. The
pertinent ownership information on the placard shall be kept current and updated
as needed. No additional signage shall be allowed other than those required by
the FCC.
71
( H. Accessory Utility Buildings: All utility buildings and structures accessory to
a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding
environment and shall meet such setback requirements as are compatible with
the actual placement of the tower. Ground mounted equipment shall be
screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative
screening better reflects and complements the architectural character
of the surrounding neighborhood.. Acceptance of design from a registered
engineer licensed by the State of Iowa shall be left to the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator.
I. Abandoned or Unused Towers or Portions of Towers: The operator I
owner of a tower shall provide the City with a copy of the notice to the FCC of
intent to cease operations. All abandoned or unused towers and associated
aboveground facilities shall be removed within ;twelve ( 12 ) months of the
cessation of operations of an antenna facility at the site, unless the Zoning
Administrator approves a time extension. In the event that a tower is not
removed within twelve ( 12 ) months of the cessation of operations at a site, the
City may remove the tower and associated facilities and the costs of removal
assessed against the property.
J. Antennas Mounted on Roofs, Walls, and Existing Towers: The placement
of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers shall
be approved by issuance of a building I zoning permit based on administrative
review.
K. Interference with Telecommunications: No new or existing
telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications
or private telecommunications, including without limitation: radio, television, and
personal communications. Any violation shall be enforced in accordance with
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) .
L. Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the information required
elsewhere in this section, prior to the issuance of a building I zoning permit, an
applicant for off-premise tower/antennas shall include the following supplemental
information:
1. A report from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa
indicating the following:
a. Description of the tower I antenna height and design
including a cross section and elevation.
b. · Documentation of the approximate height above grade for
potential mounting positions for co-located antennas,
minimum of three ( 3 ). and the approximate minimum
separation distance between antennas; and
72
c. Description of the tower's general capacity including the
number and type of antennas that can be accommodated on
the tower , minimum of three ( 3 ).
2. For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a
letter of intent committing the tower owner and his I her successors
to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in
writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use,
including without limitation, reasonable rental rates for such shared
use.
16.4 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS: All antennas and towers erected,
constructed, or located within the City and all wiring therefore shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. All applicable provisions of this Section.
B. Tower designs shall be certified by a registered engineer licensed by the
State of Iowa to conform with the latest structural standards and wind-load
requirements pf the Uniform Building Code ( UBC ), Electronics Industry
Association ( EIA ), or the current Building Code utilized and adopted by the City,
whichever is more restrictive. Acceptance of design from a registered engineer
licensed by the State of Iowa shall be left to the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator.
C. No part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment, wires, or
braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part
of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
D. Towers and antennas shall conform to accepted electrical engineering
methods and practices and comply with the provisions of the National Electric
Code (NEC).
E. Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage
climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons by erection of a security device or
fence at least six ( 6 ) feet in height.
16.5: EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS: Antennas and towers in existence as of
the adoption date of this ordinance that do not conform to or comply with this section
are subject to the following provisions:
A. Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now
existing but may not be replaced or materially altered without complying with this
section.
73
( B. If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location,
and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefore, but without
otherwise complying with this section; provided, however, that if the cost of
repairing the tower to the former use, physical dimensions, and location would
exceed the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, the tower may not be
repaired or restored except in full compliance with this section.
74
ARTICLE 16
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 1. OFF-STREET PARKING. Except for at the time of construction, alteration,
moving into, enlargement of a structure or building, or change in the use of the land, off-street
parking spaces and loading areas shall be pmvided, constructed, and maintained for all uses as
follows:
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
F)
G)
H)
I)
J)
K)
L)
M)
N)
Single Family Residential:
Duplex Residential:
Multi- Family Residential:
Condominium Residential:
Townhouse Residential:
Mobile Home Residential:
Group Residential:
Home Occupation:
Private Club or Lodge:
Convalescent Services:
Hospital:
Hotel I Motel; Boarding or
Rooming House, Fraternity or
Sorority; or Resort Facility:
Public Assembly; Community Center,
Library, Museum or Art Gallery:
Bowling Alleys:
75
2 spaces
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2 space per mobile home
1 space for each two bedrooms
1 space per dwelling unit, plus
3 spaces for each 200 square feet
devoted to said home occupation
1 space for every 4 memberships
1 space for each eight beds, plus 1
Space for each 3 employees on the
largest shift
1 space for each three hospital beds;
plus 1 space for each two employees
on the major work shift
1 space per sleeping room; plus 1
space fot each 4 seats in public
assembly areas
1 space for each four seats;
10 spaces plus l additional for each
300 square feet of floor area in
excess of 2,000 square feet
4 spaces per each lane
0) Automatic car wash: 4 spaces for each washing bay;
2 spaces for each do-it-yourself area
P) General Retail Sales 1 space per 200 feet of gross floor
Area
Q) Offices, business and 3 spaces plus one additional space
professional agencies, banks, for each 400 square feet of floor area
medical or dental clinics: over 1,000 square feet
R) Cocktail Lounges or Restaurants: 1 space for each two seats, plus 1
space for each two employees
S) Primary Educational Facility: 1 space per classroom or 1 space for
every four seats in the largest facility
for public assembly, whichever is
greater
T) Secondary Educational Facility: 1 space per classroom or 1 space for
every six seats in the largest facility
for public assembly, whichever is
greater
U) Industry: 1 space for every two employees on
the largest shift, plus sufficient space
to accommodate all vehicles used in
connection with the industrial use
Section 2: COMPUTATION OF SPACES.
A) In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and
to which said use is similar, shall apply, as determined by the Planning arid
Zoning Commission.
B) Where fractional spaces occur, the parking spaces required shall be construed to
be the nearest larger whole number.
C) Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of
this Ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number
of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of
ten percent (10%) or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces
shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building
or use existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is enlarged to the
76
extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use
shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
D) In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses if computed separately. Not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, nightclubs
or cafes, and up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parking spaces required for a
church or school auditorium may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail
stores, repair shops, service establishments, and other similar uses not normally open,
used or operated during the same hours as those listed first above.
Section 3: LOCATION AND TYPE OF PARKING SPACES. All parking spaces required herein
shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number
of spaces is required due to a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively
or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and
maintained no more than four hundred ( 400) feet from an institutional or other nonresidential building
being served.
A) In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the
building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used,
a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution, and
shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
B) Off-street parking spaces may be located within the required front yard in any
commercial or industrial district; however, no off-street parking shall be permitted in the
required front yard in any residential district except the front yard of a school or
recreational facility or upon a driveway providing access to a garage, carport or parking
area for the dwelling.
C) All required off-street parking areas in any commercial or industrial district of more than
five spaces shall be surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, or crushed rock so as to
provide a durable surface. The parking area shall be graded and drained to dispose of all
surface water accumulation within the lot, and shall be arranged and marked to provide
for orderly and safe loading or unloading.
D) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking areas shall be arranged to reflect
light away from adjacent lots and uses ofland.
E) No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet from any street right-of-way.
In case the parking lot adjoins a residential district, it shall be at least five feet from the
property line and shall be effectively screened immediately by the use of a fence, hedge,
other similar methods, subject to City approval.
77
( F) All off-street parking spaces shall have an area of not less than two hundred
( 200 ) square feet plus necessary maneuvering space for the parking of a motor
vehicle, and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords
satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles. Space for maneuvering,
incidental to parking or unparking, shall not encroach upon any public right-ofway.
G) Access Drives:
A. In business districts, no parking space or access thereto, except entrance or
exit drives as limited in this section, shall be within five ( 5 ) feet of a
street or lot line. Entrance or exit drives connecting the parking area and
the street shall be permitted with the five ( 5 ) foot strip required above,
provided:
1) Such drives shall not exceed fifteen ( 15 ) feet in total aggregate
width for each fifty ( 50 ) feet of street line abutting such lot, but in
no case exceeding forty ( 40 ) feet in total aggregate width for each
street line upon which a lot abuts;
2) Such drives have at least sixty ( 60 ) feet of unobstructed vision in
both directions along the street into which the drive enters
measured from the centerline of the drive at the point where it
enters the street, and the centerline of such drive shall be at least
sixty ( 60 ) feet from the centerline of any street intersecting the
street onto which the drive enters;
3) Such drives shall have on each side a triangular area formed by the
intersection of the driveway line, the street line and a straight line
joining said lines at points thirty ( 30 ) feet distant from their point
of intersection. Within such triangular area, no parking or loading
or unloading shall be permitted, nor shall there be any obstruction
to traffic visibility.
B. In industrial districts, no parking space or access thereto, except entrance
or exit drives as limited in this section, shall be within five ( 5 ) feet of any
lot line. Entrance or exit drives connecting the parking and the street shall
be permitted with the five ( 5 ) foot strip required above, provided these
drives meet the requirements as specified in subsection A of this section.
Section 4: OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED. In any district, in connection
with every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse,
goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or
merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least
78
one (1) off-street loading space plus one (1) additional loading space for each twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
A) Each loading space shall be no less than twelve feet (12') in width, forty feet (40')
in length and fifteen feet (15') in height.
B) Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or open space, except
where adjoining a residential district. If the loading space is adjacent to a
residential district, it shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from said district and
be effectively screened from view.
C) Off-street loading and unloading space with proper access from a street or alley,
and with at least fourteen ( 14 ) feet of vertical clearance shall be provided, either
within or outside the building to adequately serve the use on the lot. All off-street
loading and unloading spaces shall have an all weather surface to provide safe and
convenient access and use during all seasons.
79
( ARTICLE 17
SIGNS AND AWNINGS REGULATIONS
Section 1. INTENT. The intent of this Article is to promote the health, safety, prosperity,
aesthetics and general welfare of the community by providing for regulation of the erection of
signs and awnings and to provide to the administration and enforcement of the regulations
established for such purpose.
Section 2: DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following definitions shall apply:
1. Sign: Any object or device, or part thereof, situated outdoors, which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to any object, person,
institution, organization, business, business product, service, event or location by
any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, color,
motion, illumination, or projected images. "Sign" includes any billboard, freestanding
sign, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, projecting sign, portable sign and
temporary sign. "Sign" does not include the following: Flags of nations, states
and cities; objects or devices visible through windows; or works of art, except
murals, which in no way identify a business, product or service.
2. Sign Face: The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is
. displayed or illustrated. The face of a sign composed of separate characters or
words attached directly to a building, wall or other surface shall be the smallest
rectangle which encloses all of the characters or words.
3. Billboard: Shall mean an,y flat surface forty-eight ( 48 ) square feet or more in
area, erected on a framework, or attached to posts, buildings or other structures,
and used for the display of bills, posters or other advertising materials produced
on paper sheets, cloth or other materials and posted, tacked, or fastened thereto.
4. Ground Sign: Shall mean any sign, the structure of which is erected upon or
supported by the ground.
5. Roof Sign: Shall mean any sign placed on or above the roof of any building or
structure.
6. Public Property: All real property owned by the City of Hampton or any state or
federal public entity, or dedicated to public use, including the entire width of all
public street and alley rights-of-way.
7. Wall Sign: Shall mean any sign attached or erected against the wall of a building
or other structure, with the exposed sign face in a plane parallel to the plane of
said wall or structure, including signs painted directly on a wall.
80
(
8. Projecting Sign: A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by, fastened to, or suspended by, a wall or a building or other structure.
9. Awning: Shall mean drop-awnings attached to buildings by means of removable
metal frames. It shall also mean all metal and I or wood projections also referred
to as canopies or marquees.
10. Area: Shall mean the display surface included within the framework of any sign
and measured from the outside of the framework.
11. Street Line: Shall mean the place where the public sidewalk begins and the
private property line ends.
12. Portable Sign: A free standing sign not permanently anchored or secured. All
portable signs are temporary signs.
13. Temporary Sign: Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wallboard, or other light materials with or without frames, intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time only. All temporary signs are portable
signs.
14. Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization of any kind.
15. Enforcement Officer: The person designated by the City Council to monitor and
enforce compliance with this article.
16. On-Premises Sign: A sign, the primary purpose of which is to identify and I or
direct attention to an occupation, business, service, activity, product, campaign, or
attraction manufactured, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
17. Off-Premises Sign: A sign that is not an on-premises sign.
18. Home Occupation: An occupation or a profession conducted in a dwelling unit
identified by the Zoning Ordinance and the City Code of Hampton.
Section 3: Exemptions: The provisions and regulations of this article shall not apply to the
following signs:
1. Real Estate: A real estate sign with a sign face not exceeding six ( 6 ) square feet
in area which advertises the sale, rental or lease of any premises upon which the
sign is located. Not more than one ( 1 ) sign shall be permitted per one hundred
feet of lot frontage. Special signs and entrance treatments to subdivisions shall
be permitted provided they are in keeping with the character of the area.
81
2. Professional: A professional name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area.
3. Special Events: A temporary sign advertising or promoting a special event or
activity sponsored by a public, religious or non-profit organization and open to the
general public; provided however, that all such signs be erected no more than thirty
(30) days before the event and shall be removed no later than thr~e (3) days after the
end of the event.
4. Construction: Signs identifying the names of the architect, engineer,
contractor or other individuals involved in the construction of a building or other
project, and/or announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for
which the building is intended. Each sign shall have no more than two (2) sign faces,
which shall be parallel to one another, no sign face shall exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in size and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height measured from the ground.
All signs shall be removed within one (1) month following the completion of
construction.
5. Occupational: An occupational sign in a commercial district denoting only
the name and occupation of a person engaged in such occupation on the premises on
which the sign is located; provided that there shall be only one (1) such sign per
premises under this exemption and shall have not more than two (2) sign faces, which
shall be parallel to each other, and no sign shall exceed ten (10) square feet in area.
6. Memorial: A memorial sign or tablet, the name of a building and the date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible materials.
7. Traffic: A traffic or other municipal or state sign, legal notice, railroad
crossing sign, danger sign, and other temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs.
8. Public: Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by
or upon the order of public officials, such as safety signs, welcome signs, trespassing
signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, and all other similar signs,
including signs designating public hospitals, libraries, schools, parks, airports, and
other institutions or places of public interest or concern.
9. Political: Political campaign signs announcing or promoting candidates
seeking public office or issues pertinent to a political election; provided that this
exemption shall apply only to signs which are located on private property with the
consent of the property owner and are removed not more than three (3) days after
such election to which they pertain.
82
10. Seasonal Decorations: Signs pertaining to recognized national holidays and
national observances.
11. Bulletin Boards: A bulletin board not over eight ( 8 ) square feet in area for
public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the
premises of said institution.
12. Vehicular: Signs which are accessory to the use of any kind of vehicle ifthe sign
is painted or attached directly to the body of the vehicle.
13. lndoors: .. Signs located within buildings, including signs visible through
windows.
14. Directional: Signs notifying the public of the existence and I or location of local
religious, charitable and civic organizations and their facilities.
15. Temporary: Temporary signs in residential zoning districts advertising garage
sales, or similar activities and the sale of night crawlers; also, temporary signs of a
commercial nature outside of the residential zoning districts, provided that no
more than one ( 1 ) temporary sign is located on any such premises at any one
time and that such sign does not remain on the premises for more than a total of
thirty ( 30 ) days in any calendar year.
16. Residential Identification: A sign with a single sign face not more than two ( 2)
square feet in area identifying the street address and I or occupant of any
residence.
Section 4: SIGNS ON OR EXTENDING OVER PUBLIC PROPERTY.
1. Signs on Public Property: No sign or sign structure shall be erected, placed or
maintained on public property with the prior approval of the Enforcement Officer,
except for traffic and other public signs erected by or upon the order of public
officials in the performance of their duties. The subsection shall not apply to
signs not otherwise prohibited by this article, which extend over public property
from adjoining structures to which they are attached.
2. Minimum Clearance Over Sidewalks: No awning, sign, or sign structure
extending over a public sidewalk or any public property, other than the traveled
portion of any street or alley, shall be less than eight ( 8 ) feet in height, measured
from the ground to its lowest point.
3. Minimum Clearance Over Streets: No awning, sign, or sign structure
extending over the traveled portion of any street or alley shall be less than sixteen
( 16 ) feet in height, measured from the ground to its lowest point.
83
4. Maximum Extension: No sign or sign structure shall extend more than six ( 6)
feet into the airspace above a public sidewalk, street, alley, or any public property.
5. Construction and Maintenance: All signs and sign structures extending over
any public property shall be securely fastened and constructed and maintained so
that there is no unreasonable danger of collapse due to wind or other cause.
Repairs shall be ordered at the discretion of the Enforcement Officer.
6. Visibility: .. No sign or sign structure extending over any public property shall
obstruct the visibility or any traffic control device, other wise interfere with the
safe operation of motor vehicles, or encroach unnecessarily on the visibility of
signage on other premises.
Section 5. Off-Premises Si~n Prohibited in Business and Residential Districts. The
erection or maintenance of an off-premises sign is prohibited in Business and Residential
Districts.
Section 6: Maintenance. All signs and sign structures, together with all of their supports,
braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair, in a proper state of preservation, and free
from any conditions posing an unreasonable risk of harm to the public. The sign faces of all
signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. ·
Section 7: PROHIBITED SIGNS. The signs hereinafter designated shall be prohibited and it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any such sign:
1. Signs on Public Property: Any sign or sign structure located in whole or in part
on any public property, except traffic and other public signs and signs specifically
approved by the Enforcement Officer or public authority with jurisdiction over the
property.
2. Billboards: Billboards erected in Business and Residential Districts.
3. Obstructions to Doors, Windows, and Fire Escapes: Any sign or sign structure
erected, located, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any
door, window or fire escape.
4. Audible Signs: Except for use by city officials, law enforcement, and emergency
vehicles.
5. Traffic Hazards: Any sign or sign structure located in any place where, by
reason of its position, shape, color or size, may interfere with, obstruct the view
of, or be confused with any official traffic control device, or which makes use of
the words, "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or
character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic, except in
the case of official traffic control devices.
84
6. Obsolete Signs: Any sign, together with its sign structure, that advertises an
activity, business, product, or service which has not been conducted or offered on
the premises on which the sign is located for sixty ( 60 ) days or more.
7. Abandoned Signs: Any sign or sign structure that has been abandoned and not
used for sign purposes for sixty ( 60 ) days or more.
8. All Signs not specifically authorized by the ordinance are prohibited.
Section 8. PERMITTED SIGNS. Subject to all other restrictions and prohibitions and the
exemptions set forth in this article, only the signs specifically permitted in this section shall be
lawful and no person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign or sign structure which is not
authorized herein. All references to districts in this section shall mean the various zoning
districts established under the City of Hampton Zoning Ordinance. Sign permits are required for
signs permitted by this section.
Signs Permitted in Residential Districts:
1. One ( 1 ) on-premises sign upon which is displayed the name of a religious
institution, school, library, community center, or similar institution located on the
premises and the announcement of its services or activities. Such sign shall have
no more than two ( 2) sign faces, which shall be parallel to one another, and shall
not exceed forty-eight ( 48 ) square feet in area per sign face. The sign shall be a
free standing or wall sign. A free standing sign shall not be greater than six ( 6 )
feet in height measured from the ground.
2. If the premises includes a multiple dwelling complex containing eight ( 8 ) or
more units or, includes a mobile home park containing ten ( 10 ) or more mobile
home lots, one ( 1 ) on-premises identification sign is permitted. Such sign shall
be free standing, and shall have no more than two ( 2 ) sign faces, which shall be
parallel to one another, and shall not exceed twenty-four ( 24) square feet in area
per sign face.
3. Except as otherwise provided, home occupation or professional signs in any
residence district or in connection with any residential building in any other
district shall not exceed two ( 2 ) square feet in area.
Signs Permitted in All Other Districts: Any or all of the following signs shall be
permitted on each premises which is not located in a Residential District:
1. One ( 1 ) on-premises free-standing sign having no more than two ( 2 ) sign faces,
which shall be parallel to one another, and shall not exceed one hundred-forty four
( 144) square feet in area per sign face. Such sign shall not be greater than thirtysix
( 36 ) feet in height measured from the ground, to the top of the sign. If
premises has frontage on more than one street, one such sign shall be permitted
for each frontage.
85
2. One ( 1 ) on-premises wall sign limited to ten percent ( 10% ) of the area of the
wall upon which such sign is attached or displayed.
3. One ( 1 ) on-premises roof sign having no more than two ( 2 ) sign faces, which
shall be parallel to one another, and shall not exceed one hundred ( 100 ) square
feet in area per sign face. Such sign shall not extend above the highest portion of
the permanent roof or wall of a building or structure to which it is attached.
4. One ( 1 ) on-premises projecting sign having no more than two ( 2 ) sign faces,
which shall be parallel to one another, and shall not exceed fifty ( 50 ) square feet
in area per sign face. Such sign shall not extend above the top of the building or
structure wall to which it is attached.
5. One ( 1 ) permanent window sign provided that no more than twenty-five percent
( 25%) of the area of such window is so.used.
Section 9. ILLUMINATED SIGNS. Signs may be illuminated from within or with exterior
lighting. The illumination of a sign shall not cause a nuisance to nearby residents or be
illuminated in a manner to cause a hazard to drivers of motor vehicles.
Section 10. HISTORIC DISTRICT. The conditions listed below shall apply to all buildings
and structures in a unique historic district of the city identified by the attached Exhibit "A" and
incorporated herewith.
1. It is recognized that certain historic signs may provide local color, character,
individuality, and a sense of place or orientation. Examples of these are ghost
signs ( faded sign at least 50 years old ), landmark signs and I or signs made up of
materials that are no longer economically viable to produce or manufacture.
These signs may be allowed upon application to the Enforcement Officer who
may consult with the Hampton Historical Preservation Commission, ( HHPC ).
Absent a HHPC, the Enforcement Officer may confer with local historians before
approving a permit for such sign.
2. Movable awnings supported throughout on metal frames securely attached to the
structure or building may extend over the sidewalk portion of public property a
distance not to exceed two thirds ( 2/3 ) of the width of the sidewalk space
provided that minimum clearance over the sidewalk shall not be less than eight
( 8 ) feet in height, measured from the ground to its lowest point. Permanent
canopies or marquees, except those already in existence at the time of passage of
this ordinance, shall not be permitted.
Section 11. PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
1. All obsolete signs and abandoned signs must be removed with sixty ( 60 ) days of
publication of this ordinance. The thirty ( 30 ) day time period for allowable
86
,_
temporary signs and portable signs shall begin the day after publication of this
ordinance.
2. All other signs that exist on the affective date of this article or any amendment
hereto, which were lawful under all laws, including zoning laws in effect
immediately prior to the effective date, but which would not be allowed under the
terms of this article or any amendment, the use and maintenance of such sign may
be continued for a period not to exceed twenty-four ( 24) months, at which time,
nonconforming signs shall be brought in to compliance with the terms of this
ordinance.
3. The following state permitted billboards, erected with the consent of the City of
Hampton, Iowa, are hereby permitted to remain at their present locations and shall
not be required to be removed under Section 11.2 of this ordinance; State permit
numbers 35-5007, 35-5008, 35-5001 and 35-0002.
4. No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, relocated or reconstructed following
the effective date of this ordinance.
5. No sign shall be deemed to exist as of the effective date of this article unless it
shall have been completely erected prior to said effective date.
Section 12. PERMIT REQUIRED. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be
unlawful for .any person to erect or relocate any sign without obtaining a sign permit form the
Enforcement Officer and making payment of the permit fee. Minor repair, alterations,
reconstruction and maintenance of existing conforming signs, and new signs approved by a valid
permit and with applicable payments made, shall not require additional fees or permits, provided,
after repair, alteration, reconstruction or maintenance, the sign continues to conform to the
permit.
Section 13. PERMIT APPLICTION AND ISSUANCE.
1. Application: Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Enforcement
Officer on a form provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto
the following information:
• Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
• Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be
attached or erected.
• A sketch indicating the position of the sign in relation to the lot lines, the
buildings on the lot, and nearby buildings or structures.
87
\,
•
•
•
A sketch of the proposed sign showing its dimensions and message, if any,
itogether with a description of the materials from which it is to be made and its
method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
The name and address of the person erecting the sign .
Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land on which the
sign is to be erected or attached.
• A description of the nature or type of any illumination planned for the sign.
• Such other information as the Enforcement Officer shall require to indicate
full compliance with this article and all other applicable ordinances of the
City.
2 Permit Fee: A nonrefundable fee of $25.00 shall accompany each permit
application.
3. Issuance: A sign permit shall be issued by the Enforcement Officer when the
application and the investigation thereof indicates compliance by the applicant
with all provisions of this article and any other applicable laws. Any conditions
imposed pursuant to subsection 4 of this section shall be clearly stated in the
permit.
4. Conditions: In issuing a sign permit, the Enforcement Officer may impose
special conditions regarding a proposed sign. Such conditions may be imposed
only when reasonably necessary for public safety reasons and may include special
·. restrictions or requirements relating to size, height, clearance between the ground
and the sign face and set back from a premises boundary or street line.
5. Rejection and Appeal: If the Enforcement Officer rejects the application the
reasons for such denial shall be given in writing to the applicant. Such notice of
rejection shall also inform the applicant of the right to appeal the rejection to the
City Board of Adjustment. If any application is denied or no action taken by the
Enforcement Officer within a reasonable time, the applicant shall have the right fo
appeal to the City Board of Adjustment and the Board of Adjustment may make a
decision, or reverse the decision of the Enforcement Officer to grant a permit.
The applicant shall have the same right of appeal concerning any special
conditions imposed by the Enforcement Officer in issuing any sign permit. For
appeals under section 10, Historic District, of this ordinance, the applicant and I or
the Hampton Historic Preservation Committee shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Enforcement Officer to the Board of Adjustment.
6. Records: A careful and complete record of all permit applications and permits
shall be maintained by the Enforcement Officer.
88
( 7. Validity: A sign permit is valid for one ( 1 ) year and, if the permitted sign is
erected within that time, it shall remain valid until the sign is removed or until the
permit is revoked, but no permit shall authorize the subsequent structural
alteration or relocation of the sign for which it was issued. If the permitted sign is
not erected with one ( 1 ) year of the date of issuance the permit shall expire and
be deemed revoked.
Section 14. _pERMIT REVOCATION. If a sign permit has been issued for a sign and the sign
is thereafter erected or maintained in violation of the terms of the permit or any other provision
of this article, the Enforcement Officer shall, following notice to the permit holder or any
subsequent owner of the sign and an opportunity for a hearing before the Board of Adjustment,
revoke the permit. If a sign permit is issued and the sign is not erected, relocated or
reconstructed as provided in the permit within one ( 1 ) year of the date of issuance, the permit
shall be deemed automatically revoked without the necessity of notice, a hearing, or action by the
Board of Adjustment.
Section 15. ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS:
1. Enforcement Officer: The City Council shall designate an Enforcement Officer
whose duty it shall be to inspect signs within the City of compliance with the
requirements of this article. In the event any violations are found, the
Enforcement Officer shall give written notice of the violation to the owner of the
sign and demand removal or other corrective action with a reasonable amount of
time. If the violation is not corrected with the time provided, the Enforcement
Officer shall report the violation to the City Manager and City Attorney.
2. Violations: Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects or fails to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this article or ·any of
the terms and conditions of any sign permit shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction. Each day that a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
3. Prevention and Abatement of Violations: If any sign is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, moved, maintained or used in violation
of this article or of the terms and conditions of any sign permit, the City Attorney,
at the direction of the City Manager, shall, in addition to all other remedies,
institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court to prevent such
unlawful act or to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
Section 16. VARIANCE. Any person may appeal the decision of the Enforcement Officer to
the Board of Adjustment for a variance from the provisions of the sign regulations.
89
( ARTICLE 18
CONDITIONAL USES
Section 1: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS. Allowable conditional uses may be
permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a conditional use permit in accordance with
the rules and procedures of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment will grant or
deny a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards set forth herein and with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a conditional use permit, the Board of
Adjustment will authorize the issuance of a conditional use permit and may prescribe and impose
appropriate conditions, safeguards, and a specified time limit for the performance of the
conditional use permit.
Section 2: APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A request for a
conditional use permit for a conditional use or modification of a conditional use may be initiated
by a property owner or his or her authorized agent by filing an application with the City Clerk
upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan and
other such plans and data showing dimensions, arrangements, descriptive data, and other
materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the proposed use and proposed
modification in relation to the standards set forth herein. The application shall also be
accompanied by a fee of $35.00.
A) APPLICATION AND FEE: Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be
filed with the City Clerk. The application shall include the following:
1. Name and address of the owner and applicant.
2. Address and legal description of the property.
3. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the
applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property.
4. The property address and the name and mailing address of the owner of
each lot within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property and a map
with parcels keyed to the ownership and address data.
5. A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use, including any data pertinent to the findings required for
approval of the application.
6. Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement
plans, and such additional maps and drawings, all dimensions sufficiently
shown, as required to illustrate the following:
90
( a.
b.
The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks.
c. The location, height, bulk, general appearance, and intended use of
existing and proposed buildings on the site, and approximate
location of existing buildings on abutting sites within fifty (50)
feet.
d. The location of existing and proposed site improvements including
parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access,
landscaped areas, utility or service areas, fencing and screening,
signs, and lighting.
e. The location of watercourses and drainage features.
f. The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and
loading spaces, and a calculation of applicable minimum
requirements.
g. The relationship of the site and proposed use to surrounding uses,
including pedestrian and vehicular circulation, current use of
nearby parcels, and any proposed off-site improvements to be
made.
7. A fee of $35.00.
Section 3: PROCEDURES. A conditional use shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment
unless and until the following procedures have been fulfilled:
A) The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing in relation to the
conditional use request. Notice shall be given of the public hearing as required by
State Statute by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Notice shall be given to a complete list of persons provided by the applicant who
are all of the owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the property in
question.
B) The Board of Adjustment shall determine that it is empowered under this
ordinance to grant the conditional use as described in the application, and that the
granting of the conditional use will not adversely affect the public interest.
C) In granting any conditional use, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
91
which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance
and punishable under Article 18 of this ordinance.
D) The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment grants a
conditional use permit. No order of the Board of Adjustment granting a
conditional use permit shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months from
the date of such order, unless the Board of Adjustment specifically grants a longer
period of time or a building permit is obtained within the six (6) month period and
construction is commenced.
Section 4: ST AND ARDS. No conditional use pennit shall be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless such Board shall find:
4.1 That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare
of the community.
4.2 That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish
and impair property values within the neighborhood.
4.3 That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development in improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the
district.
4.4 That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, and/or necessary facilities have
been or will be provided.
4.5 That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
Section 5: SUPPLEMENT AL ST AND ARDS. In addition to the general standards outlined in
Section 4 above, specified uses shall adhere to standards as follows:
The application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied with a proposed intent or
covenant to meet the minimum requirements described herein:
A) The yards shall be at least five hundred (500) feet distant in all directions from
any residential building;
B) The out-of-doors yards shall be screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted
solid fence not less than eight (8) feet in height;
D) An off-street parking or service area in connection with the yards may be located
outside of the screened-in area.
92
(
(
ARTICLE 19
NONCONFORMING USES
Section t. INTENT. There exists lots, structures, and uses of land and structures, within the
various zoning districts of this Ordinance or Amendments thereto which were lawful prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under
provisions of this Ordinance. These nonconformity will be allowed to continue to exist until
they are discontinued, but are declared by the Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses
in the zoning districts involved. Such nonconformity's may only expand or extend in
compliance with Section 4 of this Article.
Section 2. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN ANY DISTRICT IN WHICH
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS ARE PERMITTED USES. A single family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in that district. The yard dimensions and
other bulk regulations for the district in which such lot is located shall apply. Variance of area,
width, and yard requirements shall be obtained through action of the Board of Adjustment.
Two or more nonconforming lots, or portions thereof, that are contiguous in frontage and under
the same ownership shall be considered to be an unsubdivided parcel for purposes of this
Ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be sold and then used which does not meet lot width
and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made
which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this
Ordinance.
Section 3. NONCONFORMlNG USES OR STRUCTURES IN ANY DISTRICT OTHER
THAN A COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRJAL DISTRICT. Existing structures or premises
devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district which such structure or premise is
located shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted, or structurally altered, except
when required by law, unless:
3 .1 The use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such structure or premises is
located;
3 .2 A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the
same or more restrictive classification, provided no structural alterations are made;
3.3 If a nonconforming use of any structure or premises is discontinued for a period of one
( 1 ) year, the use of the same shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district
in which it is located.
93
( Section 4. NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES IN ANY COMMERCIAL OR
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The regulations described in Section 3 of this Article shall apply to
nonconfonning uses in a commercial or industrial district, subject to the following exception:
4.1 Nonconfonning structures may be structurally altered or enlarged in conformity with the
lot area, lot width, yard, and height requirements of the district in which such use is
located. Such construction shall be limited to buildings on lots of record in the same
ownership prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. The structural alteration or
enlargement of structures shall not change the nature of the nonconforming use that
existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 5. PERMITTED STRUCTURES AND USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
MADE NONCONFORMING BY THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE BULK
REGULATIONS. A permitted structure or use that fails to meet the established bulk
regulations of the district in which it is located may be structurally altered or extended provided
that the alteration or extension is in compliance with the bulk regulations of the district in which
it is located. Any variance must be obtained through action of the Board of Adjustment.
Section 6. REPLACING DAMAGED BIDLDINGS. Any nonconforming building or
structure damaged more than fifty ( 50 ) percent of its replacement value exclusive of the
foundations at the time of damage by fire, flood, explosion, war, riot, or act of God shall not be
restored or reconstructed and used as before such happening, but if less than fifty ( 50 ) percent
of the building occurring above the foundation is damaged, it may be restored, reconstructed, or
used as before provided that reconstruction be started within one ( 1 ) year of such happening.
Section 7. USES UNDER CONDITIONAL PROVISIONS. Any use for which a conditional
use permit is pennitted as provided in this Ordinance shall not be deemed a conforming use.
Any additions shall be with Board of Adjustment approval.
Section 8. CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES. The continuance of
nonconfonning uses or structures shall be subject to the limitations set out in this section:
1. Continuation - Permitted: Any lawful use of a building or land, existing at the
time of adoption of this ordinance, may be continued; although such use does not
con.form to the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Extension: A nonconforming use shall be allowed one ( 1 ) twenty-five ( 25 )
percent expansion of the building Said expansion shall not exceed twenty-five (
25 ) percent of the floor area. The extension of a conforming use to any portion of
a nonconforming building which existed prior to this ordinance shall not be
deemed the extension of a nonconforming use.
3. Restoration: No building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more
than fifty ( 50 ) percent of its value shall be repaired or rebuilt, except in
conformity with the regulations of this ordinance.
94
\
4. Abandonment: Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a
period of one ( 1 ) year, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished and any
subsequent use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
5. Substitution of Nonconforming Uses: No nonconforming use may be changed to
any other nonconforming use, unless the Board of Adjustment finds that the
proposed nonconforming use is not more detrimental to the district than the
existing nonconforming use of the property. The Board of Adjustment may
specify such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in
connection with such change.
6. Repairs and Maintenance: Ordinary repairs and maintenance of a structure
containing a nonconforming use shall be permitted.
7. Change in Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed except to a
conforming use or to another use of a higher or more restrictive classification as
provided in this Zoning Ordinance. A change of a nonconforming use in an
industrial district to a use which is residential, shall not be permitted.
8. Amortization of Nonconforming Signs: Signs and billboards which exist off the
site of principal use at the time of adoption of this ordinance, and which are
nonconforming in accordance with this ordinance, shall be made to conform
within a period of three ( 3 ) years from said date.
9. : Amortization of Nonconforming Use of Open Land: All nonconforming junkyards,
storage areas and similar nonconforming uses of open land not involving a
substantial investment in permanent buildings, shall be cleaned up,
95
ARTICLE 20
ENFORCEMENT
Section 1. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The City Council of Hampton, Iowa, shall
appoint a Zoning Administrative Officer, and it shall be the duty of said officer to enforce this
Ordinance. Such officer may be a person holding other appointive office in the City, or in
another governmental agency. ·
Section 2. ZONING COMPLIANCE. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose whatsoever, until a permit is issued by the Zoning Administrative Officer, stating that
the building and use comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or hereafter erected or
structurally altered, without a permit being issued therefore by the Zoning Administrative
Officer. No permit shall be issued to make a change unless the changes are in conformity with
provisions of this Ordinance. Nothing in this part shall prevent the continuance of a
nonconforming use as here-in-before authorized, unless a discontinuance is necessary for the
safety oflife or property.
Section 3. PLATS. Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate drawn, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and
location of the building to be erected, the dimensions of the required yards, parking and open
spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this
Ordinance.
Section. 4. CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION.
PLANS AND PERMIT. Zoning permits issued on the basis of plans and applications, approved
by the Zoning Administrative Officer, authorize only that use, arrangement and construction.
Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this ordinance and punishable as provided by Article 21.
Section 5. CONDITIONAL USES. A zoning permit for a conditional use may be issued by
the Administrative Officer after review by and order of the Board of Adjustment.
96
I
ARTICLE 21
VIOLATION AND PENAL TY
Section 1. VIOLATION AND PENALTY. The violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor. - Any person, firm or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than fivehundred
dollars ($500) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days for each offense. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
Section 2. RESTRAINING ORDER. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this Ordinance, the City Attorney, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any proper action or proceed in the name of the City of Hampton, to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance,
conduct, business or use in or about said premises.
97
ARTICLE22
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 1. CONFIRMATION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The members of the Board
of Adjustment are hereby confirmed to their appointed terms of office. Future members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of five (5) years.
Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed from office by the City Council for cause
upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for
the unexpired term of the resigning member.
Section 2. CREA TED. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The Board shall be
composed of five residents of the City to be appointed by the City Council who are qualified by
knowledge and experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of City Planning and
Zoning, none of which shall hold any elective position in the City, to serve for five years from
the date of their appointment except for the initial terms as provided herein. The initial
appointment shall be for one member for a term of five (5) years, one member for the term of
four (4) years, one member for a term of three (3) years, one member for a term of two (2) years,
and one member for a term of one (1) year. Each term, after the initial term as provided herein,
shall expire due to a vacancy occurring because a member is no longer a resident of the City or
because of the resignation of a member and shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired
term of the member who is no longer a resident or has resigned. All members of the Board of
Adjustment shall serve without compensation except their actual expenses which shall be subject
to approval by the City Council.
Section 3. PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of
Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the
provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or upon
request of three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The chairperson, or in his/her absence the acting chair-person, may administer
oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The City
Zoning Administrator shall act as secretary for the Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be
immediately filed at City Hall. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum.
Section 4. HEARINGS, APPEALS, NOTICE. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment
concerning interpretation or administration of this Ordinance may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer or board of the City of Hampton affected by a decision of the
Administrative Officer. Such appeals should be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed
fifteen (15) days, by filing with the City Clerk and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of
98
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrative Officer shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public
notices thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
A fee of $35 shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time the notice of appeal is filed.
Section 5. STAY OF }>ROCEEDINGS. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action which was appealed, unless the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would; in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on the application, on notice
to the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
Section 6. POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following
powers and duties:
6.1 Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrative Officer in the
enforcement of this Ordinance.
6.2 Conditional Uses: To hear and decide only such exceptions as the Board of Adjustment
is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms ofthis Ordinance, and as provided for in Article
18.
6.3 Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of
this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary
hardship. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustments unless and until:
A) A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the
land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district;
2. That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
district under the terms of this Ordinance;
3. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
99
4. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
B) Notice of Public hearing shall be given as Article 18, Section 3, Paragraph A.
C) The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
by attorney.
D) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in
the application justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
E) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the
variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and
will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
F) The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a fee of $35.
G) In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under Article 18 of
this Ordinance.
Section 7. DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. In exercising the above
mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with
the terms of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, order
requirements, decision, or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have powers
of the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three (3)
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Administrative Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to affect any variation in application of
this Ordinance.
Section 8. APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Any person or persons, or
any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the community aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision of the Board of Adjustment by a
court of record in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and particularly by
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.
100
ARTICLE 23
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Section 1. PROCEDURES. This Ordinance and the district map created by said Ordinance may
be amended from time to time. However, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall
have been proposed by or shall have been first submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have
forty-five ( 45) days in which to submit its report to the City Council. If the Commission fails to
submit a report within the forty-five (45) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the
proposed amendment.
A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adoption of any proposed amendment
to this Ordinance. A notice of such public hearing shall be published not less than seven ( 7 )
days nor more than twenty ( 20 ) days prior to the date established for such hearing. Such notice
shall include the time and place for the public hearing.
In case the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the change, or in a case of a
protest filed with the City Council against a change in district boundaries signed by the owners
of twenty (20) percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or
of those immediately adjacent thereto and within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries
thereof, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4)
of all the members of the City Council.
Section 2. APPLICATION FOR CHANGE IN ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES Any
person may submit to the Council, an application requesting a change in the zoning district
boundaries as shown on the official zoning map. ·.
2.1 Each application shall be filed with the City Clerk accompanied by a fee of $35 and shall
contain the following information:
A) The legal description and local address of the property.
B) The present zoning classification and the zoning classification requested for the
property.
C) The existing use and proposed use of the property.
D) The names and addresses of the owners of all property within two-hundred (200)
feet of the property for which the change is requested.
E) A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present zomng
classification is no longer appropriate.
101
( F) A plat showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions and use of the
applicant's property and all property within two-hundred (200) feet thereof,
including streets, alleys, railroads, and other physical features.
2.2 All fees shall be deposited to the General Revenue Fund of the City. Failure to approve
the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the fee to the applicant.
2.3 Upon receipt of the application by the City Clerk a copy shall be forwarded immediately
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study and recommendation. The
Commission shall, prior to making a recommendation, determine the following:
A) Whether or not the current district classification of the property to be rezoned is
valid;
B) Whether there is a need for additional land zoned for the purpose requested;
C) Whether the proposed change is consistent with the current land use plan,
considering such factors as:
1. Whether the rezoning would result in a population density or development
which would in tum cause demand for services and utilities in excess of
the capacity planned for the area;
2. Whether the rezoning would result in the generating of traffic in excess of
the capacity of existing or planned streets in the vicinity.
D) Whether there is an intent on the part of the applicant to develop the property to
be rezoned diligently and within a reasonable time.
2.4 The Commission shall report its determinations and recommendations to the Council
within forty-five ( 45) days from receipt of the application, except that when no report is
issued within that time, the application will be deemed approved by the Commission.
The Council shall then hold a public hearing as provided in Section 362.3 of the Code of
Iowa, except that at least seven (7) days notice must be given and in no case shall the
public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting
following the published notice.
102
CHAPTER167
ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN
MANAGEMENT
167.01 Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose
167.02 Definitions
167.03 Lands to Wbicb Chapter Applies
167.04 Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries
167.0S Compliance
167.06 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
167.07 Interpretation
167.08 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
167.09 Flood Plain Management Standards
167.10 Special Floodway Provisions
167.11 Administration
167.12 Flood Plain Development Permit Required
167.13 Application for Permit
167.14 Action on Application
167.15 Construction and Use to Be as Provided in
Application and Plans
167.16 Variances
167.17 Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances
Shall be Based
167.18 Conditions Attached to Variances
167.19 Nonconforming Uses
167.20 Amendments
167.21 Penalties for Violation
167.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
1. Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Code of Iowa
Chapter 364, as amended, delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and to
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents.
2. Findings of Fact.
A. The Flood Hazard Areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
B. These flood loses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
(i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated
or otherwise protected from flooding, and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the flood plain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
3. Statement of Purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience
of its residents by minimizing these flood loses described in subsection 2, paragraph A
of this section with provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 825 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
B. Require that uses vul nerable to floods, including public facililies
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of ini tial
construction or substantial improvement.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
167.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. "Base flood" means the flood having 1 % chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. (See 100-year flood.)
2. "Basement" means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor."
3. "Development" means any manrnade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
4. "Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as "existing structure."
5. "Existing factory-built home park or subdivision" means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain
management regulations.
6. "Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision" means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
7. "Factory-built home" means any structure designed for residential use which
is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site.
For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile homes,
manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes "recreational vehicles"
which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed
for and ready for highway use.
8. "Factory-built home park" means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9. "Flood" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers
or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 826 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
10. "Flood elevation" means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year
flood.
11. "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both
the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
12. "Flood plain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as
a result of a flood.
13. "Flood plain management" means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood
plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
14. "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities
which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
15. "Floodway" means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one foot.
16. "Floodway fringe" means those portions of the flood plain, other than the
floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17. "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in
the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or,
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
18. "Lowest floor" means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 827 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section 167.09(4)(A) of this Code of Ordinances;
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry-walled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage;
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level;
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above, the
lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the
criteria above.
19. "Minor projects" means small development activities (except for filling,
grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500,000.
20. "New construction" (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
21. "New factory-built home park or subdivision" means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.
22. "100-Y ear Flood" means a flood, the magnitude of which has a 1 % chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled
or exceeded at least once every 100 years.
23. "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
24. "Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities" means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the
structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
A. Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiiing, carpeting, cabinets,
countertops, and similar finish work;
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 828 -
CHAPTER 167
c.
D.
ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Basement ceiling;
Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or aid
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
25. "Special flood hazard area" means the land within a community subject to the
"100-year flood." This land is identified as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
26. "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
27. "Structure" means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factorybuilt
homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
28. "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
29. "Substantial improvement" means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% percent of the market value of the structure
either (i) before the "start of construction" of the improvement, or (ii) if the
structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of an "historic structure," provided the alteration will not preclude
the structure's designation as an "historic structure."
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25% percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be added to any proposed addition in
determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed
twenty-five percent.
30. "Variance" means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
flood plain management regulations.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 829 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
31. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
167.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands and uses which have significant flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Franklin County and Incorporated Areas, City of Hampton, Panels
19069C0163C, 0164C, 0168C, 0251C, 0252D, 0256C, 0275C, dated December 18, 2012,
which were prepared as part of the Franklin County Flood Insurance Study, shall be used to
identify such Flood Hazard Areas and all areas shown thereon to be within the boundaries of
the 100-Year Flood shall be considered as having significant flood hazards. Where
uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of the 100-Year Flood Boundary, the
location shall be determined on the basis of the 100-Y ear Flood Elevation at the particular site
in question. The Flood Insurance Study for Franklin County is hereby adopted by reference
and is made a part of this Ordinance for the purpose of administering Flood Plain Management
Regulations.
167.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on
the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The
Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
167.05 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
this chapter.
167.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
167.07 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
State statutes.
167.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards required by
this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the designated special flood hazard areas will be free from tJooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
167.09 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS. All uses must be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where 100-year flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 830 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make such determination.
1. All development within the special flood hazard areas shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
D. Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and
extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to
favorable consideration by the City Council, where existing topography, street grades,
or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be
adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a
means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year
flood.
3. Nonresidential buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential
buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be flood-proofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a
professional engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofmg
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the
structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the
specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any
structures are flood-proofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4. All new and substantially improved structures:
A. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 831 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
B. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
C. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
5. Factory-built Homes.
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities other than on-site systems shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious
to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot
above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be simjlarly
elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 832 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the
time available after flood warning.
8. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall provide,
at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3 feet of design
freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural
flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations
or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
10. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with
subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the
applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for
residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than
five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for
those areas located within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
11. Accessory Structures.
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a
residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
( 1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level.
B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section
167.09(5) of this Code of Ordinances regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days, and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 833 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use mu t atisfy requirements
of Section 167.09(5) of this Code of Ordinances regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering.
167.10 SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS. In addition to the general Flood Plain
Standards, uses within the floodway must meet the following applicable standards. The
:floodway is that portion of the £ lood plain which must be protected from developmental
encroachment to allow the free flow of flood waters. Where floodway data has been provided
in the Flood Insurance Study, such data shall be used to define the floodway. Where no
flood way data has been provided the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
provide a floodway delineation. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such
determination.
1. No use shall be permitted in the floodway that would result in any increase in
the 100-Year Flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood
level shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.
2. All uses within the floodway shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage;
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of
any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or
system.
4. Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet
the applicable General Flood Plain Standards and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not
be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, e, plosive or
injurious to human animal or plant life i prohibited. Storage of other material may
be allowed if readily r:emovable from the floodway within the time available after
flood warning.
7. Water course alterations or re locations (channel changes and modifications)
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. in additi.on such alterations or relocations must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 834 -
)
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks
or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and
meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
167.11 ADMJNISTRATION. The Zoning Administrator shall implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. Duties and
responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
1. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the
provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
2. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources
for flood plain construction.
3. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures in the special flood hazard area.
4. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which all new or substantially improved structures have
been flood-proofed.
5. Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
6. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and
correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
167.12 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A Flood Plain
Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain
development (any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.
167.13 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a Flood Plain Development
Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following
information:
1. Work To Be Done. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is to be made.
2. Location. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify
and locate the work to be done.
3. Use or Occupancy. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the
proposed work is intended.
4. Flood Elevation. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 835 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
5. Floor Elevation. Elevation (in reJatjon to National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of the lowest floor (including basement of buildings or of the level to ' hicb a
building is to be flood-proofed.
6. Cost of Improvement. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated
cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
7. · Other. Such other information as the Adminjstrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
167.14 ACTION ON APPLICATION. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time,
make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the
applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For
disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The
Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Council.
167.15 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION
AND PLANS. Flood .Plain Development Permits, issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set fort.h in such approved
plans and applications and no other use arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or Jand
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, building floor elevations,
floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
167.16 VARIANCES. Ibe Council may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter wiU result
in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards:
1. Cause. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the
vari.ance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
2. Required To Afford Relief. Variances shall only be granted upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
3. Notice To Applicant. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of
flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that (i)
the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood in urance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such
construction increases risks to life and property.
167.17 FACTORS UPON WIDCH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES
SHALL BE BASED. In passing upon applications for variances, the Council shall consider
a ll relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 836 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the
injury of others.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
6. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood
plain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the flood water expected at the site.
12. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
13. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
167.18 CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES. Upon consideration of the
factors listed in Section 167 .17 of this Code of Ordinances, the Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
1. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
2. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and
other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural
Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purposes of
this chapter.
5. Floodproofing measures.
167.19 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 837 -
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
A. If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than SO percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the
cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building
or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its
continued designation.
167.20 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards et forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval from the Department of
Natural Resources.
167.21 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of the requirements shall constitute a simple misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined no more than $625.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Nothing herein contained prevents the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy violations.
[The next page is 885]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 838 -
CHAPTER169
AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
169.01 Definitions
169.02 Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations
169.03 Use Restrictions
169.04 Lighting
169.05 Variances
169.06 Board of Adjustment Established
169.07 Board of Adjustment
169.08 Board of Adjustment Procedures
169.09 Powers of Board of Adjustment
169.10 Vote on Variations or Orders
169.11 Judicial Review
169.12 Administrative Agency
169.13 Conflicting Regulations
169.14 Penalties
169.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. "Airport" means the Hampton Municipal Airport.
2. "Airport elevation" means the highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be 1,175 feet.
3. "Airport hazard" means any structure or tree or use of land which would
exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in fourteen (14) Code of
Federal Regulations Sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25 and which obstructs the airspace
required for the flight of aircraft and landing or takeoff at an airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
4. "Airport primary surface" means a surface longitudinally centered on a
runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal
Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for
either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the
same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
5. "Airspace height" means for the purpose of determining the height limits in
all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
6. "Control zone" means airspace extending upward from the surface of the
earth which may include one or more airports and is normally a circular area of five
(5) statute miles in radius, with extensions where necessary to include instrument
approach and departure paths.
7. "Decision height" means the height at which a decision must be made, during
an ILS instrument approach, to either continue the approach or to execute a missed
approach.
8. "Instrument runway" means a runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment, for
which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
9. "Minimum descent altitude" means the lowest altitude expressed in feet above
mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-toland
maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no
electronic glide slope is provided.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 885 -
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
10. "Minimum en route altitude" means the altitude in effect between radio fixes
which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction
clearance requirements between those fixes.
11. "Minimum obstruction clearance altitude" means the specified altitude in
effect between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airways routes, or route segments
which meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and
which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within twenty-two (22)
miles of a VOR.
12. "Runway" means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
13. "Visual runway" means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on a FAA approved airport layout plan,
military services approved airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted
to the FAA by competent authority.
169.02 AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. In order to
carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby created and established certain zones
which are depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map. A structure located in more
than one (1) zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
1. Horizontal Zone. The land lying under a horizontal plane one hundred fifty
(150) feet above the established elevations, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the
primary surface of runways 17 and 35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. No structure shall exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet
above the established airport elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
2. Conical Zone. The land lying under a surface extending outward and upward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet to one (1)
for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. No structure shall penetrate
the conical surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height
Zoning Map.
3. Approach Zone. The land lying under the surface longitudinally centered on
the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of
the primary surface.
(Note: An approach surface is applied to each end of each runway based upon the
type of approach available or planned for that runway end.)
A. The inner edge of the approach surface is five hundred (500) feet for
runways 17 and 28.
B. The outer edge of the approach zone is two thousand (2,000) feet for
runway 17 and one thousand five hundred ( 1,500) feet for runway 3 5.
C. The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for runways 17 and 35.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 886 -
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
4. Transitional Zone. The land lying under those surfaces extending outward
and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the sides of the primary surface and
from the sides of the approach surfaces. No structures shall exceed the transitional
surface, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
5. Increase in Elevation of Structures. No structure shall be erected in the
County that raises the published minimum descent altitude or decision height for an
instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be erected that causes the
minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased
on any Federal airway in the County.
169.03 USE RESTRICTIONS. Notwithstanding any other provisions of 169.02, no use
may be made of land or water within the City or County in such a manner as to interfere with
the operation of any airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use:
1. Lighting. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with streets, parking,
signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner
that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the Municipal Airport
or in the vicinity thereof.
2. Visual Hazards. No operation from any use shall produce smoke, glare or
other visual hazards within three (3) statute miles of any usable runway of the
Municipal Airport.
3. Electronic Interference. No operation from any use in the City or County
shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft.
169.04 LIGHTING. Notwithstanding the provisions of 169.03, the owner of any structure
over two hundred (200) feet above ground level must install on the structure lighting in
accordance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-lD and
amendments. Additionally, any structure constructed after the effective date of this chapter
and exceeding nine hundred forty-nine (949) feet above ground level, must install on that
structure high intensity white obstruction lights in accordance with Chapter 6 of FAA
Advisory Circular 7460-lD and amendments. Any permit or variance granted may be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or growth in question to permit the City or
County at its own expense to install, operate and maintain thereto such markers or lights as
may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard.
169.05 VARIANCES. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or to permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in violation of any section of this
chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for variance from such regulations. No
application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to Hampton Airport Manager
for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance. If the Airport Manager does
not respond to the Board of Adjustment within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of
the application, the Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 887 -
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
169.06 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created a Board
of Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
1. Appeals. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the administrative agency in the enforcement of this
chapter.
2. Special Exemptions. To hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of
this chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be
required to pass.
3. Variances. To hear and decide specific variances.
169.07 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of two (2)
members selected by the Council, two (2) members selected by the County Board of
Supervisors; and one (1) additional member to act as Chairperson and to be selected by a
majority vote of the members selected by the Council and the County Board of Supervisors.
Members are removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges, after a
public hearing. Vacancies are filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office
becomes vacant in the same manner in which the member was selected. The terms of the
members are for five (5) years, and are staggered.
169.08 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES. The Board of Adjustment shall
adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, and other official
actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the offices of the Clerk and County Auditor,
and on due cause shown.
169.09 POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment shall have
the powers established in the Code oflowa, Section 414.12.
169.10 VOTE ON VARIATIONS OR ORDERS. The concurring vote of a majority of
the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant,
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variations of
this chapter.
169.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment, may appeal to the court of record as provided in the
Code oflowa, Section 414.15.
169.12 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. It is the duty of the City's Zoning Administrator
or the County Zoning Administrator, herein referred to as the administrative agency, to
administer the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the appropriate authority upon a furnished form. Applications required by this
chapter to be submitted to the administrative agency shall be promptly considered and granted
or denied. Application for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted
by the administrative agency.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 888 -
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
169.13 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. Where there exists a conflict between any of
the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to
the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height of structures, the use of land, or
any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
169.14 PENALTIES. Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 889 -
CHAPTER 169 AIRPORT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
[The next page is 921]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 890 -
CHAPTER170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
170.01 Purpose
170.02 Application and Jurisdiction
170.03 Improvements Required
170.04 Definitions
170.05 Plat Approval and Acceptance
170.06 Information Required In Plats
170.07 Attachments to Plat
170.08 Design Standards Are Minimum
170.09 Minimum Standards of Design and Development
170.10 Inspection of Improvements
170.11 Maintenance of Improvements
170.12 Utilities
170.13 Monumentation
170.14 Resubdivision of Land
170.1 S Variations
170.16 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
170.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
design, development and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions so that
existing developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public
services and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare.
170.02 APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION. A subdivision plat shall be made when a
tract of land within the City limits or within two miles of the corporate limits of the City,
pursuant to Section 354.9, Code of Iowa, is subdivided by repeated divisions .or simultaneous
division into three or more parcels, any of which are described by metes and bounds
description for which no plat of survey is recorded. A subdivision plat is not required when
land is divided by conveyance to a governmental agency for public improvements.
170.03 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED. The subdivider shall install and construct all
improvements required by these regulations in accordance with the specifications and under
the supervision of the Council and to its satisfaction.
170.04 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
1. "Alley" means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street.
2. "Block" means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways,
or corporate boundaries.
3. "Bond" means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the
Council.
4. "Building" means any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
5. "City Engineer" means the person designated by the Council to furnish
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
6. "Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission of Hampton,
Iowa.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 921 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULA TIO NS
7. "Cul-de-sac" means a municipal service street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
8. "Developer" means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the
owner's agent.
9. "Easement" means a grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the
property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or
entity.
10. "Frontage" means that side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
11. "Lot" means a tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat.
12. "Plat" means the graphical representation of the division of land or rights in
land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for right-of-way purposes
by an agency of the government or other persons having the power of eminent
domain.
13. "Proprietor" means a person who has a recorded interest in land, including a
person selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons holding a
mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
14. "Public improvement" means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement,
or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for
which local government responsibility is established.
15. "Right-of-way" means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage
of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way
hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or
areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such
right-of-way is established.
16. "Roadway" means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and
where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
17. "Street" means a general term used to describe a public right-of-way which
provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and may provide for
vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may also
provide space for the location of utilities (both above and below ground).
18. "Subdivider" means any person, firm, corporation, or legal entity undertaking
the subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land.
19. "Subdivision" means a tract ofland divided into three or more lots.
20. "Subdivision plat" means the graphical representation of the subdivision of
land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation for
each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for the County
where the land is located.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 922 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
21. "Surveyor" means a registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 542B.
170.05 PLAT APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE. Procedures for plat approval and
acceptance are as follows:
1. Preliminary Approval by Commission. Whenever the owner of any tract or
parcel of land is required by law to secure the approval of the Commission or of the
Council to any plat or subdivision, said owner shall file said preliminary plat in
triplicate, together with any other required information, with the Clerk. Two (2)
copies of said plat and other information shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Commission for its preliminary study and approval. Such preliminary plat shall
contain such information and data as outlined in Section 170.06(1).
2. Study of Preliminary Plat by the Commission. The Commission shall study
such preliminary plat and other information submitted to see if it conforms with the
requirements of this chapter and shall approve or reject such plat and plan within
thirty (30) days after the date of the submission thereof to the Commission. The
approval of the preliminary plat and plan constitutes authorization to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat, but the final plat must be submitted to the Commission
and the Council for approval as provided in the following subsection.
3. Final Plat of Subdivision. The subdivider shall also file with the Clerk for
submission to the Commission, for its approval or rejection, the final plat and plan of
the subdivision which shall contain the data and information outlined in Section
170.06(2) of this chapter. If the Commission approves the final plat and plan, such
approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat and plan over the signatures of
both the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Commission.
4. Approval by the Council. After the approval of the final plat and plan by the
Commission, it shall be submitted to the Council for final approval and for acceptance
of all streets, alleys, easements, parks, or other areas preserved for or dedicated to the
public.
5. Approval by the Council after the Disapproval of the Commission. If the
Commission does not approve the final plat and plan of the subdivision, the Council
may approve said plat and plan and accept the streets, alleys, easements, parks, or
other areas preserved for or dedicated to the public by said plat or plan, only by a
four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire membership of the Council.
6. Filing in Office of Clerk. After approval of the final plat and plan by the
Council, two (2) copies of such final plat and plan shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk.
170.06 INFORMATION REQUIRED IN PLATS. Plat information requirements are as
follows:
1. Preliminary Plan. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale and shall
show the proposed location and width of streets, lot lines, building lines, and areas of
each proposed lot. The plan shall also show surrounding streets, lots, water courses,
sewers and water mains. The scale of such preliminary plans shall not be less than
one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet. Wherever the land is so rolling or rugged that
the preliminary location and grades of streets and sewers cannot be properly
considered without the aid of a topographical map, the Commission may require the
developer to provide a topographical map of the property showing contour intervals of
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 923 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDNISION REGULATIONS
not less than five (5) feet. Any plan not containing all information specified above
shall not be considered by the Commission. A filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be required to cover processing costs.
2. Final Plan. The final map on a reproducible original (mylar) and two (2)
prints thereof shall be submitted to the Commission. It shall show:
A. The boundaries of the property.
B. The lines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their widths and
names, and any other areas intended to be dedicated to public use; the names
of the streets shall be a continuation of the existing method of naming streets
in the City.
C. The lines of adjoining streets and alleys, with their widths and names.
D. All lot lines, building lines, and easements, with figures showing their
dimensions.
E. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of the subdivided area or of the lots, streets, alleys, easements, and
building line setbacks, and any other similar public or private uses. The linear
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
F. Radii, arcs, and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
circulinear streets, and radii for all rounded comers.
G. All monuments, together with their description. (See Section 170.13
for details).
H. Title and description of property subdivided, showing its location and
extent, points of compass, scale of plan, classification of property under
zoning law, and name of subdivider and of registered land surveyor staking
the lots.
I. Profiles may be required of any streets.
J. Any private restrictions shall be shown on the plat or reference made
to them thereon; and plats shall contain proper acknowledgments of owners
and mortgagees accepting said platting and restrictions.
170.07 ATTACHMENTS TO PLAT. Final plats shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
1. A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is
prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds.
The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all
lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school
property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council.
2. A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is
prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. An
affidavit and bond as provided for in Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be
recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or
lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded
for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 924 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
3. An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of the
land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of
mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the
encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Utility easements
shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section.
4. A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes
and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that
the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
5. A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for signatures of
the Mayor and Clerk.
6. A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots.
7. The performance bond and maintenance bond, if any.
170.08 DESIGN STANDARDS ARE MINIMUM. The standards and details herein
contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and
layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. In the design and
development of the subdivision, however, the subdivider shall use standards consistent with
the site conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant and durable neighborhood.
170.09 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT. No
preliminary or final plat or plan of a subdivision shall be approved by either the Commission
or by the Council unless it conforms to the minimum standards and requirements contained in
this chapter.
1. Acre Subdivision. Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one (1)
or more acres and there are indications that such lots will eventually be subdivided
into small building plots, consideration must be given to the street and lot arrangement
of the original subdivision so that additional streets can be opened which will permit a
logical arrangement of smaller lots.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System. The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets
in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not
subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. The width of
such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street widths
established herein. The street and alley arrangement must also be such as to cause no
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to
provide for convenient access to it. Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted halfstreet
or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley
shall be platted.
3. Streets in Relation to Railroads. When the area to be subdivided adjoins a
railroad right-of-way, no street shall be dedicated which is parallel or approximately
parallel to the railroad, unless it is one hundred (100) feet or more from the line of the
railroad right-of-way.
4. Street Right-of-way Width. The minimum width of street right-of-ways shall
be sixty-six (66) feet.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 925 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
5. Street Width. The minimum width of streets shall be thirty-one (31) feet,
except in those cases where topographical conditions, existing streets, or special
conditions make a street of less width more suitable. Under these conditions the
Commission may waive the minimum requirements.
6. Street Jogs at Intersections. At street intersections, street jogs with centerline
offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited, except
where topographic or other physical conditions make such jogs unavoidable.
7. Street Angles at Intersections. Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles
as possible, and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less than sixty (60)
degrees.
8. Dead-end Streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited except where a street is
planned to continue past the subdivider's property. A dead-end street shall terminate
in a temporary circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of ninety (90) feet,
unless the Commission approves an equally safe and convenient space. No dead-end
street shall be longer than six hundred (600) feet in length and shall be provided with
a tum-around with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred twenty (120)
feet. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along its centerline from the turnaround
to the intersecting point.
9. Alleys. The minimum width of an alley in a residential block shall be sixteen
and one-half (16.5) feet (alleys are not recommended for residential districts except
under unusual conditions). Alleys will be required in the rear of all business lots and
shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
10. Easements Where There Are No Alleys. Where alleys are not provided,
easements of not less than five (5) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all
rear lot lines and on those side lines where necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm
and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains. Easements of greater width may be
required along lines or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers
and similar utilities.
11. Length of Blocks. No blocks shall be longer than one thousand ( 1,000) feet
between street lines. Blocks over seven hundred fifty (750) feet in length shall
provide a cross walk near the center of the block. The right-of-way through such
blocks shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width.
12. Width of Blocks. The width of blocks shall not be less than two hundred
(200) feet and not more than three hundred (300) feet, except that when such
requirement would entail unusual and substantial difficulties or hardship or when it is
desired to provide a development containing large residential lots, the Commission
and the Council may modify such requirements and allow the subdivider to plat
blocks of other widths.
13. Lot Lines. All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation of this rule will give a better street
and lot plan. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided.
14. Size and Shape of Lots. The minimum dimensions for lots shall be sixty-six
(66) feet for width and one hundred (100) feet for depth, and in no case shall a lot that
is to be used for residential purposes contain less area than is required by the lot area
regulation of the zoning district in which the property is located. In laying out an
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 926 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
arrangement of lots, the subdivider should, whenever possible, arrange for wide,
shallow lots and avoid long, narrow lots.
15. Comer Lots. All comer lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
maintenance of building lines on both the front end and side streets as required by any
applicable zoning regulations.
16. Building Lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for
residential use of any character, and on commercial lots immediately adjoining
residential areas. Such building lines shall not be less than required by any applicable
zoning regulations.
17. Character of Development. The Commission shall confer with the subdivider
regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted in the
subdivision, and may require that certain minimum deed restrictions be placed upon
the property, which restrictions would prevent such construction which would clearly
depreciate the character and value of adjoining property. The Commission may also
require that the deed restrictions provide for the creation of a property owners'
association which would be responsible for the enforcement of the restrictions and for
the protection and improvement of the general welfare of the subdivision.
18. Improvements. Before any portion of the final plat of any subdivision is
finally approved for recording, the subdivider shall make and install improvements as
required in paragraphs A - H of this subsection, in that portion of the plat which is to
be finally recorded. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before
the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may post a bond, approved by the City
Attorney, with the City, which bond will insure to the City that the improvements
(with the exception of the concrete surfacing of streets) will be completed by the
subdivider within one (1) year after final approval of the plan. The amount of the
bond shall be not less than the estimated cost of the improvements, and the amount of
the estimate must be approved by a registered engineer. If the improvements are not
completed within the specified time, the Council may use the bond or any necessary
portion thereof to complete the same.
A. Grading and Improving Streets. The subdivider shall grade and
improve all streets and alleys (if any) within the subdivision. The surfacing of
such streets and alleys shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected
traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas,
but in no case shall it consist of less than a minimum granular base of six ( 6)
inches of crushed rock. The street design shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer. When fifty percent (50%) of the lots within the
subdivision have sold, but not sooner than two (2) years from the installation
of utilities within the right-of-way, the subdivider shall surface or cause to be
surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said
surfacing shall be of Portland concrete with integrated curb. Adequate
provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. The design and
specifications for all road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and
structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall be approved by the City.
B. Grading and Improving Lots. The subdivider shall, whenever
necessary, grade any portion of the property subdivided into lots so that each
lot that is to be offered for sale will be usable and suitable for the erection of
residential or any structure thereon.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 927 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
C. Sanitary Sewers. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and
provide a connection for each lot. Such installations shall be in accordance
with good engineering practices, shall be shown on plans drawn by a
registered engineer and shall meet the sanitation provisions of the City,
County, State Health Department and the State Department of Natural
Resources.
D. Storm Sewers. Were deemed necessary by the Commission, the
developer shall install a storm sewer adequate to serve the platted area. The
design of the storm sewer system shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer.
E. Water Mains. The subdivider shall install water mains and fire
hydrants in the subdivided area. Such installations shall be in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the City Water Department and the
State Department of Natural Resources, and fire hydrant locations should
meet the approval of the City Water Department. The design of the water
mains shall be certified by a registered professional engineer.
F. Other Improvements. It is also desirable to install other
improvements such as sidewalks, electric lines, street lights, gas mains and
similar facilities in any subdivision. Whenever the Commission deems it
necessary, they may require that such improvements shall be installed before
the plat is approved.
G. Trees. The subdivider may plant trees in subdivisions whenever there
are no existing woodlands. In order to protect sidewalks, sewers and water
mains, the Commission may prevent the planting of trees on the parking area
and certain species that are subject to disease or pests or which may
eventually become nuisances because of the growth of their roots in the
service utilities.
H. Sump Pumps. Where storm sewers are required, all lots adjacent
thereto shall be provided with connections for sump pumps to the main prior
to approval of any plat, the inlet for which connections shall be installed on
each lot and not in the right-of-way. The location of such connections shall
be shown on either the preliminary or final plat.
The subdivider may request the Council to provide the materials necessary for the water,
sanitary sewer, and storm sewer systems within the subdivision to be developed.
170.10 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS. The Council shall provide for inspection
of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The
subdivider shall pay to the City an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits or certificates
of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivider shall furnish the Council
with a construction schedule prior to the commencement of any and all construction, and
notify the City not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of readiness for required
inspections.
170.11 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements shall be maintained and
a maintenance bond provided as follows:
1. Maintenance of Improvements Before Acceptance. The subdivider shall be
required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 928 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of said
improvements by the Council. If there are any residents of the subdivision residing on
a street not dedicated to the City, the City may on twelve (12) hours' notice plow the
street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to subdivider.
2. Maintenance Bond. The subdivider shall be required to file a maintenance
bond with the governing body, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate
by the Council and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure the
satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of two (2) years after
the date of their acceptance by the governing body and dedication of same to the City.
170.12 UTILITIES. The following shall apply to the provision of utilities:
1. Location. The Council may require that all utility facilities, including, but not
limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, be located underground
throughout the subdivision. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the
subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections
to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's
expense. At the discretion of the Council, the requirement for service connections to
each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership
and intended to be developed for the same primary use.
2. Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
A. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities.
Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Proper coordination shall
be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for
the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties.
B. Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along
side lot lines with satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
170.13 MONUMENTATION. Monuments shall be in conformance with the following
requirements:
1. The surveyor shall confirm the prior establishment of control monuments at
each controlling comer on the boundaries of the parcel or tract of land being surveyed.
If no control monuments exist, the surveyor shall place the monuments. Control
monuments shall be constructed of reasonably permanent material solidly embedded
in the ground and capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic or electronic
equipment. The surveyor shall affix a cap of reasonably inert material bearing an
embossed or stencil cut marking of the Iowa registration number of the surveyor to the
top of each monument which the surveyor places.
2. Control monuments shall be placed at the following locations:
A. Each comer and angle point of each lot, block, or parcel of land
surveyed.
B. Each point of intersection of the outer boundary of the survey with an
existing or created right-of-way line of a street, railroad, or other way.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 929 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
C. Each point of curve, tangency, reversed curve, or compounded curve
on each right-of-way line established.
3. If the placement of a monument required by this section at the prescribed
location is impractical, a reference monument shall be established near the prescribed
location. If a point requiring monumentation has been previously monumented, the
existence of the monument shall be confirmed by the surveyor.
4. At least a minimum number of two survey control monuments are required to
be placed before the recording of a subdivision provided the surveyor includes in the
surveyor's statement a declaration that additional monuments shall be placed before a
date specified in the statement or within one year from the date the subdivision is
recorded, whichever is earlier.
170.14 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND. The following requirements shall govern the
resubdividing of land.
1. Procedure for Resubdividing. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map,
or area reserved for public use indicated on the map, or any lot line, or if it affects any
map or plan legally established prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the same procedure, rules, and
regulations as for a subdivision.
2. Acreage Lots. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision
plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites,
the Commission and Council may require that such parcel of land allow for future
opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing
for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the
plat.
170.15 VARIATIONS. Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or
shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of
this chapter would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships, the Commission may
vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop the property in
a reasonable manner, but at the same time the public welfare and interests of the City are
protected and the general intent and spirit of this chapter are preserved.
170.16 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. No plat or subdivision
within the City or within two (2) miles thereof shall be filed or recorded with the County, nor
shall any plat or subdivision have any validity until it complies with the provision of these
regulations, has been approved by the Council as herein set forth, and further:
1. Building Permits. The City shall not issue building or repair permits for any
structure located on a lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared after
the date of the adoption of this Code of Ordinances but which has not been approved
in accordance with the provisions contained herein. An original tract may be divided
into two (2) lots or tracts and not be subject to the provisions of this section. If an
original tract shall be divided into more than two (2) lots or tracts after the date of the
adoption of this Code of Ordinances, no building or repair permits shall be issued for
any structure located or proposed to be located on any of such tracts or lots, unless or
until a plat as required by this chapter has been fully approved by the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 930 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
2. Public Improvements. The Council shall not permit any public improvement
over which it has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in
any area that has been subdivided or upon any street that has been platted after the
date of the adoption of this Code of Ordinances unless such subdivision or street has
been approved in accordance with the provisions contained therein.
3. Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter may, in
addition to other sanctions or remedies available, be cited for a municipal infraction.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, IOWA
- 931 -
CHAPTER 170 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
0000000000
CODE OF ORDINANCES, HAMPTON, row A
- 932 -