6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 1/715
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19-4786
Ordinance amending Title 9, Entitled "Motor Vehicles and Traffic," Chapter 1, Entitled "Definitions, Administration and Enforcement
of Traffic Provisions," and Chapter 8, Entitled "Bicycles," to provide for the operation of electric assist bicycles.
Whereas, electric assist bicycles are gaining in popularity and staff is negotiating with a company to provide them in Iowa City this spring;
Whereas, the electric assist bicycle program being negotiated consists of bicycles that cannot be operated solely by means of a small motor, but rather
the motor assists the operation only when the rider is pedaling;
Whereas, currently this type of electric assist bicycle is categorized in the City Code as a motor vehicle;
Whereas, the City Code should be amended to treat this type of electric assist bicycle the same as a conventional bicycle in terms of operation; and
Whereas, it is in the best interest of the City to adopt this ordinance.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CITY, IOWA:
Section I. Amendments.
1. Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 1, entitled “Definitions, Administration, and Enforcement of Traffic Provisions,” Section 1,
entitled “Definitions,” is amended by adding the following underlined text:
Electric Assist Bicycle: A bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour. An electric assist bicycle is not a bicycle, motorized bicycle or motor
bicycle as defined herein.
2. Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 8, entitled “Bicycles,” is amended by adding the following underlined text as new Section 7,
entitled “Electric Assist Bicycles”:
Section 7. The provisions of Sections 9-8-1, 9-8-3, and 9-8-5 of this Code apply to electric assist bicycles in the same manner and to the same extent
as they apply to bicycles.
Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section III. Severability. If any section, provi sion or part of the Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconsti tutional.
Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
Passed and approved this 2nd day of April, 2019.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Kellie K. Fruehling, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19-4787
An ordinance repealing Title 4, “Alcoholic Beverages”, Chapter 4, “Dancing Regulations”, Section 1, “Dancing Restricted in
Connection with Business” and Chapter 3, “Outdoor Service Areas; Seasonal, Five Day or Fourteen Day Licenses and
Permits”, Section 4(I) regarding ‘Dancing” of the City Code
Whereas, since at least the early 1970s City Code has prohibited dancing in establishments with a liquor license without a city-issued dancing permit; and,
Whereas, said regulation of dancing was originally intended to address concerns about overcrowding in liquor establishments and resulting fire hazards; and,
Whereas, inspections that are now done in connection with all applications for liquor licenses adequately address these concerns; and,
Whereas, it is in the public interest to repeal the dancing regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 2/715
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City, Iowa:
Section I. Repeal. Iowa City Code of Ordinances Title 4, “Alcoholic Beverages”, Chapter 4, “Dancing Regulations”, Section 1 “Dancing Restricted in Connection with
Business,” and Chapter 3, “Outdoor Service Areas; Seasonal, Five Day or Fourteen Day Licenses and Permits”, Section 4(I) regarding ‘Dancing” are hereby repealed.
Section III. Severability. If any section, provi sion or part of the Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section IV. Effective date. This Ordi nance shall be in effect after its final passage, approv al and publication.
Passed and approved this 2nd day of April, 2019.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Kellie K. Fruehling, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance Number 19-4791
Ordinance amending Title 4, Alcoholic Beverages, Chapter 5, Prohibitions and Restrictions, Section 5, Open Containers; and Title
10, Public Ways and Property, Chapter 9, Parks and Recreation Regulations, Section 2, Prohibited Actions in Parks, to allow alcohol
to be sold in City parks at City-sponsored events pursuant to permits issued by the City.
Whereas, City staff is proposing limited alcohol sales and consumption at City-sponsored events held within City Parks; and
Whereas, these are new special events targeted and marketed to adults; and
Whereas, events will follow permitting rules and will have City staff present at all times to manage the events; and
Whereas, it is in the best interests of the City to approve this ordinance amendment.
Now, Therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City, Iowa:
Section I. Amendments.
Title 4, Alcoholic Beverages, Chapter 5, Prohibitions and Restrictions, Section 5, Open Containers, is hereby amended by deleting the last sentence of subsection B
in its entirety, and substituting the following language:
This subsection shall not apply to the farmers’ market, or designated areas in City parks at City-sponsored events pursuant to City-issued permits.
Title 10, Public Ways and Property, Chapter 9, Parks and Recreation Regulations, Section 2, Prohibited Actions in Parks, Subsection F is hereby amended by
deleting it in its entirety and substituting the following language:
F. Alcoholic Beverages: Possess or consume any beer or alcoholic beverages in any park, except if said person has purchased said alcoholic beverage from an
"authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site", as those terms are defined in subsection 4-5-3D of this code, or is doing so at a City-sponsored event
where the sale and consumption of beer or alcoholic beverage is done pursuant to a permit issued by the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee. Any
such permit issued will abide by and incorporate administrative rules approved by the City Manager.
Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section III. Severability. If any section, provi sion or part of the Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconsti tutional.
Section IV. Effective date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon publication.
Passed and approved this 21st day of May, 2019.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Julie Voparil, Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.19-4792
ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, ENTITLED “FINANCES, TAXATION AND FEES,” CHAPTER 4, ENTITLED “SCHEDULE OF FEES,
RATES, CHARGES, BONDS, FINES AND PENALTIES” OF THE CITY CODE TO INCREASE WATER SERVICE CHARGES AND STORM
WATER SERVICE CHARGES
WHEREAS, pursuant to Chapter 384, Code of Iowa (2019), the City of Iowa City is authorized to establish and provide for the collection of rates to pay for the
City’s utility systems, including the City’s water supply and treatment system and storm water system; and
WHEREAS, the City’s financial policies dictate that the Water Fund shall be self-supporting; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 3/715
WHEREAS, the City’s current water rate structure does not provide sufficient revenue to fund the necessary water main replacements and water fund capital
program; and
WHEREAS, the Iowa City City Council intends to provide a water rate and fee structure that makes the City’s water utility self-sustaining; and
WHEREAS, to that end, the Iowa City City Council proposes to increase water user charges by 5% on July 1, 2019 and by 5% on July 1, 2020 to recover the
City’s cost of providing those services, and
WHEREAS, the City’s financial policies dictate that the Storm Water Fund shall be self-supporting; and
WHEREAS, the City’s current storm water rate structure does not provide sufficient revenue to fully fund the storm water operations and the Storm Water
Fund capital program; and
WHEREAS, the Iowa City City Council intends to provide a storm water rate and fee structure that makes the City’s storm water utility self-sustaining; and
WHEREAS, to that end, the Iowa City City Council proposes to increase storm water user charges by $0.50 per equivalent residential unit (ERU) per month
on July 1, 2019 to recover the City’s cost of providing those services, and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF IOWA CITY, IOWA:
SECTION I. AMENDMENTS.
Title 3, entitled “Finances, Taxation and Fees,” Chapter 4, entitled “Schedule of Fees, Rates, Charges, Bonds, Fines and Penalties,” Section 3, entitled
“Potable Water Use and Service,” of the City Code is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and replacing it as follows:
3-4-3: POTABLE WATER USE AND SERVICE:
Description Of Fee, Charge,
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge,
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Water service charges (see
section 16-3A-4 of this code):
Meter Size
(Inches)
Charge
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
For first 100 cubic feet or
less of water used, based
on meter size
5/8, 5/8 x 3/4
3/4
1
11/2
2
3
4
6
$ 7.79
8.52
10.04
20.01
26.91
49.74
86.75
174.56
$ 8.19
8.95
10.54
21.01
28.26
52.23
91.09
183.29
There will be no minimum monthly charge for a single purpose water meter for the months
of November to March if no water is used.
User charges for water in
excess of 100 cubic feet per
month:
Monthly
Usage
(Cubic Feet)
Charge Per 100 Cubic Feet
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
Dual purpose meters 101 - 3,000
Over 3,000 $3.64
2.61
$3.82
2.74
Single purpose meters Over 100 3.64 3.82
Other charges and discounts: Charge
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 4/715
Low Income Discount
60% of
minimum
monthly water
charge
60% of minimum
monthly water
charge
Temporary water use (see
subsection 16-3A-4B of this
code):
During construction for the
first 90 days from the date
of the connection to the
water main for a new
water service or a
maximum of 90 days for
reconstruction:
Charge Per Month
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
Single- and twofamily
residences $18.24 $19.15
Multi-family
residences 18.24 19.15
Commercial
structures 30.39 31.91
After 90 days for any
structure, until the water
meter is installed
121.55 127.63
Charge
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
Direct purchase of water fee,
per 100 gallons or fraction
thereof (see subsection 16-3A-
4C of this code)
$0.50 $0.50
Deposit and delinquency fee
for combined city water and/or
sanitary sewer and/or solid
waste collection accounts (see
section 16-3A-5 of this code):
Residential owner account
0.00 0.00
Residential tenant
account
120 .00 120 .00
Commercial account An amount equal to an average 2 month billing for
commercial service for city water and/or sanitary sewer
service, or $120.00, whichever is greater
5 percent delinquency charge on current billed portion of the outstanding amount on
combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste account that is not paid within
22 days of billing date. Can be waived once every 12 months
Delinquency deposit fee for
combined water and/or
sanitary sewer and/or solid
waste collection accounts (see
section 16-3A-5 of this code)
An amount equal to an average 2 month billing for the
delinquent account. Can be waived if the account holder
enrolls in SurePay.
To connect water main
extensions, per acre
Charge
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 5/715
$479.59 $503.57
Service Fees
July 1, 2019 July 1, 2020
During Normal
Working Hours
After Normal
Working
Hours1
During Normal
Working
Hours
After Normal
Working
Hours1
Reconnection of
discontinued service
$45 .00 $84.00 $47.25 $88.20
Posting fee for shutting off
water in collection
procedure
$45.00; Can
be waived
once in the
lifetime of the
account.
Not done after
normal
working hours
$47.25; Can
be waived
once in the
lifetime of the
account.
Not done after
normal
working hours
Frozen water meters $36.75, plus
cost of meter
$84.00, plus
cost of meter
$38.59, plus
cost of meter
$88.20, plus
cost of meter
Shut off water service at
curb and check for exterior
leaks
No charge $84.00, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
No charge $88.20, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
Broken or damaged
hydrant
Repair cost $84.00, plus
repair cost
Repair cost $88.20, plus
repair cost
Location of city owned
water main for other
utilities
No charge No charge No charge No charge
Location of city owned
water main for private
enterprise
No charge $84.00, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
No charge $88.20, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
Check water meter for
accuracy at consumer's
request
$80.85 Not done after
normal
working hours
$84.89 Not done after
normal
working hours
Annual fire hydrant fee for
inspection and operation
of fire hydrants which are
privately owned or owned
by other government
agencies
$95.55 Not done after
normal
working hours
$100.33 Not done after
normal
working hours
After hours callout fee for
any water work done
outside of normal working
hours
Not applicable $84.00, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
Not applicable $88.20, plus
hourly
overtime rate
beyond 2
hours
Note:
1. The water division's normal working hours are 7:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
Title 3, entitled “Finances, Taxation and Fees,” Chapter 4, entitled “Schedule of Fees, Rates, Charges, Bonds, Fines and Penalties,” Section 6, entitled
“Storm water Utility Fee,” of the City Code is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and replacing it as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 6/715
3-4-6: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE: link link
Description Of Fee, Bond, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
Storm water utility fee. Users include all users owning or occupying developed property in the city
of Iowa City
1 equivalent residential unit (ERU) = $5.00
Low Income Discount 60 % of the monthly charge
SECTION II. REPEALER. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provi sions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION III. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provi sion or part of the Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconsti tutional.
SECTION IV. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in effect July 1, 2019.
Passed and approved this 21st day of May, 2019.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Julie Voparil, Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19-4793
An ordinance amending Title 17 of the City Code (Building and Housing) to establish a moratorium until March 7, 2020 on the
issuance of new rental permits for single-family and duplex units in RS-5, RS-8 and RNS-12 zones within certain rental permit
districts in the Rental Impact Area shown in Figure 17-1 of the City Code
Whereas, in 2017 the State legislature adopted a law (HF 134) amending Iowa Code Section 414.1 to prohibit municipalities, after January 1, 2018, from adopting or
enforcing any regulation or restriction related to occupancy of residential rental property that is based upon the existence of familial or nonfamilial relationships between
the occupants of such rental property; and
Whereas, regulation of occupancy based on familial status had been an important tool to promote peaceful habitation in residential areas of Iowa City for more than 50
years and the loss of the tool significantly threatened the stability of the neighborhoods in the City’s single family zones; and,
Whereas, after the passage of HF 134, the City studied how to mitigate the impacts of rental housing and increases in occupancy levels on neighborhood stability,
housing affordability, public and tenant safety, urban congestion, blight, risk to public peace and order, conflicts between rental and owner-occupied housing, and
excessive demands upon public safety, infrastructure and municipal services; and
Whereas, after said study one of the tools the City adopted by Ordinance No. 17-4734 was a rental permit cap on single family dwellings and duplex units in
neighborhoods included in a defined “Rental Impact Area”, which ordinance is codified at Section 17-5-16E of the City Code; and,
Whereas, on April 23, 2019, the State legislature passed SF 447 which prohibits cities from adopting or enforcing rental permit caps; and
Whereas, the loss of the rental cap tool threatens neighborhood stability and requires that the City study alternative strategies to mitigate the impact of rental housing on
neighborhood stability, housing affordability, public and tenant safety, urban congestion, blight, risk to public peace and order, conflicts between rental and owneroccupied
housing, and excessive demands upon public safety, infrastructure and municipal services; and,
Whereas, the Northside, College Green, Bowery, Longfellow, Mark Twain, Riverfront Crossings East, Riverfront Crossings West, Miller/Orchard, and
Brookland/Roosevelt rental permit districts of the “Rental Impact Area” in Figure 17-1 of the City Code currently exceed the 30% cap; and,
Whereas, during the course of this study, it is prudent to establish a moratorium until March 7, 2020 on the issuance of new rental permits (i.e., not renewals of existing
permits) for single-family and duplex units in the neighborhoods that currently exceed the 30% cap.
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, that:
Section I. Amendment. Title 17 “Building and Housing” of the City Code is hereby amended by adding a new Chapter 15, entitled “Moratorium”, as follows:
1. Moratorium and Area of Applicability: For properties zoned RS-5, RS-8 and RNS-12 within the Northside, College Green, Bowery, Longfellow, Mark
Twain, Riverfront Crossings East, Riverfront Crossings West, Miller/Orchard, and Brookland/Roosevelt rental permit districts of the “Rental Impact
Area” in Figure 17-1 of the City Code, the City shall not issue a rental permit for any single-family or duplex dwelling unit unless:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 7/715
a. It has a current rental permit; or
b. It has a rental permit that expired in the past twelve (12) months and has been granted a written extension; or
2. Definitions: For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions apply:
a. DWELLING shall be as defined in Chapter 14-9 of the City Code: A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for residential occupancy.
b. DWELLING UNIT shall be as defined in Chapter 14-9 of the City Code: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single unit with facilities used or intended to be used by one household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating meals. Multiple dwelling units exist if
there is more than one meter for any utility, more than one address to the property, more than one kitchen, and/or if there is a lockable, physical separation
between rooms within the dwelling unit such that a room or rooms on each side of the separation could be used as a dwelling unit.
3. Termination: This Chapter 15 shall be automatically repealed on March 7, 2020.
Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provi sions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section III. Severability. If any section, provi sion or part of the Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconsti tutional.
Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordi nance shall be in effect after its final passage, approv al and publication, as provided by law.
Passed and approved this 21st day of May, 2019.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Julie Voparil, Deputy City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Iowa City, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including ordinance 19-4783, passed March 12,
2019, and resolution 16-258, passed August 29, 2016. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the
provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 18-4762
Ordinance to Adopt the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, 2018, AKA "City Code."
Whereas, Section 380.8 of the Code of Iowa, 2018, requires that at least once every five years a city shall adopt a code of ordinances; and,
Whereas, on February 21st, 2012 the City Council adopted the City Code of Iowa City, Iowa; and,
Whereas, the City of Iowa City adds new ordinances and amendments upon passage by supplementation to the City Code itself; and,
Whereas, if a proposed code of ordinances contains only existing ordinances which have been edited and compiled without substantive changes, the
council may adopt such code without notice of public hearing; and,
Whereas, it is now appropriate to adopt a code of compiled and existing ordinances under the statute, without any substantive changes proposed.
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City, Iowa:
Section I. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the City as enacted by the City Council, and shall hereafter be
referred to as "The City Code".
Section II. It is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, a copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section III. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the City Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the City Code in any manner to cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
Section IV. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section V. A code of ordinances, containing only the current and existing ordinances edited and compiled without change in substance, shall be and
hereby is adopted as the City Code, 2018.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 8/715
Passed and approved this 17th day of July, 2018.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Julie Voparil, Deputy City Clerk
CHARTER1
Preamble
Definitions
Article I. Powers Of The City
§ 1.01.Powers Of The City.
§ 1.02.Construction.
§ 1.03.Savings Clause.
Article II. City Council
§ 2.01.Composition.
§ 2.02.Division Into Council Districts.
§ 2.03.Eligibility.
§ 2.04.Terms.
§ 2.05.Compensation.
§ 2.06.Mayor.
§ 2.07. General Powers And Duties.
§ 2.08. Appointments.
§ 2.09. Rules; Records.
§ 2.10. Vacancies.
§ 2.11. Council Action.
§ 2.12. Prohibitions.
Article III. Nomination, Primary Election And Regular Election
§ 3.01. Nomination.
§ 3.02. Primary Election.
§ 3.03. Regular City Election.
Article IV. City Manager
§ 4.01. Appointment; Qualifications.
§ 4.02. Accountability; Removal.
§ 4.03. Absence; Disability Of City Manager.
§ 4.04. Duties Of City Manager.
§ 4.05. Ineligibility; Prohibited Acts. Article V. Boards, Commissions And Committees
§ 5.01. Establishment.
§ 5.02. Appointment; Removal.
§ 5.03. Rules.
Article VI. Campaign Contributions And Expenditures
§ 6.01. Limitations On The Amount Of Campaign Contributions.
§ 6.02. Disclosure Of Contributions And Expenditures.
§ 6.03. Definition.
§ 6.04. Violations.
Article VII. Initiative And Referendum
§ 7.01. General Provisions.
§ 7.02. Commencement Of Proceedings, Affidavit.
§ 7.03. Petitions; Revocation Of Signatures.
§ 7.04. Procedure After Filing.
§ 7.05. Action On Petitions.
§ 7.06. Results Of Election.
§ 7.07. Prohibition On Establishment Of Stricter Conditions Or Requirements.
Article VIII. Charter Amendments And Review
§ 8.01. Charter Amendments.
§ 8.02. Charter Review Commission.
PREAMBLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 9/715
We, the people of Iowa City, Iowa, pursuant to the constitution and statutes of the state of Iowa and the principle of self-determination, proclaim that
the government of Iowa City belongs to all its residents and all share the responsibility for it. We hereby adopt this charter and confer upon it the full
home rule powers of a charter city. By this action we adopt the following principles:
1. Resident participation on an inclusive basis in democratic self-government.
2. The provision of service relating to the health, safety, and welfare of its residents in a fair, equitable and efficient manner.
3. The conduct of city business in conformity with due process, equal protection under the laws, and those individual liberties protected by the
constitution of the United States, the state of Iowa, and local ordinances.
4. Civility by city employees in their interactions with the public. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
DEFINITIONS
As used in this charter:
1. "City" means the city of Iowa City, Iowa.
2. "City council" or "council" means the governing body of the city.
3. "Councilmember" means a member of the council, including the mayor.
4. "Shall" imposes a duty.
5. "Must" states a requirement.
6. "May" confers a power.
7. "Eligible elector" means a person eligible to register to vote in Iowa City.
8. "Qualified elector" means a resident of Iowa City who is registered to vote in Iowa City.
9. "Board" includes a board, commission, committee or other similar entity however designated.
10. "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, political party, committee or any other legal entity.
11. "Ordinance" means a city law of a general and permanent nature.
12. "Measure", except as provided in article VII, means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 85-
3227, 3-12-1985; Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
ARTICLE I. POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 1.01. Powers Of The City.
The city has all powers possible under the constitution and laws of this state. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 1.02. Construction.
The grant of power to the city under this charter is intended to be broad; the mention of a specific power in this charter is not intended to be a
limitation on the general powers conferred in this article. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 1.03. Savings Clause.
If any provision of this charter, or the application of this charter to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
Section 2.01. Composition.
The city council consists of seven members. As provided in article III, four, to be known as councilmembers at large, are to be nominated by eligible
electors of the city at large, and three, to be known as district councilmembers, are to be nominated by eligible electors of their respective districts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 10/715
All councilmembers shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city at large. (Ord. 85-3273, 12-17-1985)
Section 2.02. Division Into Council Districts.
The council, by ordinance, shall divide the city into three council districts of substantially equal population. These districts are to be designated as
council district A, council district B, and council district C. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 2.03. Eligibility.
To be eligible to be elected to and to retain a council position, a person must be an eligible elector of Iowa City, and if seeking or elected to represent
a council district, must be an eligible elector of that council district. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 2.04. Terms.
At the first election under this charter, all seven councilmembers are to be elected; the councilmember from council district A, council district C, and
the two councilmembers at large who receive the greatest number of votes cast for councilmember at large are to serve for terms of four years, and
other councilmembers are to serve for terms of two years. Commencing at the next regular city election, and at all subsequent regular city elections,
all councilmembers elected to fill the positions of those whose terms expire shall be elected for terms of four years. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 2.05. Compensation.
The council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the compensation of the mayor and the other council members. The council shall not adopt such an
ordinance during the months of November and December immediately following a regular city election. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 2.06. Mayor.
A. Immediately following the beginning of the terms of councilmembers elected at the regular city election, the council shall meet and elect from
among its members the mayor and mayor pro tem for a term of two years. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
B. The mayor is a voting member of the council, the official representative of the city, presiding officer of the council and its policy spokesperson. The
mayor may add items to the city council agenda. The mayor shall present to the city no later than February 28 an annual state of the city message.
(Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
C. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence of the mayor. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
Section 2.07. General Powers And Duties.
All powers of the city are vested in the council, except as otherwise provided by state law or this charter. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
Section 2.08. Appointments.
A. The council shall appoint the city manager.
B. The council shall appoint the city clerk. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
C. The council shall appoint the city attorney. (Ord. 95-3671, 3-28-1995)
D. The council shall appoint all members of the city's boards, except as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
E. The council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, of persons it appoints and shall provide for the method of compensation of other city
employees. All appointments and promotions of city employees by city council and city manager must be made according to job-related criteria and
be consistent with nondiscriminatory and equal employment opportunity standards established pursuant to law. (Ord. 95-3671, 3-28-1995)
Section 2.09. Rules; Records.
The council may determine its own rules and shall maintain records of its proceedings consistent with state law. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 11/715
Section 2.10. Vacancies.
The council shall fill a vacancy occurring in an elective city office as provided by state law. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 2.11. Council Action.
Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a majority vote of all the members of the council except as otherwise provided by state
law. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 2.12. Prohibitions.
A. A councilmember may not hold any other city office or be a city employee or elected county official while serving on the council nor hold any
remunerated city office or employment for at least one year after leaving the council. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
B. With the exception of the appointment of the chief of the police department and chief of the fire department, which are subject to approval of the
city council, neither the council nor its members may dictate, in any manner, the appointment or removal of any person appointed by the city
manager. However, the council may express its views to the city manager pertaining to the appointment or removal of such employee. (Ord. 05-4152,
3-1-2005)
C. A councilmember may not interfere with the supervision or direction of any person appointed by or under the control of the city manager. (Ord. 76-
2792, 1-2-1976)
ARTICLE III. NOMINATION, PRIMARY ELECTION AND REGULAR ELECTION
Section 3.01. Nomination.
A. An eligible elector of a council district may become a candidate for a council district seat by filing with the Johnson County commissioner of
elections a valid petition requesting that his or her name be placed on the ballot for that office. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the petition
must be filed not more than eighty-five (85) days nor less than sixty-eight (68) days before the date of the election. Unless otherwise provided by
state law, the petition must be signed by eligible electors from the candidate's district equal in number to at least two (2) percent of those who voted
to fill the same office at the last regular city election, but not less than ten (10) persons.
B. An eligible elector of the city may become a candidate for an at-large council seat by filing with the Johnson County commissioner of elections a
petition requesting that the candidate's name be placed on the ballot for that office. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the petition must be filed
not more than eighty-five (85) days nor less than sixty-eight (68) days before the date of the election. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the
petition must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two (2) percent of those who voted to fill the same office at the last regular city
election, but not less than ten (10) persons. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 3.02. Primary Election.
A. If there are more than two candidates for a council district seat, a primary election must be held for that seat with only the qualified electors of that
council district eligible to vote. The names of the two candidates who receive the highest number of votes in the primary election are to be placed on
the ballot for the regular city election as candidates for that council seat. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
B. If there are more than twice as many candidates as there are at large positions to be filled, there shall be a primary election held unless the
council, by ordinance, chooses to have a run-off-election. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
Section 3.03. Regular City Election.
A. In the regular city election, each council district seat up for election shall be listed separately on the ballot and only the names of candidates
nominated from that council district shall be listed on the ballot as candidates for that seat. However, all qualified electors of the city shall be entitled
to vote for each candidate. The three council district seats shall be designated on the ballot as council district A, council district B and council district
C and each shall be elected at large.
B. The at large council seats shall be designated on the ballot as such. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
ARTICLE IV. CITY MANAGER
Section 4.01. Appointment; Qualifications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 12/715
In appointing a city manager, the council shall consider only the qualifications and fitness of the person without regard to political or other affiliation.
During his or her tenure the city manager shall reside within the city. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 4.02. Accountability; Removal.
A. The city manager is under the direction and supervision of the council and holds office at its pleasure. A city manager removed by the council is
entitled to receive termination pay as provided by contract. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
B. Upon the resignation or removal of the city manager, the council shall appoint an individual qualified to perform the duties of city manager to serve
at the pleasure of council or until a city manager is appointed. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 4.03. Absence; Disability Of City Manager.
The city manager may designate a qualified city employee as acting city manager to perform his or her duties during a temporary absence or
disability. If the city manager does not make such a designation, the council shall appoint a qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city
manager until he or she returns. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
Section 4.04. Duties Of City Manager.
A. The city manager shall be chief administrative officer of the city and shall:
(1)Insure that the laws of the city are executed and enforced.
(2)Supervise and direct the administration of city government and the official conduct of employees of the city appointed by the city manager
including their employment, training, reclassification, suspension or discharge as the occasion requires, subject to state law.
(3)Appoint the chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department with the approval of the city council.
(4)Supervise the chief of the police department and chief of the fire department, including their suspension or discharge as the occasion requires.
Such supervision shall not be subject to approval of the city council.
(5)Appoint or employ persons to occupy positions for which no other method of appointment is provided by state law or this charter.
(6)Supervise the administration of the city personnel system, including the determination of the compensation of all city employees appointed by
the city manager subject to state law or this charter.
(7)Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the city, supervise all purchases of materials and supplies, and assure that
such materials and supplies are received and are of specified quality and character.
(8)Supervise and manage all public improvements, works and undertakings of the city, and all city-owned property including buildings, plants,
systems, and enterprises, and have charge of their construction, improvement, repair and maintenance except where otherwise provided by state
law.
(9)Supervise the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for the city.
(10)Provide for the issuance and revocation of licenses and permits authorized by state law or city ordinance and cause a record thereof to be
maintained.
(11)Prepare and submit to the council the annual budgets in the form prescribed by state law.
(12)Provide the council an itemized written monthly financial report.
(13)Attend council meetings and keep the council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the city and its needs.
(14)See that the business affairs of the city are transacted in an efficient manner and that accurate records of all city business are maintained and
made available to the public, except as otherwise provided by state law.
(15)Provide necessary and reasonable clerical, research and professional assistance to boards within limitations of the budget.
(16)Perform such other and further duties as the council may direct. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
B. The city manager, in performing the foregoing duties, may:
(1)Present recommendations and programs to the council and participate in any discussion by the council of any matters pertaining to the duties of
the city manager.
(2)Cause the examination and investigation of the affairs of any department or the conduct of any employee under supervision of the city manager.
(3)Execute contracts on behalf of the city when authorized by the council. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 13/715
Section 4.05. Ineligibility; Prohibited Acts.
Except for the exercise of the right to vote, the city manager shall not take part in any election of councilmembers. This prohibition shall in no way
limit the city manager's duty to make available public records as provided by state law or this charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
ARTICLE V. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Section 5.01. Establishment.
A. With the exception of the community police review board, the council may establish boards in addition to those required by state law and shall
specify the title, duties, length of term, qualifications of members and other appropriate matters. The council may reduce or increase a board's duties,
transfer duties from one board to another or dissolve any board, except as otherwise provided by state law or this charter.
B. There shall be a permanent community police review board, which shall have vested in it the following minimum powers:
1. To hold at least one community forum each year for the purpose of hearing views on the policies, practices, and procedures of the Iowa City
police department;
2. To make recommendations regarding such policies, practices, and procedures to the city council;
3. To investigate claims of misconduct by sworn police officers and to issue independent reports of its findings to the city council; and
4. The authority to subpoena witnesses. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 5.02. Appointment; Removal.
The council shall, subject to the requirements of state law, seek to provide broad representation on all boards. The council shall establish procedures
to give at least thirty days' notice of vacancies before they are filled and shall encourage applications by residents. Council procedures for the
removal of members shall be consistent with state law. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 5.03. Rules.
A. The council shall establish rules and procedures for the operation of all boards, which must include but are not limited to, the adoption of by-laws
and rules pertaining to open meetings and open records. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
B. The council shall specify, for each board, methods for informal and formal communication with council, time schedules for the completion of
reports requested by council and such rules as it deems appropriate.
C. A board may establish additional rules and procedures that are consistent with state law, council rules, and this charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
ARTICLE VI. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES
Section 6.01. Limitations On The Amount Of Campaign Contributions.
The council, by ordinance, shall prescribe limitations on the amount of campaign contributions made to a candidate for election to council by a
person as defined in this charter. (Ord. 95-3671, 3-28-1995)
Section 6.02. Disclosure Of Contributions And Expenditures.
The council, by ordinance, may prescribe procedures requiring the disclosure of the amount, source and kind of contributions received and
expenditures made by (1) each candidate for election to council and (2) any and all other persons, for the purpose of aiding or securing the
candidate's nomination or election. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 6.03. Definition.
Within this article "contribution" shall be defined as that term is defined in chapter 68A ("campaign finance") of the code of Iowa. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-
2005; amd. Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 14/715
Section 6.04. Violations.
The council, by ordinance, shall prescribe: (1) penalties for the violation of the contribution limitations and disclosure requirements it establishes
pursuant to this section; and (2) when appropriate, conditions for the revocation of a candidate's right to serve on council if elected, consistent with
state law. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
ARTICLE VII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 7.01. General Provisions.
A. Authority.
(1)Initiative. The eligible electors have the right to propose measures to the council and, if the council fails to adopt a measure so proposed without
any change in substance, to have the measure submitted to the voters at an election.
(2)Referendum. The eligible electors have the right to require reconsideration by the council of an existing measure and, if the council fails to
repeal such measure, to have it submitted to the voters at an election.
(3)Definition. Within this article, "measure" means all ordinances, amendments, resolutions or motions of a legislative nature, however designated,
which (a) are of a permanent rather than temporary character and (b) include a proposition enacting, amending or repealing a new or existing law,
policy or plan, as opposed to one providing for the execution or administration of a law, policy or plan already enacted by council.
B. Limitations.
(1)Subject Matter. The right of initiative and referendum shall not extend to any of the following:
(a) Any measure of an executive or administrative nature.
(b) The city budget.
(c) The appropriation of money.
(d) The levy of taxes or special assessments.
(e) The issuance of general obligation and revenue bonds.
(f) The letting of contracts.
(g) Salaries of city employees.
(h) Any measure required to be enacted by state or federal law.
(i) Amendments to this charter.
(j) Amendments affecting the city zoning ordinance or the land use maps of the comprehensive plan, including the district plan maps.
(k) Public improvements subsequent to city council action to authorize acquisition of property for that public improvement, or notice to bidders for
that public improvement, whichever occurs earlier. "Public improvement" shall mean any building or construction work.
(2)Resubmission. No initiative or referendum petition shall be filed within two years after the same measure or a measure substantially the same
has been submitted to the voters at an election.
(3)Council Repeal, Amendment And Reenactment. No measure proposed by initiative petition and adopted by the vote of the council without
submission to the voters, or adopted by the voters pursuant to this article, may for two years thereafter be repealed or amended except by a
vote of the people, unless provision is otherwise made in the original initiative measure. No measure referred by referendum petition and
repealed by the vote of the council without submission to the voters, or repealed by the voters pursuant to this article, may be reenacted for two
years thereafter except by vote of the people, unless provision is otherwise made in the original referendum petition.
C. Construction.
(1)Scope Of Power. It is intended that this article confer broad initiative and referendum powers upon the eligible electors of the city.
(2)Initiative. It is intended that (a) no initiative petition will be invalid because it repeals an existing measure in whole or in part by virtue of
proposing a new measure and (b) an initiative petition may amend an existing measure.
(3)Referendum. It is intended that a referendum petition may repeal a measure in whole or in part.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 15/715
D. Effect Of Filing Petition. The filing of an initiative or referendum petition does not suspend or invalidate any measure under consideration. Such
measure shall remain in full force and effect until its amendment or repeal by council pursuant to section 7.05A or until a majority of the qualified
electors voting on a measure vote to repeal or amend the measure and the vote is certified.
E. City Obligations. An initiative or referendum vote which repeals an existing measure in whole or in part does not affect any obligations entered into
by the city, its agencies or any person in reliance on the measure during the time it was in effect. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 7.02. Commencement Of Proceedings; Affidavit.
A. Commencement. One or more qualified electors, hereinafter referred to as the "petitioners," may commence initiative or referendum proceedings
by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will supervise the circulation of the petition and will be responsible for filing it in proper form, stating
their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all relevant notices are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative
measure or citing the measure sought to be reconsidered.
B. Affidavit. The city clerk shall accept the affidavit for filing if on its face it appears to have signatures of one or more qualified electors. The city clerk
shall issue the appropriate petition forms to the petitioners the same day the affidavit is accepted for filing. The city clerk shall cause to be prepared
and have available to the public, forms and affidavits suitable for the commencement of proceedings and the preparation of initiative and referendum
petitions. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 7.03. Petitions; Revocation Of Signatures.
A. Number Of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the
number of persons who voted in the last regular city election, but such signatures of eligible electors shall be no fewer than ten. (Res. 16-258, 8-29-
2016)
B. Form And Content. All papers of a petition prepared for filing must be substantially uniform in size and style and must be assembled as one
instrument. Each person signing shall provide, and the petition form shall provide space for, the signature, printed name, address of the person
signing and the date the signature is executed. Petitions prepared for circulation must contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation
the full text of the measure proposed or sought to be reconsidered. The petition filed with the city clerk need have attached to it only one copy of the
measure being proposed or referred.
C. Affidavit Of Circulator. Each paper of a petition containing signatures must have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by an eligible
elector certifying: the number of signatures on the paper, that he or she personally circulated it, that all signatures were affixed in his or her presence,
that he or she believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity
before signing to read the full text of the measure proposed or sought to be reconsidered. Any person filing a false affidavit will be liable to criminal
penalties as provided by state law.
D. Time For Filing Initiative Petitions. Signatures on an initiative petition must be secured and the petition filed within six months after the date the
affidavit required under section 7.02A was filed.
E. Time For Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions may be filed within sixty days after final adoption by the council of the measure
sought to be reconsidered, or subsequently at any time more than two years after such final adoption. The signatures on a referendum petition must
be secured during the sixty days after such final adoption; however, if the petition is filed more than two years after final adoption, the signatures
must be secured within six months after the date the affidavit required under section 7.02A was filed.
F. Revocation Of Signature. Prior to the time a petition is filed with the city clerk, a signatory may revoke his or her signature for any reason by filing
with the city clerk a statement of his or her intent to revoke his or her signature. After a petition is filed a signatory may not revoke his or her
signature. The city clerk shall cause to be prepared and have available to the public, forms suitable for the revocation of petition signatures. (Ord. 15-
4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 7.04. Procedure After Filing.
A. Validity Of A Petition. A petition is valid if it contains the minimum required signatures by eligible electors in the required form and with the required
content and accompanied by the affidavit of circulator as set forth in section 7.03. The petition shall be examined by the city clerk before it is
accepted for filing. If the petition appears valid on its face it shall be accepted for filing. If it lacks the required number of signatures it shall be
considered invalid and returned to the petitioners. Petitions which have been accepted for filing are valid unless written objections are filed with the
city clerk within five working days after the petition is received.
B. Hearing On Objections; Objections Committee. Written objections timely filed with the city clerk shall be considered by an objections committee
made up of the mayor and city clerk and one member of the council chosen by the council by ballot, and a majority decision shall be final. The
hearing on the objections shall be held within ten days of receipt of the objections.
C. Court Review. To the extent allowed by law, court review of the objections committee's actions shall be by writ of certiorari. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-
2015)
Section 7.05. Action On Petitions.
A. Action By Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been determined valid, the council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative
measure or reconsider the referred measure. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative measure and fails to adopt a measure which is similar
in substance within sixty days, or if the council fails to repeal the referred measure within thirty days after the date the petition was finally determined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 16/715
valid, it shall submit the proposed or referred measure to the qualified electors of the city as hereinafter prescribed. If at any time more than thirty
days before a scheduled initiative or referendum election the council adopts the proposed initiative measure or adopts a measure which is similar in
substance or if the council repeals a referred measure, the initiative or referendum proceedings shall terminate and the proposed or referred
measure shall not be submitted to the voters.
B. Submission To Voters.
(1) Initiative. The vote of the city on a proposed measure shall be held at the regular city election or at the general election which next occurs more
than forty days after the expiration of the sixty day period provided for consideration in section 7.05A, provided that the initiative petition was filed
no less than 80 days prior to the deadline imposed by state law for the submission of ballot questions to the commissioner of elections.
(2) Referendum. The vote of the city on a referred measure shall be held at the regular city election or at the general election which next occurs
more than forty days after the expiration of the thirty day period provided for reconsideration in section 7.05A, provided that the referendum petition
was filed no less than 50 days prior to the deadline imposed by state law for the submission of ballot questions to the commissioner of elections.
The council may provide for a special referendum election on a referred measure any time more than 120 days after the filing of the referendum
petition with the city clerk.
C. Ballot. Copies of the proposed or referred measure shall be made available to the qualified electors at the polls and shall be advertised at the
city's expense in the manner required for "questions" in section 376.5 of the Iowa Code. The subject matter and purpose of the referred or proposed
measure shall be indicated on the ballot. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 7.06. Results Of Election.
A. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative measure vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results. The adopted measure shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as measures of the same kind adopted
by the council, except as provided in section 7.01B(3). If conflicting measures are approved by majority vote at the same election, the one receiving
the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred measure vote in favor of repealing the measure, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
Section 7.07. Prohibition On Establishment Of Stricter Conditions Or Requirements.
The council shall not set, except by charter amendment, conditions or requirements affecting initiative and referendum. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
ARTICLE VIII. CHARTER AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW
Section 8.01. Charter Amendments.
This charter may be amended only by one of the following methods:
A. The council, by resolution, may submit a proposed amendment to the voters at a special city election, and the proposed amendment becomes
effective when approved by a majority of those voting.
B. The council, by ordinance, may amend the charter. However, within thirty (30) days of publication of the ordinance, if a petition valid under the
provisions of section 362.4 of the code of Iowa is filed with the council, the council must submit the amending ordinance to the voters at a special
city election, and the amendment does not become effective until approved by a majority of those voting.
C. If a petition valid under the provisions of section 362.4 of the code of Iowa is filed with the council proposing an amendment to the charter, the
council must submit the proposed amendment to the voters at a special city election, and the amendment becomes effective if approved by a
majority of those voting. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
Section 8.02. Charter Review Commission.
The council, using the procedures prescribed in article V, shall establish a charter review commission at least once every ten years following the
effective date of this charter. The commission, consisting of at least nine members, shall review the existing charter and may, within twelve months
recommend any charter amendments that it deems fit to the council. The council shall either exercise its power of amendment pursuant to section
8.01B of the charter on a matter recommended by the commission or submit such amendments to the voters in the form prescribed by the
commission, and an amendment becomes effective when approved by a majority of those voting. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
The home rule charter is set out in this volume as adopted by the voters on November 15, 1973, and by ordinance 76-2792, on January 2, 1976. The
following table shows the disposition of amendments to the charter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 17/715
Ordinance
Number Date Disposition
77-2826 3-15-
1977
6.01
77-2858 9-6-1977
7.05B
77-2864 9-6-1977
3.01
85-3227 3-12-
1985
Definitions 7,8, 2.01, 2.03, 2.05 - 2.08, 3.01 - 3.03, 4.04, 5.02, 6.04, 7.01 - 7.05, 8.01, 8.02
85-3228 3-12-
1985
6.02
85-3273 12-17-
1985
2.01
90-3462 6-26-
1990
7.03A, 7.04A
95-3671 3-28-
1995
2.06B, 2.08C,E, 3.01A, 6.01, 7.04D
05-4152 3-1-2005
Definitions 11,12, 2.03, 2.05, 2.11, 2.12B, 3.01A, 3.02A, 4.04A, 5.02, 5.03A, 6.02, 6.03, 6.04, 7.01, 7.02, 7.03B,C,E,
7.04A,B,C, 7.05, 7.06, 8.01, 8.02
Res. 07-
262
8-31-
2007
5.01
15-4621 5-19-
2015
Preamble, 2.06B, 3.01, 4.02A, 5.01, 5.02, 6.03, 7.01, 7.03, 7.04, 7.05, 7.06, 7.07
Footnote 1: The home rule charter of the city, adopted by the voters of the city on November 15, 1973, and by ordinance 76-2792 on January 2, 1976, pursuant to I.C.A.
section 372.9, is set out herein as adopted and amended.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: OFFICIAL CITY CODE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Iowa City. This city code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CITY CODE or CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by title in any legal documents. (1994 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1994 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
city code. (1994 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 18/715
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
city clerk. Any person having a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. The
person receiving replacement pages shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available through
the office of the city clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city
and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (1994 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations and not requiring the vote of the people; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of
a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all
special ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the preceding section, except as the city code may contain provisions for such matters, in
which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1994 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. The repeal of an ordinance, after it becomes effective, does not revive an ordinance previously repealed, and no new ordinance shall be construed or
held to repeal a former ordinance unless expressly so stated. However, any offense committed against or under any such former ordinance shall not be
affected, and any conviction, penalty, abatement, punishment, judgment, decree or other court order shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically so ordered by a court of law or equity.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein
repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of
the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code. (1978 Code §1-5; amd. 1994 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1994 Code)
Chapter 3
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this city code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included, provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section
of this city code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
(1994 Code)
B. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language; technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed according to such meaning. (1978 Code §1-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 19/715
C. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter", "article", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
As used in this code, the following definitions shall apply:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
ATTEST: To affirm to be true or genuine; to certify.
CALENDAR YEAR: January 1 through December 31.
CITY: The city of Iowa City, county of Johnson, state of Iowa and shall extend to its several officers, agents and employees.
CITY CODE: The city code of the city of Iowa City.
COMPUTING TIME; HOLIDAYS: In computing time, the first day shall be excluded and the last included unless the last falls on Sunday or a holiday, in
which case, the time prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following Monday or first working day.
COUNTY: The county of Johnson in the state of Iowa.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be
construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize other agents or employees to perform the required act or make the required
inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Iowa City".
LAND, REAL ESTATE, REAL PROPERTY: Includes land, buildings, structures, tenements, hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein,
equitable as well as legal.
MONTH, YEAR, DAY: The word "month" means a calendar month, the word "year" means a twelve (12) month period, and the word "day" means a
calendar day unless specified otherwise.
OATH, AFFIRMATION: The word "oath" includes affirmations in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases, the word
"swear" includes "affirm".
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICIALS, OFFICERS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS: Whenever reference is made to officials, officers, boards and commissions by title only, i.e.,
"council", "clerk", "the mayor", such terms shall be deemed to refer to the officials, officers, boards and commissions of the city of Iowa City.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, joint venture, firm, partnership, association, organization, responsible party, government or any other group or
entity acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case the person is unable to write, by
proper mark. Due to a physical handicap, if a person is unable to make a written signature or mark, that person may substitute the following in lieu of a
signature required by law:
A. The person's name written by another upon the request and in the presence of the person with a disability; or
B. A rubber stamp reproduction of the name of the person with a disability or facsimile of the actual signature when adopted by the person with a
disability for all purposes requiring a signature and then only when affixed by that person or another upon request and in the presence of the person
with a disability. (1978 Code §2-1; amd. 1994 Code)
1-3-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of this title is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or section of this code, the provision which
establishes the more specific and/or the higher standards for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. Nothing in
this title shall be construed to repeal additional remedies or rights of action arising from a violation of any ordinance or code section. (1978 Code §1-2;
amd. 1994 Code)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 20/715
division or section hereof, including when such catchlines are amended, unless expressly so provided. (1994 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PENALTY:
A. State Law Violations Declared Simple Misdemeanor: Any act or failure to act defined and made a simple misdemeanor under the code of Iowa, as
amended, or as may hereafter be so defined by a statute of the state is hereby declared to be a simple misdemeanor under the ordinances and this
code, provided the regulation or prohibition of such acts or failures to act is now within or shall hereafter come within the scope of the powers granted
expressly or by implication to the city as a municipal corporation. (1978 Code §1-8; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Criminal Penalty: The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a simple misdemeanor by this code or any ordinance or code
herein adopted by reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or any ordinance or code herein adopted by
reference, is a simple misdemeanor and is, unless another penalty is specified, or the violation is scheduled under state law, punishable by a penalty
with a fine of at least sixty five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred twenty five dollars ($625.00). (Ord. 09-4350, 6-30-2009; amd. Ord. 15-
4620, 5-19-2015)
1-4-2: CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ENVIRONMENTAL INFRACTION: A municipal infraction that is a violation of this code or standards established by the city in consultation with the
state department of natural resources or its successor.
MUNICIPAL INFRACTION: A violation of this code punishable by civil penalty and such alternative relief sought by the city and as provided by state
law. (1978 Code §1-20; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Violations, Penalties And Alternative Relief:
1. Any violation of this code, with the exception of any violation which is a felony, aggravated misdemeanor or serious misdemeanor under state law or
if the violation is a simple misdemeanor under the code of Iowa, as amended, is a municipal infraction.
2. Unless another civil penalty is provided elsewhere in this code for a specific violation, a municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable as provided
in the following schedule of civil penalties for each day a violation exists or continues: (1978 Code §1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
First offense $ 100.00
Second offense 250.00
Third and subsequent offenses 500.00
Environmental infraction each offense 1,000.00
(Ord. 98-3849, 8-25-1998)
3. Violations arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 CFR section 403.8, by an industrial user may be
punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
4. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
5. Seeking a penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief in the same action. Such alternative relief
may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement, injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
6. A person committing an environmental infraction is not subject to a civil penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The violation results solely from a person conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing, scheduled maintenance, testing or
conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
b. The person notifies the city of the violation within twenty four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
c. The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
d. The city shall not enforce this section against a person committing an environmental violation until the city offers to participate in informal
negotiations with the person. If a person accepts the offer, the city and the person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues
alleged to be the basis of the violation. (1978 Code §1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Civil Citations For Municipal And/Or Environmental Infractions:
1. An officer authorized by the city to enforce the code may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 21/715
2. The citation may be served by personal service as provided in rule of civil procedure 56.1, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at the
defendant's last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in rules 60 and 60.1, Iowa rules of civil
procedure.
3. One copy of the citation shall be filed with the clerk of the district court, and one copy shall be retained by the issuing officer.
4. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
a. The name and address of the defendant.
b. The name and/or description of the infraction, attested to by the officer issuing the citation, including specific reference to the city code section or
ordinance under which the person is being cited.
c. The location and time of the infraction.
d. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought or both.
e. The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid or the offense cured or abated.
f. The time and place of court appearance.
g. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
h. The enforcement official may, but shall not be required to, give notice to abate prior to the issuance of a civil citation for a repeat offense involving
the same property and occurring within one year of the prior violation. (1978 Code §1-22; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Enhanced Penalties For Certain Municipal Infractions:
1. Civil penalties for municipal infractions of certain sections of this code as noted therein shall be punishable as provided in the following schedule for
each day a violation exists or continues:
First offense $250.00
Second offense 500.00
Third offense 750.00
(Ord. 04-4135, 8-3-2004; amd. Ord. 09-4332, 3-10-2009)
2. The civil penalty for violation of sections 14-2A-5, 14-2B-5, and subsection 17-5-19X1 of this code shall be punishable as provided in the following
schedule for each day a violation exists or continues:
First offense $ 750.00
Second and subsequent offense 1,000.00
(Ord. 10-4390, 5-10-2010)
3. The civil penalty for violation of section 17-5-14 of this code shall be punishable as provided in the following schedule for each day a violation exists
or continues:
First offense $ 500.00
Second offense 750.00
Third and subsequent offense 1,000.00
(Ord. 14-4570, 2-18-2014)
1-4-3: ELECTION OF REMEDIES:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense, provided the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery. (1994 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for failure to perform such duty unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 22/715
Chapter 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL1
1-5-1: CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS2:
There are hereby established in the City three (3) City Council Districts. The following "voting precincts", as defined in chapter 9 of this title, shall comprise
the three (3) City Council Districts:
A. City Council District A: Voting precincts 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15.
B. City Council District B: Voting precincts 1, 6, 12, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24.
C. City Council District C: Voting precincts 3, 4, 5, 11, 19, 20, 21, 22. (Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
1-5-2: EFFECTIVE TIME OF ELECTED OFFICERS:
All elected City officers shall take office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of January 1 which is not a Sunday or legal holiday, following the officers' election.
(1978 Code §2-19; amd. 1994 Code)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION3:
A. City Council Members: Members of the City Council (with the exception of Mayor) shall be compensated at the rate of seven thousand seventy two
dollars ($7,072.00) annually effective January 1, 2010. Beginning January 1, 2020, members of the City Council shall be compensated at the rate of
eleven thousand nine hundred sixty dollars ($11,960.00) annually.
B. Mayor: Compensation for the Mayor will be the same rate as a City Council member plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. Beginning January
1, 2020, the Mayor shall be compensated at the rate of fourteen thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($14,950.00) annually.
C. Adjustment: Staff will adjust City Council compensation based on an annual adjustment for inflation. The annual adjustment for inflation will be
equivalent to the cumulative annual percent change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) - All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), Midwest Region, all items,
using the third quarter ending September 30 of the prior year and September 30 of the current year. The calculated amount will be included in the
annual budget for review by the City Council in each regular election year in accordance with State Code.
D. Health Insurance: Beginning January 1, 2004, health insurance shall be available to a Council member on such terms and conditions as health
insurance is available to City employees, except that a City Council member's participation in the City's group health insurance plan shall be at the
Council member's own expense and at no cost to the City. Beginning January 1, 2020 health insurance shall be available to Council member on such
terms and conditions as health insurance is available to half-time permanent City employees. (Ord. 18-4774, 12-4-2018)
1-5-4: MAYOR4:
A. Powers And Duties:
1. The Mayor shall act as the official representative of the City. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts and officers
of the State. The Mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties provided by law. (1978 Code §2-46; amd. 1994 Code)
2. The Mayor shall sign documents on behalf of the City as required by law. (1978 Code §2-45; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Mayor Pro Tem:
1. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor in the event that the Mayor is unable to attend City Council meetings or is unable to act in the capacity as
Mayor because of legal disability or absence from the community. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem's acts as such shall
have the same force and effect and legality as though performed by the regularly elected Mayor, and such Mayor Pro Tem shall have the power to
sign all resolutions and/or ordinances and execute all contracts or documents adopted or approved by the City Council and do all other things
incident to such actions and shall have all powers to initiate any emergency measures while acting as Mayor Pro Tem as those possessed by the
Mayor.
2. In the event any State or Federal law requires the selection of a presiding officer pro tem at a specific meeting of the City Council due to the absence
of the Mayor for the purpose of a specific project, bond issue or other proposal, the City Council shall select a presiding officer pro tem at that
meeting for that purpose.
3. In the absence of the Mayor Pro Tem, the City Council may elect from one of its number a temporary Mayor Pro Tem. (1978 Code §2-42)
1-5-5: MEETINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 23/715
A. Organizational Meeting Of Newly Elected City Council: The new elected City Council shall meet for the first time not earlier than twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon on January 2 which is not a Sunday or legal holiday and not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 6. (1978 Code §2-20)
B. Regular Meetings: The time and place for all regular meetings of the City Council shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-21)
C. Special Meetings: The procedure for the calling of a special meeting of the City Council shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Such procedure
shall include, but shall not be limited to, who may call such special meeting, what notice is required thereof and how such notice shall be given to the
City Council members and any other matters determined by the City Council to be necessary thereto. (1978 Code §2-22)
1-5-6: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
A. Robert's Rules Of Order: The rules of parliamentary practices comprised in the current edition of "Robert's Rules of Order", as amended, shall govern
the sessions of the City Council in all cases in which they are applicable and where they are not inconsistent with the standing rules of the City Council
or the laws of the State5. (1978 Code §2-23)
B. Voting Rights: The presiding officer of the City Council, whether the regularly elected presiding officer or presiding officer pro tem, shall have a right to
cast a vote as a member of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-43)
Chapter 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: PERSONNEL PROCEDURES, RULES, REGULATIONS AND COMPENSATION PLANS:
A. Establishment By Resolution; Amendments: Personnel procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans for the employees of the city shall be
established by resolution of the city council at a regular or special meeting. Such procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans may be
amended by resolution of the city council at a later meeting, and the adoption of any procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans shall not
operate to establish any employment contract between the city and any employee, whether directly or by implication, and shall not be construed to alter
the general nature of at-will employment recognized by state law. The city may, also, by collective bargaining, adopt rules and regulations in regard to
personnel practices. (1978 Code §2-87; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Copies On File; Notice: Copies of the procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans referred to in subsection a above shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk and the city library. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish such procedures as are necessary to give notice to
and familiarize the city employees and prospective employees of such procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans. (1978 Code §2-88;
amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS; CITY ATTORNEY, CITY CLERK, CITY MANAGER
1-7-1: OATH:
Before undertaking the duties of the office, the City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall take an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of the State of Iowa and, to the best of the person's ability, faithfully and honestly perform the duties of the office. (1978 Code §2-
55; amd. 1994 Code)
1-7-2: APPOINTMENT1 AND REMOVAL:
The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney and City Manager, who must be qualified electors, residing within the City. The City Council shall appoint a
City Clerk. Residency shall be preferred but not required for the City Clerk. Within ten (10) calendar days after appointment, each appointee shall qualify
by taking the oath. Such oath shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk. In the event the City Attorney, City Clerk or City Manager is removed from office,
such removal must be by a majority vote of City Council. (Ord. 17-4714, 6-20-2017)
1-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall exercise all powers and perform all duties as required by this Code and City ordinances, State law
and as directed by City Council. (1994 Code)
1-7-4: FACILITIES AND STAFF:
A. The City Council shall provide the City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager with such facilities and staff as necessary.
B. City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall have the authority to appoint or remove office staff, respectively. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 24/715
1-7-5: COMPENSATION:
The City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall be paid such compensation as set by resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-67; amd. 1994
Code)
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE DEPARTMENTS
1-8-1: ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE DEPARTMENTS ORGANIZED:
The administrative service of the City shall be divided under the City Manager into the following departments and heads thereof:
Department of Finance Director of Finance
Department of Police Chief of Police
Department of Fire Fire Chief
Department of Public Works Director of Public Works
Department of Parks and Recreation Director of Parks and Recreation
Department of Neighborhood and Development Services Director of Neighborhood and Development Services
Department of Transportation Services Director of Transportation Services
(1978 Code §2-1; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 11-4459, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-4574, 3-5-2014; Ord. 15-4617, 4-21-2015; Ord. 17-4713, 6-20-2017)
After March 4, 2014, any references to "Director of Housing and Inspection Services" or "Director of Planning and Community Development" shall mean
the "Director of Neighborhood and Development Services", with the latter having all the powers and duties granted to the former under the provisions of
this Code. (Ord. 14-4574, 3-4-2014)
1-8-2: COOPERATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
Each department shall fully cooperate with all other departments and officers of the City and shall furnish, upon the direction of the City Manager, any
other departments and officers such service, labor and materials as may be requested by the head of such departments or officers and as facilities shall
reasonably permit, all as the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred. (1978 Code §2-2; amd. 1994
Code)
1-8-3: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The heads of departments shall:
A. Be immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto.
B. Keep informed as to the latest practice in their particular field and shall put into place, with the approval of the City Manager, such new practices as
appear to be of benefit to the service of the City and to the public at large.
C. Submit department reports to the City Manager, as may be required.
D. Establish and maintain a system of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental
activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the City Manager.
E. Have power, when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and to remove departmental staff, subject to personnel procedures1 of the City.
F. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all City property and equipment used in the department. (1978 Code §2-3; amd. 1994 Code)
G. Reside within the Municipal limits of the City of Iowa City. These residency requirements are a condition of employment. (Ord. 11-4459, 11-22-2011)
1-8-4: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS:
Each department head shall perform the duties required of the office by State law, this Code and the ordinances of the City and such other duties required
by the City Manager. (1978 Code §2-4; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 25/715
1-8-5: ADDITIONAL CITY STAFF:
In addition to City departments, nothing herein shall preclude the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, to create any other positions deemed
necessary and appropriate to the good order and management of the City. (1994 Code)
Chapter 9
CITY ELECTIONS
1-9-1: PERMANENT REGISTRATION:
A. Permanent Registration Required: There is hereby adopted in the city the plan of permanent registration for voters therein, and no qualified voter shall
be permitted to vote at any election unless such voter shall register as provided in the code of Iowa, as amended.
B. Definition: For the purpose of this section, the word "election" shall be held to mean general, city, special, school or primary elections and shall include
state, county and city elections. (1978 Code §10-1; amd. 1994 Code)
1-9-2: LIMITATION ON CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS1:
A. Definitions:
CAMPAIGN FUNCTION: Any meeting related to a candidate's campaign for election.
CANDIDATE: Any individual who has taken affirmative action to seek nomination or election to a municipal public office.
CANDIDATE'S COMMITTEE: The committee designated by the candidate to receive contributions as defined in chapter 56 of the state code of Iowa.
CONTRIBUTION: 1. A gift, loan, advance, deposit, rebate, refund, or transfer of money or a gift in kind.
2. The payment, by any person other than a candidate, of compensation for the personal services of another person which are rendered to a
candidate for any such purpose.
3. "Contribution" shall not include a person's time donated to aid or promote a candidate's nomination for election. "Contribution" shall not include
refreshments served at a campaign function so long as such refreshments do not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) in value or transportation provided
to a candidate so long as its value computed at a rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per mile does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in value
in any single election.
4. "Contribution" shall not include something provided to a candidate for the candidate's personal consumption or use and not intended for or on
behalf of the candidate's committee.
ELECTION: Any primary, general, or special election held in the city.
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC OFFICE: The city council.
PERSON: Without limitation, any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership
or association, labor union, political action committee, or any other legal entity. (Ord. 01-3955, 2-6-2001; amd. Ord. 03-4068, 4-8-2003)
B. Limitation On Campaign Contributions By Persons: With regard to elections to fill a municipal public office:
1. No person shall make, and no candidate or candidate's committee shall solicit or accept, any contribution which will cause the total amount
contributed by any such contributor with respect to a single election in support of or opposition to such candidate, to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
2. A person shall not make a contribution in the name of another person, and a person shall not knowingly accept a contribution made by one person in
the name of another. (Ord. 01-3955, 2-6-2001)
1-9-3: VOTING PRECINCTS:
A. Precincts Established: There are hereby established in the city the voting precincts set out in this section. (1978 Code §10-34)
B. Boundaries Of Precincts: The area encompassed within the voting precincts shall be indicated as follows:
Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of 1st Avenue and Court Street; east on Court Street to Friendship Street; north on Friendship Street to
Washington Street; east on Washington Street to Scott Boulevard; north along Scott Boulevard to Rochester Avenue; west on Rochester Avenue to
Post Road; south on Post Road to Princeton Road; northwest along Princeton Road to 1st Avenue; south along 1st Avenue to the point of beginning.
Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of Sunset and Benton Streets; west on Benton Street to Emerald Street; north on Emerald Street to Melrose
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 26/715
Avenue; starting in an easterly direction along Melrose Avenue and continuing along the corporate limits of University Heights to the Iowa Interstate
Railway tracks; west on the railroad tracks to Mormon Trek Boulevard; south on Mormon Trek Boulevard to Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue
to Westgate Street; south on Westgate Street to Keswick Drive; along Keswick Drive to the intersection with Benton Street; east on Benton Street to
Teg Drive; south on Teg Drive and continuing east along Aber Avenue to Sunset Street; Sunset Street to Ashley Drive; along Ashley Drive to Wylde
Green Road; along Wylde Green Road to Edingale Drive; along Edingale Drive to Weeber Street; north on Weeber Street to Benton Street; east on
Benton Street to Oaknoll Drive; north on Oaknoll Drive to Oakcrest Street; west on Oakcrest Street to George Street; north on George Street to the
corporate limits of University Heights and continuing westerly along said corporate limits to the point of beginning.
Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railway tracks and Mormon Trek Boulevard; northeast on Mormon Trek Boulevard to
Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to Iowa Avenue; east on Iowa Avenue to the Iowa River; south along the Iowa River to the Iowa Interstate Railway
bridge; then west along the railroad tracks to the point of beginning.
Precinct 4: Beginning at the intersection of Newton Road and Riverside Drive; west on Riverside Drive and Highway 6 to the Iowa City Corporate
Limits; north along the corporate limits to the Iowa River; proceeding west and north along the Iowa River to a point where the river intersects with the
extended N boundary line of lot 108 of Peninsula Neighborhood Phase 2A; southeasterly to Walker Circle and continuing along Foster Road to
Dubuque Street; south on Dubuque Street to Park Road; west on Park Road to the west bank of the Iowa River; south along the river to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 5: Beginning at the intersection of Park Road and Dubuque Street; south on Dubuque Street to Market Street; west on Market Street to Clinton
Street; south on Clinton to Iowa Avenue; east on Iowa Avenue to Dubuque Street; south on Dubuque Street to College Street; east on College Street to
Linn Street; south on Linn Street to Burlington Street; west on Burlington Street to the Iowa River; north along the river to Park Road; east on Park
Road to the point of beginning.
Precinct 6: Beginning at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railroad tracks and Scott Boulevard; west along the tracks to 2nd Avenue; north on 2nd
Avenue to J Street; west on J Street to 3rd Avenue; north on 3rd Avenue to I Street; west on I Street to 5th Avenue; north on 5th Avenue to F Street;
east on F Street to 4th Avenue; north on 4th Avenue to Muscatine Avenue; east on Muscatine Avenue to the Iowa City corporate limits and continuing
along said corporate limits to the point of beginning.
Precinct 7: Beginning at the intersection of Walden Road and Mormon Trek Boulevard; north along Mormon Trek Boulevard to Bartelt Road; along
Bartelt Road to Roberts Road; along Roberts Road to Westwinds Drive; north along Westwinds Drive to Melrose Avenue; west along Melrose Avenue
to Hawkeye Park Road; along Hawkeye Park Road to Mormon Trek Boulevard; north on Mormon Trek Boulevard to the Iowa Interstate Railway and
the Iowa City corporate limits; westerly and continuing along said corporate limits to Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue to Galway Drive; along
Galway Drive to Donegal Court; southerly along Donegal Court to Tipperary Road; southerly along Tipperary Road to its intersection with the NW
corner of lot 195 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10; along the western boundary of said lot 195 to its SW corner; easterly to the SE corner of lot 194
Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10; southerly to Willow Creek; easterly to the west boundary of Shannon Drive; southerly along Shannon Drive to Irving
Avenue; northerly and easterly along Irving Avenue to Jensen Street; south along Jensen Street to Walden Road; northeasterly along Walden Road to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
Precinct 8: Beginning at the SE corner of 1715 Mormon Trek Boulevard where Mormon Trek Boulevard and Hwy 218 intersect; thence NW and
continuing along the Iowa City corporate limits to Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue to Galway Drive; along Galway Drive to Donegal Court;
southerly along Donegal Court to Tipperary Road; southerly along Tipperary Road to where it intersects with the western boundary of lot 195 Galway
Hills Subdivision Part 10; southerly along said western boundary and continuing easterly to the SE corner of lot 194 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10;
southerly to Willow Creek; easterly to the west boundary of Shannon Drive; southerly along Shannon Drive to Irving Avenue; northerly and easterly
along Irving Avenue to Jensen Street; south along Jensen Street to Walden Road; northeasterly along Walden Road to Mormon Trek Boulevard; south
along Mormon Trek Boulevard to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
Precinct 9: Beginning at the intersection of Mormon Trek Boulevard and Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue to Westgate Street; south on
Westgate Street to Keswick Drive; south on Keswick Drive to Benton Street; east on Benton Street to Teg Drive; south along Teg Drive and Aber
Avenue to Sunset Street; south on Sunset Street to the centerline of the southbound lane of Highway 1; west along the centerline of the southbound
lane of Highway 1; crossing Highway 218 and continuing southwesterly along the centerline of the southbound lane of Highway 1 to Naples Avenue;
southeast to the Iowa City corporate limits; southwest along the corporate limits to where the Iowa City corporate limits shift north at Kitty Lee Road;
north along Kitty Lee Road and continuing along said corporate limits to the SE corner of 1715 Mormon Trek Boulevard which is the intersection of the
right-of-ways of Mormon Trek Boulevard and Highway 218; north along Mormon Trek Boulevard to Bartelt Road; along Bartelt Road to Roberts Road;
along Roberts Road to Westwinds Drive; north along Westwinds Drive to Melrose Avenue; west along Melrose Avenue to Hawkeye Park Road; along
Hawkeye Park Road to Mormon Trek Boulevard; south on Mormon Trek Boulevard to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
Precinct 10: Beginning at the intersection of Highway 6 and the Iowa River; east along Highway 6 to Boyrum Street; then south on Boyrum Street to
Southgate Avenue; then east on Southgate Avenue to Keokuk Street; then south on Keokuk Street to Sandusky Drive; then east on Sandusky Drive to
Taylor Drive; then south on Taylor Drive to Burns Avenue; then east on Burns Avenue to Sycamore Street; then south on Sycamore Street to the Iowa
City corporate limits; then following along the Iowa City corporate limits to the point where the corporate limits intersects the centerline of the CRANDIC
Railroad in Section 21, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then continuing north along said centerline of the CRANDIC to the centerline of the Iowa River;
then north along said centerline to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
Precinct 11: Beginning at the intersection of Burlington and Gilbert Streets; south on Gilbert Street to Highway 6; west on Highway 6 to Miller Avenue;
north on Miller Avenue extended to the Iowa Interstate Railroad; east along the railroad to the Iowa River; north along the river to Burlington Street;
east on Burlington Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 12: Beginning at the intersection of Industrial Park Road and Highway 6; north on Industrial Park Road and the centerline of Industrial Park
Road extended to the centerline of the Iowa Interstate Railroad; then east on said centerline to the centerline of Scott Boulevard; then north to the north
right-of-way line of the Iowa Interstate Railroad; then southeasterly along said right-of-way to the west line of the southeast quarter of Section 19,
Township 79 N, Range 5 W; then following the Iowa City corporate limits north, east, south, west, south, east, south, west, south, west, north, west,
south, and westerly along the Iowa City corporate limits to the east line of Section 24, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then southerly along said east line to
the centerline of Hwy 6; then northwesterly, south, west, south, west, south, west, south, west, south, and west to the east right-of-way line of Soccer
Park Road; then southerly along the east right-of-way of Soccer Park Road to Napoleon Street; then west along Napoleon Street to the intersection
with the west right-of-way line of Soccer Park Road; then along the west right-of-way line of Soccer Park Road and Iowa City corporate limits northerly
to the south line of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then following the Iowa City corporate limits westerly and northerly
to the north right-of-way line of Nursery Lane; then following the Iowa City corporate limits east, north, east, south, east, north, east, north, and west to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 27/715
the intersection of Sycamore Street and the south line of Section 23, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then north on Sycamore Street to California Avenue;
then east on California Avenue to Miami Drive; then southwest on Miami Drive to Nevada Avenue; then southeast on Nevada Avenue to Lakeside
Drive; then east and north on Lakeside Drive to Highway 6 and to the point of beginning. Due to annexations that occurred after the 2010 federal
census, the annexed portion of Iowa City located within the census block identified by GEOID 191030105001112 is part of this Iowa City Precinct 12.
Precinct 13: Beginning at the intersection of Benton Street and Miller Avenue; south on Miller Avenue to Highway 1; east on Highway 1 to the Iowa
River; south on the Iowa River to the centerline of the CRANDIC Railroad; southwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with the Iowa City
corporate limits just south of Mormon Trek Boulevard; then west, north, west, north, northwesterly, and southwesterly along said corporate limits to the
west line of Section 21, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then following the Iowa City corporate limits south, easterly, south, and westerly to the east rightof-
way line of US Highway 218; southeasterly along said right-of-way to the south line of Section 20, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; west along said south
line to the west line of the southeast quarter of said Section 20, northerly on said west line and the centerline of Naples Avenue to the centerline of
Highway 1; northeasterly along the centerline of Highway 1 to its intersection with Sunset Street extended; northwesterly on Sunset Street to Ashley
Drive; along Ashley Drive to Wylde Green Road; along Wylde Green Road to Edingale Drive; along Edingale Drive to Weeber Street; along Weeber
Street to Benton Street; east on Benton Street to Oaknoll Drive; north on Oaknoll Drive to Oakcrest Street; west on Oakcrest Street to George Street;
north on George Street to the University Heights corporate limits; following said corporate limits north, east, north, and east to the centerline of the Iowa
Interstate Railroad; southeast along said centerline to a point south of the southern-most corner of Brookland Park; south along an extension of Miller
Avenue and continuing along Miller Avenue to Benton Street; west along Benton Street to the point of beginning. Due to annexations that occurred
after the 2010 federal census, the annexed portion of Iowa City located within the census block identified by GEOID 191030104004015 is part of the
West Lucas Township Precinct.
Precinct 14: Beginning at the intersection of Highway 6 and Sycamore Street; north on Sycamore Street to Lower Muscatine Road; northwest on Lower
Muscatine Road to Kirkwood Avenue; west along Kirkwood Avenue to Gilbert Street; south along Gilbert Street to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to
Boyrum Street; south on Boyrum Street to Southgate Avenue; east along Southgate Avenue to Keokuk Street; south on Keokuk Street to Sandusky
Drive; east on Sandusky Drive to Taylor Drive; north on Taylor Drive to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to Sycamore Street and the point of beginning.
Precinct 15: Beginning at the intersection of Burns Avenue and Taylor Drive; north on Taylor Drive to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to Sycamore
Street; north on Sycamore Street to Lower Muscatine Road; northwest on Lower Muscatine Road to Pine Street; north on Pine Street to the Iowa
Interstate Railway; southeast along the railroad to its intersection with Industrial Park Road extended; south along Industrial Park Road to Highway 6
and crossing Highway 6 to Lakeside Drive; south on Lakeside Drive to Nevada Avenue; north on Nevada Avenue to Miami Drive; north on Miami Drive
to California Avenue; west on California Avenue to Sycamore Street; south on Sycamore Street to Burns Avenue; west on Burns Avenue to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 16: Beginning at the intersection of Muscatine Avenue and Scott Boulevard; north on Scott Boulevard to Washington Street; west on
Washington Street to Friendship Street; south on Friendship Street to Court Street; west on Court Street to 1st Avenue; south on 1st Avenue to
Friendship Street; west on Friendship Street to 5th Avenue; south on 5th Avenue to Muscatine Avenue; following Muscatine Avenue east to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 17: Beginning at the intersection of 5th Avenue and Muscatine Avenue; northwest on Muscatine Avenue to Burlington Street; west on
Burlington Street to Governor Street; north on Governor Street to Jefferson Street; east on Jefferson Street to Parsons Avenue; north on Parsons
Avenue to Rochester Avenue; east along Rochester Avenue to 1st Avenue; south on 1st Avenue to Friendship Street; west on Friendship Street to 5th
Avenue; south on 5th Avenue to the point of beginning.
Precinct 18: Beginning at the intersection of Muscatine Avenue and Burlington Street; west along Burlington Street to Governor Street; south along
Governor Street to Bowery Street; west along Bowery Street to Lucas Street; south along Lucas Street to the Iowa Interstate Railroad tracks; west on
the tracks to Gilbert Street; south on Gilbert Street to Kirkwood Avenue; east on Kirkwood Avenue to Lower Muscatine Road; southeast along Lower
Muscatine Road to Pine Street; north on Pine Street to the railroad tracks; southeast along the tracks to 2nd Avenue; north on 2nd Avenue to J Street;
west on J Street to 3rd Avenue; north on 3rd Avenue to I Street; west on I Street to 5th Avenue; north on 5th Avenue to F Street; east on F Street to 4th
Avenue; north on 4th Avenue to Muscatine Avenue; northwest along Muscatine Avenue to the point of beginning.
Precinct 19: Beginning at the intersection of Dodge Street and Bowery Street; east on Bowery Street to Lucas Street; south on Lucas Street to the Iowa
Interstate Railroad tracks; west on the railroad tracks to Gilbert Street; north on Gilbert Street to Burlington Street; west on Burlington Street to Linn
Street; north on Linn Street to College Street; east on College Street to Van Buren Street; south on Van Buren to Burlington Street; east on Burlington
Street to Dodge Street; south on Dodge Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 20: Beginning at the intersection of Dodge Street and Burlington Street; west on Burlington Street to Van Buren Street; north on Van Buren
Street to College Street; west on College Street to Dubuque Street; north on Dubuque Street to Iowa Avenue; west on Iowa Avenue to Clinton Street;
north on Clinton Street to Market Street; east on Market Street to Dodge Street; south on Dodge Street to Jefferson Street; east on Jefferson Street to
Governor Street; south on Governor Street to Bowery Street; west on Bowery Street to Dodge Street; north on Dodge Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 21: Beginning at the intersection of Governor Street and Jefferson Street; west on Jefferson Street to Dodge Street; north on Dodge Street to
Market Street; west on Market Street to Dubuque Street; north on Dubuque Street to Kimball Road; east on Kimball Road to Governor Street; south on
Governor Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 22: Beginning at the intersection of Gilbert Street and Kimball Road; west on Kimball Road to Dubuque Street; north on Dubuque Street to
Foster Road; along Foster Road and continuing along Walker Circle to where the NE boundary line of lot 108 Peninsula Neighborhood Phase 2A
extended intersects with the Iowa River and the Iowa City corporate limits; north along said corporate limits and continuing across Interstate 80 to
Dubuque Street; continuing southerly along the corporate limits to Interstate 80; east along I-80 to Prairie du Chien Road; south along Prairie du Chien
Road to North Dodge Street and Highway 1; southwest to Governor Street; northwest on Governor Street to Kimball Road; westerly along Kimball
Road to the point of beginning.
Precinct 23: Beginning at the intersection of Jefferson Street and Governor Street; north on Governor Street to its intersection with North Dodge
Street/Highway 1; northeast along Dodge Street to Prairie du Chien Road; north on Prairie du Chien Road to Interstate 80 and the Iowa City corporate
limits; starting east along the corporate limits and following the corporate limits around to Rochester Avenue; west on Rochester Avenue to Post Road;
south on Post Road to Princeton Road; northwest on Princeton Road to 1st Avenue; north on 1st Avenue to Rochester Avenue; west along Rochester
Avenue to Parsons Avenue; south on Parsons Avenue to Jefferson Street; west on Jefferson Street to the point of beginning. Due to annexations that
occurred after the 2010 federal census, the annexed portion of Iowa City located within the census blocks identified by GEOID 191030001001045,
191030001001004, 191030101004030, 191030001001000, and 191030001001007 are part of the Newport Township Precinct.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
Precinct 24: Beginning at the SE corner of Scott Park on the Iowa City corporate limits; following the corporate limits south to American Legion Road;
west on American Legion Road to Scott Boulevard; north along Scott Boulevard to Rochester Avenue; east on Rochester Avenue to the Iowa City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 28/715
corporate limits; starting east along the corporate limits and continuing to follow the corporate limits back to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
Title 2
HUMAN RIGHTS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGE: Chronological age of any person.
AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who: a) claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or b) believes that such person will be
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
CITY ATTORNEY: The duly appointed attorney for the city or such person designated by the city attorney.
COMMISSION: The Iowa City human rights commission.
COMPLAINANT: A person who has filed a report of discrimination as provided for by this title.
COMPLAINT: A report of discrimination as provided for by this title.
CONCILIATION: The attempt by the human rights coordinator to reach a resolution with both parties in a case in which a determination of probable cause
has been made.
CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTION: As defined in section 537.1301(11) of the code of Iowa, as amended.
COURT: The district court of the state of Iowa or any judge of the court if the court is not in session at that time.
COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A. A building consisting of four (4) or more dwelling units if the building has one or more elevators; or
B. The ground floor units of a building consisting of four (4) or more units.
CREDIT: As defined in section 537.1301(15) of the code of Iowa, as amended.
CREDITOR: As defined in section 537.1301(17) of the code of Iowa, as amended.
DEPENDENT: Any person, regardless of age, who resides in a household and who derives primary care or support from that household.
DISABILITY: A. The physical or mental impairment of a person which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, and the
condition of a person with a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a diagnosis of
acquired immune deficiency syndrome related complex, or any other condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The inclusion of a
condition related to a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result in the meaning of "disability" under the provisions of this title does not preclude the
application of the provisions of this title to conditions resulting from other contagious or infectious diseases.
B. A record of having such an impairment.
C. Being regarded as having such an impairment. "Disability" does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined
by chapter 124A of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
ELDERLY: Any person who has attained the age of fifty five (55) years.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who works for wages, salary or commission or any combination thereof, and persons who are seeking or applying for
employment.
EMPLOYER: Includes any person, wherever situated, who solicits individuals within the City to apply for employment within the City or elsewhere. The
term includes the City itself, and to the extent not inconsistent with State law, all other political subdivisions, public corporations, governmental units
conducting any activity within the City and public agencies or corporations.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person undertaking to procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person.
FAMILIAL STATUS: A. One or more individuals under the age of eighteen (18) domiciled with one of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 29/715
1. A parent or another person having legal custody of the individual or individuals.
2. The designee of the parent or the other person having custody of the individual or individuals, with the written permission of the parent or other
person.
B. Protections against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal
custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
FAMILY: For purposes of this title "family" includes a single individual, and includes persons who are registered as domestic partners and who are eligible
to obtain a certified statement of the domestic partnership from the City Clerk, as provided in chapter 6 of this title.
GENDER IDENTITY: A person's gender-related identity, appearance, or expression, whether or not traditionally associated with the person's biological sex
or sex at birth, incorporating the person's attitudes, preferences, beliefs, and practices pertaining thereto, including being physically and/or behaviorally
androgynous.
HOUSING TRANSACTION: The sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property and the offer to sell, exchange, rent or lease real property.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any organization which exists for the purpose in whole or in part of collective bargaining, of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment.
MARITAL STATUS: The state of being married, single, divorced, separated or widowed.
PERSON: One or more individuals; partnerships; associations; corporations; legal representatives; trustees; receivers; the City or any board, commission,
department or agency thereof; all other governmental units conducting any activity in the City; labor organizations; trustees in cases under title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; and fiduciaries.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: Each and every place, establishment or facility of whatever kind, nature or class that caters or offers services, facilities or
goods to the general public for a fee or charge. Each and every place, establishment or facility that caters or offers services, facilities or goods to the
general public gratuitously shall be deemed a public accommodation if the accommodation receives any substantial governmental support or subsidy.
Public accommodation shall not mean any bona fide private club or other place, establishment or facility which is by its nature distinctly private, except
that, when such distinctly private place, establishment or facility caters or offers services, facilities or goods to the general public for a fee or charge or
gratuitously, it shall be deemed a public accommodation during such period.
PUBLIC ASSISTANCE SOURCE OF INCOME: Income and support derived from any tax supported Federal, State or local funds, including, but not limited
to, social security, supplemental security income, temporary assistance for needy families, family investment program, general relief, food stamps, and
unemployment compensation, housing choice voucher subsidies and similar rent subsidy programs.
RESPONDENT: A person who is alleged to have committed an act prohibited by this title, against whom a complaint has been filed under this title, or who
has been identified in the course of investigation as required with respect to respondents so identified under subsection 2-4-4A of this title.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT: A form of sex discrimination. Sexual harassment may take the form of deliberate or repeated comments, questions,
representations or physical contacts of a sexual nature which are unwelcome to the recipient. Sexual harassment may also take the form of conduct that
has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual, history of, or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.
STATE, STATE PARTY AND STATE PARTIES: As used in the preamble and part I of the "International Convention On the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (1966)", as amended, shall mean the City of Iowa City, Iowa.
UNFAIR PRACTICE OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE: Those practices specified as unfair or discriminatory in sections 216.6, 216.7, 216.8, 216.8A,
216.9, 216.10, 216.11, and 216.11A of the Code of Iowa, as amended, or this title. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; Ord. 97-
3785, 5-20-1997; Ord. 00-3921, 3-7-2000; Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; Ord. 16-4658, 2-16-2016, eff. 6-1-2016; Ord. 18-4736, 1-
2-2018; Ord. 18-4739, 2-20-2018)
2-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to protect individuals of the City against discrimination as defined in this chapter. Moreover, this title provides for execution
within the City of the policies of the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the Federal Civil Rights Acts, as amended, the preamble and part I (articles
1 - 7) of the "International Convention On the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1966)", as amended, and the promotion of cooperation
among the City, State and Federal agencies which are charged, presently and in the future, with enforcing these Acts and instruments. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-
16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-1-3: CONSTRUCTION:
This title shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purpose, and shall be enforced by the Iowa City Human Rights Commission consistent with the intent,
language and spirit of the preamble and part I (articles 1 - 7) of the "International Convention On the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(1966)", as amended. However, the construction and enforcement of the preamble and part I of said international convention shall in no event operate to
diminish protection that otherwise exists under this title, the Iowa Civil Rights Act, as amended, the Federal Civil Rights Acts, as amended, or the
Constitution of the State of Iowa, as amended, or the Constitution of the United States of America, as amended. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
Chapter 2
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 30/715
2-2-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; GENERAL DUTIES:
There is hereby established the Iowa City human rights commission whose duties shall be to disseminate information, educate the public on illegal
discrimination and human rights, provide the enforcement necessary to further the goals of this title, and protect individuals from unfounded charges of
discriminatory practices. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-2-2: POWERS:
The commission created by this chapter shall have the following powers: (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
A. Receive complaints alleging unfair or discriminatory practices.
B. Investigate and study the existence, character, causes and extent of discrimination in the areas covered by this title, and to eliminate discrimination by
education, conciliation and enforcement where necessary.
C. Issue publications and reports of the research and investigations of the commission subject to the limitations of confidentiality.
D. Prepare and transmit to the city council from time to time, but not less often than once each year, reports describing the proceedings, investigations,
hearings, decisions and other work performed by the commission.
E. Make recommendations to the city council for such further legislation concerning discrimination as it may deem necessary and desirable.
F. Cooperate, within the limits of any appropriations made for its operation, with other agencies or organizations, both public and private, whose purposes
are not inconsistent with those of this title, and in the planning and conducting of programs designed to eliminate racial, religious, cultural and other
intergroup tensions.
G. Educate the public on human rights and illegal discrimination, such as organizing and facilitating educational public forums that address one or more of
the broad range of topics included within the rubric of human rights.
H. Seek injunctive relief as may be appropriate to preserve the rights of the complainant and the public interest when it appears that a complainant may be
irreparably injured before a public hearing can be called to determine the merits of the complaint.
I. Issue subpoenas and order discovery as provided by this section to aid in investigations of allegations of discrimination. The subpoenas and discovery
may be ordered to the same extent and are subject to the same limitations as subpoenas and discovery in a civil action in district court. (Ord. 03-4105,
12-16-2003)
2-2-3: STRUCTURE:
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, appointed by vote of the city council. Appointees shall serve for a term of three (3) years and thereafter
until a successor has been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. Appointments shall take into consideration
persons of the various racial, religious, cultural, social and economic groups in the city. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
2-2-4: RECORDS TO BE CONFIDENTIAL; EXCEPTIONS:
A. The disclosure of information, whether a charge has been filed or not, or revealing the contents of any file is prohibited except in the following
circumstances:
1. A written request is received by a party or party's attorney following a probable cause determination.
2. If the commission has issued a right to sue letter, a party or a party's attorney may have access to the commission case file on that complaint. (Ord.
03-4105, 12-16-2003)
3. If a mediation agreement regarding a housing complaint is made public according to the provisions of section 2-4-2 of this title.
4. The final investigative report is made available to the parties or a party's attorney according to the provisions of section 2-4-2 of this title. (Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015)
B. No member of the commission staff shall disclose the filing of a charge, the information gathered during the investigation, or the endeavors to eliminate
such discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, mediation, conciliation or persuasion, except as may be necessary to conduct an investigation of a
complaint. Nothing in this section shall prevent the commission from releasing such information concerning alleged or acknowledged discriminatory
practices to the state civil rights commission, the United States civil rights commission, the federal equal employment opportunity commission, and
other agencies or organizations whose primary purpose is the enforcement of civil rights legislation. This section does not prevent any complainant,
witness or other person from publicizing the filing of a complaint or the matter therein complained of. Violation of these provisions by a member of the
commission or its staff shall constitute grounds for removal. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 31/715
Chapter 3
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
2-3-1: EMPLOYMENT; EXCEPTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any employer to refuse to hire, accept, register, classify, promote or refer for employment, or to otherwise discriminate in
employment against any other person or to discharge any employee because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national
origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
B. It shall be unlawful for any labor organization to refuse to admit to membership, apprenticeship or training an applicant, to expel any member, or to
otherwise discriminate against any applicant for membership, apprenticeship or training or any member in the privileges, rights or benefits of such
membership, apprenticeship or training because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or
sexual orientation of such applicant or member.
C. It shall be unlawful for any employer, employment agency, labor organization or the employees or members thereof to directly or indirectly advertise or
in any other manner indicate or publicize that individuals are unwelcome, objectionable or not solicited for employment or membership because of age,
color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
D. Employment policies relating to pregnancy and childbirth shall be governed by the following:
1. A written or unwritten employment policy or practice which excludes from employment applicants or employees because of the employee's
pregnancy is a prima facie violation of this title.
2. Disabilities caused or contributed to by the employee's pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth and recovery therefrom are, for all job related purposes,
temporary disabilities and shall be treated as such under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan available in connection with
employment or any written or unwritten employment policies and practices involving terms and conditions of employment as applied to other
temporary disabilities.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or require as a condition of employment of any employee or prospective employee a test for the presence of
the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus. An agreement between an employer, employment agency, labor organization or their employees,
agents or members and an employee or prospective employee concerning employment, pay or benefits to an employee or prospective employee in
return for taking a test for the presence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus, is prohibited. The prohibitions of this subsection do not
apply if the state epidemiologist determines and the director of public health declares through the utilization of guidelines established by the center for
disease control of the United States department of health and human services, that a person with a condition related to acquired immune deficiency
syndrome poses a significant risk of transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus to other persons in a specific occupation.
F. The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
1. Any bona fide religious institution or its educational facility, association, corporation or society with respect to any qualifications for employment
based on religion when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose. A religious qualification for instructional personnel or an
administrative officer, serving in a supervisory capacity of a bona fide religious educational facility or religious institution shall be presumed to be a
bona fide occupational qualification. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2. An employer or employment agency which chooses to offer employment or advertise for employment to only the disabled or elderly. Any such
employment or offer of employment shall not discriminate among the disabled or elderly on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
3. The employment of individuals for work within the home of the employer if the employer or members of the family reside therein during such
employment.
4. The employment of individuals to render personal service to the person of the employer or members of the employer's family. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-
1994)
5. The employment on the basis of sex in those certain instances where sex is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the
normal operation of a particular business or enterprise. The bona fide occupational qualification shall be interpreted narrowly. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-
2003)
6. A state or federal program designed to benefit a specific age classification which serves a bona fide public purpose. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
7. The employment on the basis of disability in those certain instances where presence of disability is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably
necessary to the normal operation of a particular business or enterprise. The bona fide occupational qualification shall be interpreted narrowly. (Ord.
03-4105, 12-16-2003)
8. Any employer who regularly employs less than four (4) individuals. For purposes of this section, individuals who are members of the employer's
family shall not be counted as employees. (Ord. 08-4312, 8-11-2008)
2-3-2: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION; EXCEPTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny any other person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages of any
place of public accommodation because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. (Ord. 00-3950, 11-7-2000; amd. Ord. 13-4560, 10-15-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 32/715
B. It shall be unlawful to directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate or publicize that the patronage of persons is unwelcome,
objectionable or not solicited because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
C. This section shall not apply to any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications the institution may impose based on religion when
such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
D. Public accommodations may be designated specifically for the elderly and disabled. However, public accommodations may not be restricted among the
elderly and disabled on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.
(Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
E. It shall not be unlawful for a public accommodation to take any action otherwise prohibited by this section where age is a bona fide factor or qualification
based on health, safety or developmental differences between age groups. In order to establish that the exception applies, a place of public
accommodation must show the restriction or policy is necessary to protect the health, safety, or developmental differences of persons based on age
alone. Developmental differences of persons based on age means the social, emotional, physical and intellectual development of a person based on
the chronological age of a person.
F. Nothing in this section shall prohibit restrictions regarding the consumption of alcoholic beverages by those under the legal drinking age or the presence
of persons under the legal drinking age in places of public accommodation where alcoholic beverages are served.
G. This section shall not apply to discounts for services or accommodations based upon age. (Ord. 13-4560, 10-15-2013)
2-3-3: CREDIT TRANSACTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Consumer Credit: It shall be unlawful for any creditor to refuse to enter into any consumer credit transaction or to impose finance charges or other terms
or conditions more onerous than those regularly extended by that creditor to consumers of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed,
disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.
B. Extension Of Credit: It shall be unlawful for any person authorized or licensed to do business in this state pursuant to chapter 524, 533, 534, 536, or
536A of the code of Iowa, as amended, to refuse to loan or to extend credit or to impose terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly
extended to persons of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race,
religion, sex or sexual orientation.
C. Insurance:
1. It shall be unlawful for any creditor to refuse to offer credit, life or health and accident insurance because of age, color, creed, disability, gender
identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. Refusal by a creditor to offer credit, life or health and accident
insurance based upon the age or physical disability of the consumer shall not be an unfair or discriminatory practice if such denial is based solely
upon bona fide underwriting considerations not prohibited by title XIII, subtitle 1, code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
2. The provisions of this section shall not be construed by negative implication or otherwise to narrow or restrict any other provisions of this title. (Ord.
94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-3-4: EDUCATION:
A. It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any educational institution to discriminate on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation in any program or activity. Such discriminatory practices shall include, but not be
limited to, the following practices:
1. Exclusion of a person or persons from participation in, denial of the benefits of, or subject to discrimination in any academic, extracurricular,
research, occupational training or other program or activity.
2. Denial of comparable opportunity in intramural and interscholastic athletic programs.
3. Discrimination among persons in employment and the conditions of employment.
4. On the basis of sex, the application of any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family or marital status of a person, or the exclusion of
any person from any program or activity or employment because of pregnancy or related conditions dependent upon the physician's diagnosis and
certification. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
B. For the purpose of this section, "educational institution" includes any preschool, elementary, secondary or merged area school, area education agency
or postsecondary college and their governing boards, with the exception that this section shall not include the University Of Iowa or any other
educational division of the state.
C. This section does not prohibit an educational institution from maintaining separate toilet facilities, locker rooms or living facilities for the different sexes
so long as comparable facilities are provided. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any bona fide religious institution from imposing
qualifications based on religion when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose or any institution from admitting students of only
one sex. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 33/715
2-3-5: HOUSING; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be an unlawful or discriminatory practice for any person: (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
A. To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign, sublease, refuse to negotiate or to otherwise make unavailable, or deny any real property or dwelling or part,
portion or interest therein, to any person because of the age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of income of that person. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015;
amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
B. To discriminate against any other person in the terms, conditions or privileges of any real estate transaction because of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public
assistance source of income.
C. To directly or indirectly advertise, or in any other manner indicate or publicize in any real estate transaction that any person is not welcome or not
solicited because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of income. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
D. To discriminate against the lessee or purchaser of any real property or dwelling or part, portion or interest of the real property or dwelling, or against any
prospective lessee or purchaser of the property or dwelling because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents, or public assistance source of income of persons who may
from time to time be present in or on the lessee's or owner's premises for lawful purposes at the invitation of the lessee or owner as friends, guests,
visitors, relatives or in any similar capacity. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
E. The following exceptions are applicable to this section and section 2-3-6 of this chapter:
1. Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications it may impose based on religion, when these qualifications are related to a bona
fide religious purpose unless the religious institution owns or operates property for a commercial purpose or membership in the religion is restricted
on account of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race, sex, sexual orientation, presence or
absence of dependents or public assistance source of income.
2. Any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society
from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion
or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity,
marital status, familial status, national origin, race, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of
income. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
3. Restrictions based on sex in the rental or leasing of dwellings within which residents of both sexes would share a common bathroom facility on the
same floor of the building. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
F. The following are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in this section and section 2-3-6 of this chapter with the exception of the prohibition on
discrimination in advertising set forth in subsection C of this section: (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
1. The rental or leasing of four (4) or fewer rooms within a single dwelling by the owner of such dwelling, if the owner resides therein. (Ord. 15-4650,
12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of
each other, if the owner occupies the premises, or some portion thereof, and actually resides therein.
G. Nothing in this title limits the applicability of the city's restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Nor does
any provision in this title regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. For the purposes of this title, "housing for older
persons" means housing:
1. Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal
program and as determined by the secretary of housing and urban development); or
2. Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty two (62) years of age or older; or
3. Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty five (55) years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as
housing for older persons under this subsection, the regulations promulgated by the secretary of housing and urban development shall apply and at
least the following two (2) criteria must be present:
a. That at least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least one person fifty five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
b. The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for
persons fifty five (55) years of age or older.
However, such housing may not otherwise be restricted on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, public assistance source of income or presence or absence of dependents. (Ord. 15-4650,
12-15-2015)
2-3-6: ADDITIONAL UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 34/715
A. A person shall not induce or attempt to induce another person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a
neighborhood of a person of a particular age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents, or public assistance source of income.
B. A person shall not represent to a person of a particular age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents, or public assistance source of income that a dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is available for inspection, sale or rental. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
C. A person shall not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to a buyer or renter because of a disability of any
of the following persons:
1. That buyer or renter.
2. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available.
3. A person associated with that buyer or renter.
D. A person shall not discriminate against another person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of any of the following persons:
1. That person.
2. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available.
3. A person associated with that person.
E. For the purposes of this section only, discrimination includes any of the following circumstances:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if
the modifications are necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises. In the case of a rental, a landlord may, where reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreement to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when the accommodations are necessary to afford the
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and
construct those dwellings in a manner that meets the following requirements: (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; Ord. 99-
3905, 10-12-1999; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
a. The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons.
b. All doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in
wheelchairs.
c. All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling.
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations.
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars.
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that a person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
d. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the "American National Standard For Buildings And Facilities Providing Accessibility And
Usability For Physically Handicapped People", as amended, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1", satisfies the requirements of subsection E3c of
this section.
4. Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to a person whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other persons or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
F. A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions shall not discriminate against a person in making a residential
real estate related transaction available or in terms or conditions of a residential real estate related transaction because of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public
assistance source of income. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
G. For the purpose of this section, "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following:
1. To make or purchase loans or provide other financial assistance to purchase, construct, improve, repair or maintain a dwelling, or to secure
residential real estate.
2. To sell, broker or appraise residential real estate. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
H. A person shall not deny another person access to, or membership or participation in a multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other
service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in terms or conditions of access,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 35/715
membership or participation in such organization because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents, or public assistance source of income. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-3-7: EFFECT ON OTHER LAW:
A. This chapter does not affect a reasonable local or state restriction on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or restriction
relating to health or safety standards.
B. This chapter does not affect a requirement of nondiscrimination in other city ordinances. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-3-8: AIDING OR ABETTING; RETALIATION; INTIMIDATION:
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for:
A. Any person to intentionally aid, abet, compel or coerce another person to engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by this title.
B. Any person to discriminate against another person because such person has either lawfully opposed any discriminatory practice forbidden by this title,
obeyed the provisions of this title, or has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this title. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
C. Any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or
enjoyed, or having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this title. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-
15-2015)
Chapter 4
ENFORCEMENT
2-4-1: PERSONS WHO MAY FILE COMPLAINTS; METHOD OF FILING COMPLAINT; AMENDING COMPLAINT:
A. All persons claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair practice within this city may, by themselves or by counsel make, sign and file with the
commission a verified, written complaint which shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have committed the discriminatory or unfair
practice of which complained, shall set forth the particulars thereof, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the commission.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. Upon the filing of a complaint, the human rights coordinator shall serve notice on the complainant acknowledging the filing and advising the complainant
of the time limits and choice of forums provided under the law. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
C. The commission, a commissioner, the city attorney or any other person aware of the existence of a discriminatory practice may in like manner make,
sign and file such complaint. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997)
D. Complaints and answers may be amended as follows:
1. The complainant shall have the power to amend any complaint at any time prior to the human rights coordinator's probable cause recommendation.
2. The human rights coordinator shall have the power to amend any complaint after a probable cause finding and prior to the decision to have a public
hearing.
3. At the discretion of the administrative law judge, the complaint may be amended after the decision to have a public hearing.
4. The respondent shall have like power to amend such respondent's answer, at any time prior to hearing, and thereafter at the discretion of the
administrative law judge.
5. Amendments to the complaint and answer alleging additional acts which constitute unfair or discriminatory practices related to or growing out of the
subject matter of the original complaint will relate back to the date the original complaint or answer was filed. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
E. A claim under this title shall not be maintained unless a complaint is filed with the commission within three hundred (300) days after the alleged
discriminatory or unfair practice occurred. (Ord. 08-4312, 8-11-2008)
F. A verified copy of a complaint filed with the state civil rights commission, or its successor, under the provisions of chapter 216, code of Iowa, as
amended; or EEOC, or its successor; or HUD, or its successor, shall be sufficient complaint for the purpose of this title if it alleges either in the text
thereof or in accompanying statements that the alleged discriminatory practice occurred within this city. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
G. A complaint or any part thereof may be withdrawn by the complainant at any time prior to notice of a public hearing and thereafter at the discretion of
the commission. However, nothing herein shall preclude the human rights coordinator from continuing the investigation and initiating a complaint on the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 36/715
commission's behalf against the original respondent whenever it deems it in the public interest. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
2-4-2: INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; PREDETERMINATION SETTLEMENT:
A. Upon the filing of a verified complaint, the human rights coordinator shall serve notice on the respondent. Notice shall include both a copy of the
complaint and a statement of the respondent's procedural rights and obligations under the law or ordinance. Service shall be effected by certified mail
within twenty (20) days of filing for complaints in the areas of employment, public accommodation, credit or education, and within seven (7) days of
filing for complaints alleging discrimination in the area of housing. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. The human rights coordinator may draft and mail to the parties written questionnaire/document requests to which respondent and complainant are
required to respond. Answers and documents are to be received by the human rights coordinator's office within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
questionnaire/document request for complaints in the areas of employment, public accommodation, credit and education, and within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the questionnaire/document request for complaints in the area of housing. The human rights coordinator may grant extensions of time to
respond. (Ord. 15-4606, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
C. After reviewing materials responsive to the questionnaire/document request, the human rights office shall determine whether the complaint warrants
further investigation. If the human rights office finds there is a reasonable possibility of a probable cause determination or the legal issues present in
the complaint need further development, the human rights office shall promptly resume the investigation of the complaint. A complaint determined by
the human rights office not to warrant further processing by the human rights office shall be administratively closed. Notice of such closure shall be
promptly served upon the complainant and the respondent by certified mail. Service is effective upon mailing. Such notice shall state the reasons for
administrative closure.
D. A complainant may object to the administrative closure within ten (10) days of service by filing a written request for review that states the basis for the
objection. If a complainant makes a timely written request for review of the administrative closure, the human rights office shall promptly review the
complainant's request and all relevant material. If, after review by the human rights office, it is determined that the complaint does not warrant further
processing, the human rights office shall close the file and notify the complainant and respondent of the final decision of administrative closure. If, after
review, the human rights office determines that there is a reasonable possibility of a probable cause determination or the legal issues presented in the
complaint need further development, the allegations will be investigated further. (Ord. 12-4484, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
E. A complaint may be administratively closed at any time if the complainant cannot be contacted after diligent efforts or is uncooperative causing
unreasonable delay in the processing of a complaint. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
F. Upon completion of the investigation, the human rights office shall issue a written investigative summary and recommendation as to whether probable
cause exists that the person charged in the complaint has committed a discriminatory practice. (Ord. 12-4484, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
G. Any time after a complaint is filed under this title, but before the human rights office issues a probable cause determination, the human rights office may
seek a disposition of the complaint through a predetermination settlement. (Ord. 12-4484, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
H. A complaint may be closed as satisfactorily adjusted when the respondent has made an offer of settlement acceptable to the human rights coordinator
but not the complainant. Notice of intended closure shall state the reasons for closure and be served by certified mail upon the complainant. The
complainant shall be allowed thirty (30) days to respond in writing to the human rights coordinator either stating the reasons why the offer is
unacceptable or accepting the offer. The human rights coordinator will review and consider the response before making a closure decision.
I. In all complaint areas except housing, the complainant or respondent may request mediation of the complaint at any time during the complaint process
prior to the probable cause determination. Mediation shall not be undertaken unless both the complainant and respondent agree to participate.
Mediation may be discontinued at the request of either party. If the complainant and respondent do not reach a mediation agreement, the complaint
process shall continue to resolution as provided in this section.
1. A mediation agreement is an agreement between the respondent and complainant. It is not subject to review or approval of the commission.
2. All verbal or written information relating to the subject matter of a mediation agreement and transmitted between either the complainant or
respondent and a mediator to resolve a complaint filed under this chapter, whether reflected in notes, memoranda, or other work product, is
confidential as provided in subsection 2-2-4B of this title. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
J. In the area of housing, the commission shall, during the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with the finding that there is or is not
probable cause as defined in this chapter, to the extent feasible, engage in mediation with respect to the complaint.
1. A mediation agreement is an agreement between a respondent and the complainant and is subject to commission approval.
2. A mediation agreement may provide for binding arbitration or other method of dispute resolution. Dispute resolution that results from a mediation
agreement may authorize appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
3. A mediation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent agree otherwise, and the commission determines that
disclosure is not necessary to further the purposes of this chapter relating to unfair practices or discrimination in housing or real estate.
4. The proceedings or results of mediation shall not be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the
written consent of the persons who are party to the mediation. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-3: PROCEEDINGS ON COMPLAINTS; PROBABLE CAUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 37/715
A. If the human rights office finds that probable cause exists regarding the allegations of the complaint, the human rights office shall notify the complainant
and the respondent of the finding. The human rights office shall promptly endeavor to eliminate the discriminatory or unfair practice by conference,
conciliation and persuasion.
B. If the human rights office finds that no probable cause exists, the human rights office shall issue a written finding dismissing the complaint and notifying
the parties of the complainant's right to appeal the finding. Notice of the no probable cause determination shall be promptly mailed to the complainant
and to the respondent by certified mail. Service is effective upon mailing.
C. A complainant may object to the finding of no probable cause within ten (10) days of service by filing a written request for review that states the basis
for the objection. If a complainant makes a timely written request for review of the finding, the human rights office shall hear the complainant's evidence
within thirty (30) days of the request for review. If no probable cause is again the finding after further review by the human rights office, the human
rights office shall notify the complainant in writing of the decision, and shall close the file. If the human rights office finds probable cause after review,
the human rights office shall proceed with efforts to eliminate the discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion. (Ord. 12-
4484, 5-15-2012)
D. In the area of housing, the commission shall determine based on the facts whether probable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing or
real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur. The commission shall make this determination not later than one hundred (100) days after a
complaint is filed unless any of the following applies:
1. It is impracticable to make the determination within that time period.
2. The commission has approved a mediation agreement relating to the complaint.
3. If it is impracticable to make the determination within the time period provided by this subsection, the commission shall notify the complainant and
respondent in writing of the reasons for the delay. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
4. The final administrative disposition of a complaint shall be made within one year of the date of receipt of the complaint, unless it is impracticable to
do so. If final administrative disposition within one year is impracticable, the human rights coordinator shall notify the complainant and respondent in
writing. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-4: ADDITIONAL PROCEEDINGS; HOUSING:
A. The commission may join a person not named in the complaint as an additional or substitute respondent if, in the course of the investigation, the
commission determines that the person should be alleged to have committed a discriminatory housing or real estate practice.
B. In addition to the information required in the notice, the commission shall include in a notice to a respondent joined under this section an explanation of
the basis for the determination under this section that the person is properly joined as a respondent. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-
15-2015)
C. If the commission concludes, following the filing of a complaint, that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purpose of this title relating to
unfair or discriminatory housing or real estate practices, the commission may authorize a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief
pending final disposition of the complaint and the city attorney and/or a designated agent shall promptly commence and maintain such proceedings.
(Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
D. The commission shall prepare a final investigative report. A final report under this section may be amended by the commission if additional evidence is
discovered.
E. After the completion of the commission's investigation, the commission shall make available to the aggrieved person and the respondent information
derived from the investigation and the final investigative report relating to that investigation.
F. If the commission determines that probable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to
occur, the commission shall immediately issue a determination unless the commission determines that the legality of a zoning or land use law or
ordinance is involved as provided in subsection H of this section. A determination issued under this subsection must include all of the following:
1. A short and plain statement of the facts on which the commission has found probable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing or real estate
practice has occurred or is about to occur.
2. The determination must be based upon the final investigative report.
3. The determination need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the complaint.
G. Not later than twenty (20) days after the commission issues a determination, the commission shall send a copy of the determination with information
concerning the election under this title to all of the following persons:
1. Each respondent. The respondent shall also receive a notice of the opportunity for a hearing as provided under this title.
2. Each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed.
H. If the commission determines that the matter involves the legality of a state or local zoning or other land use ordinance, the commission shall not issue
determination and shall immediately refer the matter to the city attorney for appropriate action.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 38/715
I. If the commission determines that no probable cause exists to believe a discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur,
the commission shall promptly dismiss the complaint. The commission shall make public disclosure of each dismissal under this section.
J. The commission shall not issue a determination under this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice after the beginning
of a trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under federal or state law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing or real
estate practice.
K. If the commission determines that probable cause exists to believe a discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred, the commission may,
after notice, provide for a hearing on the charges in the complaint. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 17A, code of Iowa, as
amended, for contested cases.
L. If the commission determines at a hearing under subsection K of this section that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory
housing or real estate practice, the commission may order the appropriate relief, including actual damages, reasonable attorney fees, court costs and
other injunctive or equitable relief. To vindicate the public interest, the commission may assess a civil penalty against the respondent. (Ord. 94-3647,
11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-5: CONCILIATION PROCEDURES:
A. Following a probable cause determination, the human rights coordinator shall endeavor to eliminate the discriminatory or unfair practice by conciliation,
conference and persuasion, unless the coordinator determines conciliation efforts are impracticable. If the conciliation process is determined to be
impracticable, the coordinator shall state in writing the reason(s) for bypassing conciliation efforts. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. A conciliation agreement shall become effective after it has been signed by the respondent, or authorized representative, the complainant, or authorized
representative and by the human rights coordinator on behalf of the commission. Copies of the agreement shall be served on all parties. The
commission shall be informed of the agreement.
C. The terms of a conciliation agreement reached with the respondent may require the respondent to refrain in the future from committing discriminatory or
unfair practices of the type stated in the agreement; to take remedial action which, in the judgment of the human rights coordinator, will carry out the
purposes of this title; and to consent to the entry in an appropriate district court of a consent decree embodying the terms of the conciliation agreement.
Violation of such a consent decree may be punished as contempt by the court in which it is filed, upon a showing by the human rights coordinator of the
violation at any time within six (6) months of its occurrence. In all cases in which a conciliation agreement is entered, the human rights coordinator shall
issue an order stating its terms and furnish a copy of the order to the complainant, the respondent, and such other persons as the coordinator deems
proper. At any time, in the discretion of the human rights coordinator, the coordinator may investigate whether the terms of the agreement are being
complied with by the respondent. Upon a finding that the terms of the conciliation agreement are not being complied with by the respondent, the human
rights coordinator shall take appropriate action to assure compliance. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-6: REMEDIAL ACTION:
For the purposes of this title, remedial action includes, but is not limited to, the following: (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
A. Hiring, reinstating or promoting of employees with or without pay. Interim earned income and unemployment compensation shall operate to reduce the
pay otherwise allowable. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. Admission or restoration of individuals to a labor organization, admission to or participation in a guidance program, apprenticeship training program, on
the job training program or other occupational training or retraining program, with the utilization of objective criteria in the admission of individuals to
such programs.
C. Admission of individuals to a public accommodation or an educational institution.
D. Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real property to an individual.
E. Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment of the advantages, facilities, privileges and services of the respondent denied to the
complainant because of the discriminatory or unfair practice.
F. Reporting as to the manner of compliance.
G. Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of business in a form prescribed by the commission and inclusion of notices in
advertising material. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
H. Payment to the complainant of damages caused by the discriminatory or unfair practice which may include actual damages, emotional distress
damages, front pay, court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
I. In addition to the remedies in the preceding provisions of this section, the commission may issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist
from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take such affirmative action as in the judgment of the commission will carry out the purposes of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 39/715
chapter as follows:
1. In the case of a respondent operating by virtue of a license issued by the state or a political subdivision or agency, if the commission, upon notice to
the respondent with an opportunity to be heard, determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice and that the
practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the respondent or by an
officer or executive agent acting within the scope of their employment, the commission shall so certify to the licensing agency. Unless the practice is
reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of discrimination is binding on the licensing agency. If a certification is made pursuant to this
subsection, the licensing agency may initiate licensee disciplinary procedures.
2. In the case of a respondent who is found by the commission to have engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice in the course of performing under
a contract or subcontract with the state or political subdivision or agency, if the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or
knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board or executive agent acting within the scope of their employment, the commission shall so certify to the
contracting agency. Unless the commission's finding of a discriminatory or unfair practice is reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of
discrimination is binding on the contracting agency.
3. Upon receiving a certification made under this subsection, a contracting agency may take appropriate action to terminate a contract or portion
thereof previously entered into with the respondent, either absolutely or on condition that the respondent carry out a program of compliance with the
provisions of this title, and assist the state and all political subdivisions and agencies thereof to refrain from entering into further contracts. (Ord. 94-
3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
J. The election of an affirmative order under subsections A through H of this section shall not bar the election of affirmative remedies provided in
subsection I of this section. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
K. In connection with housing discrimination complaints only under this title, the commission may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty
against the respondent in an amount not to exceed those established by code of Iowa chapter 216.15A as amended. Funds collected under this
section shall be paid to the city for deposit to the city treasury to the credit of the general fund. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
L. Any other relief that the administrative law judge finds to be appropriate. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-7: NOTICE AND HEARING:
A. Litigation Worthy: Upon notification by the human rights coordinator that conciliation has been bypassed or unsuccessful, the city attorney shall form an
opinion as to whether the case is litigation worthy and make a recommendation to two (2) members of the commission whether the case should be
dismissed or proceed to public hearing. If both members of the commission wish to proceed contrary to the recommendation of the city attorney, they
may authorize the human rights coordinator to do so. Otherwise, the human rights coordinator shall dismiss the case or proceed to public hearing in
accordance with the recommendation of the city attorney.
B. Representative Of Commission: The commission's case in support of the complaint shall be presented by the city attorney or designee.
C. Statement Of Charges:
1. When a complaint proceeds to public hearing, the human rights coordinator shall prepare a written statement of charges in support of the complaint,
which shall contain:
a. An allegation that the respondent is a proper respondent within the meaning of and subject to provisions of this title.
b. A factual allegation or allegations of an unfair or discriminatory practice or practices, substantially as uncovered in the investigation, stated in the
complaint (including amendments thereto), or stated in the probable cause decision.
2. A statement of charges is sufficient if it:
a. Names the respondents and complainants;
b. States the section(s) of the code alleged to be violated; and
c. Incorporates by reference the complaint and any amendments to the complaint.
3. The statement of charges shall also specifically identify all allegations, if any, in the complaint, as amended, which:
a. Have been closed by other than a probable cause finding; or
b. The commission has elected not to prosecute despite a probable cause finding.
4. None of the allegations identified pursuant to subsection C3 of this section shall be considered as a claim of discrimination in the contested case
proceeding, but evidence on such allegations may be considered when relevant to other allegations of discrimination or as background evidence.
D. Scheduling Conference: The administrative law judge may set the matter for a scheduling conference in order that the parties, including the
commission, and the presiding officer may arrive at a mutually agreed date for the public hearing.
E. Notice Of Hearing: Delivery of the notice of hearing constitutes the commencement of the contested case proceeding. Delivery shall be executed by any
of the following means: certified mail, with return receipt requested, personal service as provided in the Iowa rules of civil procedure, first class mail, or
publication as provided by the Iowa rules of civil procedure to all interested parties or their attorneys at least thirty (30) days before the date of the
hearing. Certified mail return receipts, returns of service, or similar evidence of service shall be filed with the presiding officer. The notice shall include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 40/715
1. The time and place of hearing;
2. The nature of the hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is being held;
3. A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. This requirement may be satisfied by a statement of the issues as described by the statement of
charges or an incorporation of the attached statement of charges;
4. The reference to the sections of this title involved;
5. Identification of all parties including the name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as advocate for the commission and of
parties' counsel where known; and
6. Identification of the administrative law judge.
F. Answer To Notice Of Hearing: The respondent is encouraged to file an answer to the allegation contained within the notice of hearing within twenty (20)
days of the service of the notice of hearing. Answers are encouraged as a means of sharpening the issues and preserving claimed error.
G. Default:
1. If a party fails to appear or participate in a contested case proceeding after proper service of notice, the administrative law judge may, if no
adjournment is granted, enter a default decision or proceed with the hearing and render a decision in the absence of the party.
2. Default decisions or decisions rendered on the merits after a party has failed to appear or participate in a contested case proceeding become final
agency action unless, within fifteen (15) days after the date of notification of mailing of the decision, a motion to vacate is filed and served on all
parties or an appeal of a decision on the merits is timely initiated.
3. "Good cause" for purposes of this rule shall have the same meaning as "good cause" for setting aside a default judgment under Iowa rules of civil
procedure 1.977.
H. Filing And Service Of Documents: After the notice of hearing, all pleadings, motions, documents or other papers shall be filed with the administrative
law judge with a copy to parties of record, with separate copies to the city attorney. Except as provided by these rules, the Iowa rules of civil procedure
pertaining to discovery, or other laws, all pleadings, motions, documents or other papers that are required to be served upon a party shall be filed
simultaneously with the administrative law judge.
I. Discovery:
1. Discovery procedures applicable in civil actions as set forth in the Iowa rules of civil procedure, are applicable in contested cases. Unless lengthened
or shortened by these rules or by order of the administrative law judge, time periods for compliance with discovery shall be as provided in the Iowa
rules of civil procedure.
2. When discovery of information from the complainant is sought, discovery should be made upon the complainant with a copy thereof provided to the
city attorney. When discovery of information from the commission is sought, discovery should be made upon the commission with a copy thereof
provided to the complainant or the complainant's representative.
J. Subpoenas:
1. A commission subpoena shall be issued to a party upon request. Such a request should be in writing, but oral requests may be honored by the
administrative law judge. The request shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the requesting party.
2. Parties are responsible for service of their own subpoenas and payment of witness fees and mileage expenses.
K. Motions:
1. No technical form for motions is required. However, prehearing motions must be in writing, state the grounds for relief, and state the relief sought.
Any motion for summary judgment shall comply with the Iowa rules of civil procedure. Motions made during the hearing may be stated orally upon
the record.
2. Any party may file a written response to a motion within fourteen (14) days after the motion is served, unless the time period is extended or
shortened by the administrative law judge.
3. Motions for summary judgment shall comply with the requirements of the Iowa rules of civil procedure 1.981.
L. Prehearing Conferences: Upon the administrative law judge's own motion or the motion of the parties, the administrative law judge may direct the
parties or their counsel to meet with the administrative law judge for a conference to consider:
1. Simplification of issues;
2. Necessity or desirability of amendments to pleadings for purposes of clarification, simplification, or limitation;
3. Stipulations, admissions of fact and of contents and authenticity of documents;
4. Limitation of number of witnesses;
5. Scheduling dates for the exchange of witness lists and proposed exhibits;
6. Identifying matters which the parties intend to request be officially noticed; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 41/715
7. Such other matters, including discovery matters, as may tend to expedite the disposition of the proceedings.
M. Continuances: Unless otherwise provided, applications for continuances shall be made to the administrative law judge.
N. Disqualification: A person shall not be appointed as an administrative law judge and an administrative law judge shall withdraw from participation in the
making of any proposed or final decision in a contested case if that person:
1. Has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party or a representative of a party;
2. Has personally investigated, prosecuted or advocated in connection with that case, the specific controversy underlying that case, another pending
factually related contested case, or a pending factually related controversy that may culminate in a contested case involving the same parties;
3. Is subject to the authority, direction or discretion of any person who has personally investigated, prosecuted or advocated in connection with that
contested case, the specific controversy underlying that contested case, or a pending factually contested case or controversy involving the same
parties;
4. Has acted as counsel to any person who is a private party to that proceeding within the past two (2) years, unless all parties agree to the
administrative law judge;
5. Has a personal financial interest in the outcome of the case or any other significant personal interest that could be substantially affected by the
outcome of the case;
6. Has a spouse or relative within the third degree of relationship that: a) is a party to the case, or an officer, director or trustee of a party; b) is a lawyer
in the case; c) is known to have an interest that could be substantially affected by the outcome of the case; or d) is likely to be a material witness in
the case; or
7. Has any other legally sufficient cause to withdraw from participation in the decision making in that case.
O. Ex Parte Communication: Unless required for the disposition of ex parte matters specifically authorized by this title or the Iowa rules of civil procedure,
following issuance of the notice of hearing, there shall be no communication, directly or indirectly, between the administrative law judge and any party
or representative of any party or any other person with a direct or indirect interest in such case in connection with any issue of fact or law in the case
except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate.
P. Powers Of Administrative Law Judge: The administrative law judge who presides at the hearing shall have all powers necessary to the conduct of a fair
and impartial hearing including, but not limited to, the power to:
1. Conduct formal hearing in accordance with the provisions of this title;
2. Administer oaths and examine witnesses;
3. Compel production of documents and appearance of witnesses in control of the parties;
4. Issue subpoenas;
5. Issue decisions and orders;
6. Rule on motions, and other procedural items or matters;
7. Require the submission of briefs;
8. Issue such orders and rulings as will ensure the orderly conduct of the proceedings;
9. Receive, rule on, exclude or limit evidence and limit lines of questioning or testimony which are irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious;
10. Maintain the decorum of the hearing including the power to refuse to admit or to expel anyone whose conduct is disorderly;
11. Take any action authorized by these rules; and
12. Impose appropriate sanctions against any party or person failing to obey an order.
Q. Hearing Procedures:
1. Objections: All objections shall be timely made and stated in the record. Any objection not duly made before the administrative law judge shall be
deemed waived.
2. Representation Of Parties: Parties have the right to participate or to be represented in all hearings or prehearing conferences related to their case.
3. Rights Of Parties: Subject to terms and conditions prescribed by the administrative law judge, parties have the right to introduce evidence on issues
of material fact, cross examine witnesses present at the hearing as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts, present evidence in rebuttal,
and submit briefs and engage in oral argument.
4. Sequestration Of Witnesses: At the request of a party or sua sponte, the administrative law judge may order witnesses sequestered so they cannot
hear the testimony of other witnesses.
5. Contents Of Record: The record in a contested case before the administrative law judge shall include:
a. All pleadings, motions, and rulings.
b. All evidence received or considered and all other submissions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 42/715
c. A statement of matters officially noticed.
d. All questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon.
e. All proposed findings and exceptions.
f. Any decision, opinion, or report by the administrative law judge at the hearing. Deliberations of the commission when deciding whether to adopt a
proposed decision are not part of the record unless expressly made part of the record by order of the commission or the administrative law judge.
R. Evidence:
1. The administrative law judge shall rule on admissibility of evidence and may, where appropriate, take official notice of facts in accordance with all
applicable requirements of law.
2. Stipulation of facts is encouraged.
3. Evidence in the proceeding shall be confined to the issues as to which the parties receive notice prior to the hearing unless the parties waive their
right to such notice by express or implied waiver, or the administrative law judge determines that good cause justifies their expansion. (Ord. 03-4105,
12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
4. With the exception of hearings regarding housing, the rules of evidence do not apply in a contested case hearing. Findings shall be based upon the
kind of evidence on which reasonably prudent persons are accustomed to rely for the conduct of their serious affairs, and may be based upon such
evidence even if it would be inadmissible in a jury trial. In a hearing concerning housing, the federal rules of evidence shall apply. The administrative
law judge shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
5. No evidence shall be received at any hearing concerning offers or counter offers of adjustment during efforts to conciliate or settle an alleged unfair
or discriminatory practice.
6. The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of evidence.
S. Evidence Of Past Sexual Practices:
1. Discovery: In a contested case alleging conduct which constitutes sexual harassment, a party seeking discovery of information concerning the
complainant's sexual conduct with persons other than the person who committed the alleged act of sexual harassment must establish specific facts
showing good cause for discovery, and that the information sought is relevant to the subject matter of the action, and reasonably calculated to lead to
the discovery of admissible evidence.
2. Evidence: In a contested case against a respondent who is accused of sexual harassment, or whose agent or employee is accused of sexual
harassment, evidence concerning the past sexual behavior of the alleged victim is not admissible.
T. Cost Of Copies Of Record: Upon request by a party the commission shall provide a copy of the whole or any portion of the record at cost. The cost of
preparing a copy of the record shall be paid by the requesting party.
U. Posthearing Briefs:
1. Submission Of Posthearing Briefs: The administrative law judge may fix times for submission of posthearing briefs. Unless otherwise ordered, such
briefs shall be filed simultaneously by all parties and there shall be no page limit nor any other formal requirements.
2. Reply Briefs: If simultaneous briefs are filed, then any party may file a reply brief within ten (10) days after service of the brief to which the reply is
made.
V. Requests To Present Additional Evidence:
1. In General: A party may request the taking of additional evidence only by establishing that the evidence is material, that good cause existed for
failure to present the evidence at the hearing, and that the party has not waived the right to present the evidence.
2. Filing Request: If a request to present additional evidence is made after the issuance of the proposed decision, then the request must be filed with
the appeal or, by a nonappealing party, within fourteen (14) days after the service of the appeal. If the commission grants the motion to present
additional evidence, the commission shall remand the case to the administrative law judge for the taking of the additional evidence and any
appropriate modification of the proposed order.
W. Proposed Decision: After a review of the transcript, the evidence, and the briefs, the administrative law judge shall set forth, in writing, findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and a proposed decision and order. The proposed decision becomes the final decision of the commission without further
proceedings unless there is an appeal to, or review on motion of, the commission within thirty (30) days.
X. Review Of Proposed Decision On Appeal To Commission:
1. Appeal By Party: Any adversely affected party may appeal a proposed decision to the commission within thirty (30) days after issuance of the
proposed decision.
2. Review: The commission may initiate review of a proposed decision on its own motion at any time within thirty (30) days following the issuance of
such a decision.
3. Notice Of Appeal: An appeal of a proposed decision is initiated by filing a timely notice of appeal with the commission. The notice of appeal must be
signed by the appealing party or a representative of that party and contain a certificate of service. The notice shall specify:
a. The parties initiating the appeal;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 43/715
b. The proposed decision or order appealed from;
c. The specific findings or conclusions to which exception is taken and any other exceptions to the decision or order;
d. The relief sought; and
e. The grounds for relief.
4. Oral Argument: All parties or their attorneys shall be allowed ten (10) minutes to present oral argument to the commission whenever the commission
reviews a proposed decision pursuant to this rule. The commission may, in its discretion, allow oral argument to continue longer.
5. Briefs And Arguments: Unless otherwise ordered, within twenty (20) days of the notice of appeal or order for review, each appealing party may file
exceptions and briefs. Within ten (10) days thereafter, any party may file a responsive brief. The commission may shorten or extend the briefing
period as appropriate.
Y. Scope Of Review By Commission:
1. Whenever the commission reviews a proposed decision, it has all the power it would have in initially making the final decision. The commission may
adopt, modify, or reject the administrative law judge's proposed decision or it may remand the case to the administrative law judge for the taking of
additional evidence and the making of any further proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, or decision that it deems necessary.
2. Whenever the commission reviews a proposed decision, it shall consider only those issues actually presented to the administrative law judge unless
the issue was one which either:
a. Was raised prior to the proposed decision by a party, but not ruled upon; or
b. Was discussed in the proposed decision, but not argued on brief by the parties.
Z. Intervention:
1. Motion: A motion for leave to intervene in a contested case proceeding shall state the grounds for the proposed intervention, the position and interest
of the proposed intervenor, and the possible impact of intervention on the proceeding. A proposed answer or petition in intervention shall be attached
to the motion. Any party may file a response within fourteen (14) days of service of the motion to intervene unless the time period is extended or
shortened by the administrative law judge.
2. Grounds For Intervention: The movant shall demonstrate that: a) intervention would not unduly prolong the proceedings or otherwise prejudice the
rights of existing parties; b) the movant is likely to be aggrieved or adversely affected by a final order in the proceeding; and c) the interests of the
movant are not adequately represented by existing parties.
3. Effect Of Intervention: A person granted leave to intervene is a party to the proceeding. The order granting intervention may restrict the issues that
may be raised by the intervenor or otherwise condition the intervenor's participation in the proceeding.
AA. Awards Of Attorney Fees:
1. In any final decision in which it is determined that the complainant is entitled to an award of attorney fees, but the actual amount has not yet been
determined, there is, by operation of this provision, an express retention of jurisdiction of the case by the commission in order to determine the actual
amount of attorney fees to which the party is entitled and to enter a subsequent order awarding those fees, regardless of whether or not such
retention of jurisdiction is expressed in the final decision. In such case, the decision is final in all other respects except the determination of the
amount of the attorney fees.
2. If the amount of attorney fees is not stipulated to by the parties, the administrative law judge shall schedule a hearing on the issue of the amount of
the attorney fees. The administrative law judge's decision is a proposed decision, and either party may appeal as provided in subsections V through
X of this section.
BB. Waiver, Modification Of Rules:
1. Upon notice to all parties, the administrative law judge may, with respect to matters pending, modify or waive any rule herein upon a determination
that no party will be prejudiced and that the ends of justice will be served.
2. Unless otherwise precluded by law, the parties in a contested case proceeding may waive any provision of this chapter. However, the administrative
law judge, in the discretion of the presiding officer, may refuse to give effect to such a waiver when the administrative law judge deems the waiver to
be inconsistent with the public interest.
CC. Application For Rehearing:
1. By Whom Filed: Any party to a contested case proceeding may file an application for rehearing from a final order.
2. Content Of Application: The application for rehearing shall state on whose behalf it is filed, the specific grounds for rehearing, and the relief sought.
In addition, the application shall state whether the applicant desires reconsideration of all or part of the decision on the existing record and whether
the applicant requests an opportunity to submit additional evidence.
3. Time Of Filing: The application shall be filed with the commission within twenty (20) days after the issuance of the final decision.
4. Notice To Other Parties: A copy of the application shall be timely mailed by the applicant to all parties of record not joining therein.
5. Disposition: Any application for a rehearing shall be deemed denied unless the commission grants the application within twenty (20) days after its
filing. The commission shall notify the parties in writing that the application was denied.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 44/715
DD. Assessment Of Costs Of Hearing:
1. General Rule: If the commission prevails in the hearing, the respondent shall pay the "contested case costs" incurred by the commission. If the
respondent prevails in the hearing, the commission shall itself bear the "contested case costs" incurred by the commission.
2. Mixed Results: Where the commission is successful as to part of the remedies sought at the hearing and unsuccessful as to part of the remedies,
the administrative law judge may recommend an equitable apportionment of "contested case costs" between the commission and the respondent.
3. Costs Allowable: The following "contested case costs" and no others will be assessed or apportioned:
a. The daily charge of the court reporter for attending and transcribing the hearing.
b. All mileage charges of the court reporter for traveling to and from the hearing.
c. All travel time charges of the court reporter for traveling to and from the hearing.
d. The cost of the original of the transcripts of the hearing.
e. Postage incurred by the administrative law judge in sending by mail (regular or certified) any papers which are made part of the record.
f. Expenses and fees of the administrative law judge, including, but not limited to, lodging and transportation.
EE. Appeals To District Court: Appeals to the district courts from the decision of the commission shall be perfected pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code
chapter 17A. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-8: FINDINGS AND ORDER:
A. If upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the commission determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or
unfair practice, the commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and
desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take the necessary remedial action as in the judgment of the commission shall carry out the
purposes of this title. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the respondent and complainant and to any other public officers and persons as the
commission deems proper. A description of possible remedial actions appears in section 2-4-6 of this chapter.
B. If upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the commission finds that a respondent has not engaged in any such discriminatory or
unfair practice, the commission shall issue an order denying relief and stating the findings of fact and conclusions of the commission, and shall cause a
copy of the order dismissing the complaint to be served by certified mail on the complainant and the respondent. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW; ENFORCEMENT:
A. The commission may obtain an order of court for the enforcement of commission orders in a proceeding as provided in this section. Such an
enforcement proceeding shall be brought in the district court of the county where the discriminatory practice occurred.
B. Such an enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in the court and the service of a copy thereof upon the person charged. The
commission shall then file with the court a transcript of the record of the hearing before it. The court has the power to grant such temporary relief or
restraining order as it deems just and proper, and to make and enter upon the pleadings, testimony and proceeding set forth in such transcript an order
enforcing, modifying, and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside the order of the commission, in whole or in part.
C. An objection that has not been urged before the commission shall not be considered by the court in an enforcement proceeding, unless the failure or
neglect to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordinary circumstances.
D. Any party to the enforcement proceeding may move the court to remit the case to the commission in the interest of justice for the purpose of adducing
additional specified and material evidence and seeking findings thereof, providing such parties shall show reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce
such evidence before the commission.
E. In the enforcement proceeding the court shall determine its order on the same basis as it would in a proceeding reviewing commission action under
section 17A.19, code of Iowa, as amended.
F. The commission's copy of the testimony shall be available to all parties for examination at all reasonable times, without cost, and for the purpose of
judicial review of the commission's orders.
G. The commission may appear in court by the city attorney or a designee.
H. If no proceeding to obtain judicial review is instituted within thirty (30) days from the service of an order of the commission issued pursuant to this
section, the commission may obtain an order of the court for the enforcement of such order upon showing that the person charged is subject to the
jurisdiction of the commission and resides or transacts business within the county in which the petition for enforcement is brought.
I. Judicial review of the actions of the commission may be sought in accordance with the terms of the Iowa administrative procedure act, as amended.
Notwithstanding the terms of such act, petition for judicial review may be filed in the district court in which an enforcement proceeding under
subsections A and B of this section may be brought. For purposes of the time limit for filing a petition for judicial review under the Iowa administrative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 45/715
procedure act, as amended, the issuance of a final decision of the commission under this title occurs on the date notice of the decision is mailed by
certified mail to the parties. Notwithstanding the time limit provided in section 17A.19, subsection 3 of the code of Iowa, as amended, a petition for
judicial review of no probable cause decisions and other final agency actions which are not of general applicability must be filed within thirty (30) days
of the issuance of the final agency action. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-10: SIXTY DAY RELEASE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS; ALTERNATIVE JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS UPON
COMPLAINTS REGARDING EMPLOYMENT, PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS, CREDIT AND EDUCATION:
This section applies to all complaints except housing. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
A. Conditions For Release: A person claiming to be aggrieved by an unfair or discriminatory practice must initially seek administrative relief by filing a
complaint with the commission in accordance with section 2-4-1 of this chapter. After the proper filing of a complaint with the commission, a person
may subsequently commence an action for relief in the district court if all of the following conditions have been satisfied:
1. The complainant has timely filed the complaint with the commission as provided in subsection 2-4-1E of this chapter.
2. The complaint has been on file with the commission at least sixty (60) days and the commission has issued a release to the complainant pursuant to
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. Requirements For Issuance Of Release: Upon a request by the complainant, and after the expiration of sixty (60) days from the timely filing of a
complaint with the commission, the human rights coordinator shall issue to the complainant a release stating that the complainant has a right to
commence an action in the district court. A release under this subsection shall not be issued if a finding of no probable cause has been made on the
complaint, or a conciliation agreement has been executed, or the commission has served notice of hearing upon the respondent, or the complaint is
closed as an administrative closure and two (2) years have elapsed since the issuance date of the closure. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015)
C. Availability Of Documents: (Rep. by Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
D. Commencement Of Action: An action authorized under this section is barred unless commenced within ninety (90) days after issuance by the
commission of a release under subsection B of this section. If a complainant obtains a release from the commission under subsection B of this section,
the commission shall be barred from further action on that complaint.
E. Venue: Venue for an action under this section shall be in Johnson County, Iowa.
F. Relief: The district court may grant any relief in an action under this section which is authorized by section 2-4-6 of this chapter. The district court may
also award the respondent reasonable attorney fees and court costs when the court finds that the complainant's action was frivolous.
G. Legislative Intent: It is the legislative intent of this section that every complaint be at least preliminarily screened by the commission during the first sixty
(60) days. This subsection does not authorize administrative closures if an investigation is warranted. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650,
12-15-2015)
2-4-11: COMPLAINTS:
This section applies only to complaints in the area of housing.
A. A complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf a complaint alleging a violation of section 2-3-5 or 2-3-6 of this title was filed,
may elect to have the claims asserted in that charge decided in a civil action.
1. The particular party electing to have his or her case decided in a civil rather than administrative action under subsection 2-4-4J of this chapter, must
do so no later than twenty (20) days after the date of receipt of the probable cause determination. In the event the commission makes such election,
it must be made not later than twenty (20) days after the date the determination was issued.
2. The person making the election shall give notice to the human rights coordinator and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the election
relates.
3. The election to have the charges of a complaint decided in a civil action as provided here is available only if it is alleged there has been a violation of
section 2-3-5 or 2-3-6 of this title.
B. An aggrieved person may file a civil action in district court not later than two (2) years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged
discriminatory housing or real estate practice, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to the discriminatory housing or real estate
practice or breach of a conciliation agreement.
1. The two (2) year period does not include the time between the filing of a housing or real estate practice discrimination complaint and the disposition
of that complaint by the city attorney.
2. An aggrieved person may file an action under this section whether or not a discriminatory housing or real estate complaint has been filed under
sections 2-3-5 and/or 2-3-6 of this title, and without regard to the status of any discriminatory housing or real estate complaint filed under those
sections, but:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 46/715
a. If the human rights coordinator obtains a conciliation agreement with the consent of an aggrieved person, the aggrieved person shall not file an
action under this section with respect to the alleged discriminatory practice that forms the basis for the complaint except to enforce the terms of the
agreement.
b. An aggrieved person shall not file an action under this section with respect to an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice that forms
the basis of a probable cause determination issued by the human rights office if the commission has begun a hearing on the record under this
chapter with respect to the charge. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-12: CIVIL PROCEEDINGS - HOUSING:
A. If timely election to district court is made under subsection 2-4-11 of this chapter, the human rights coordinator may authorize, not later than thirty (30)
days after the election is made, the filing of a civil action on behalf of the complainant in district court and the city attorney, or its designated agent, may
commence and maintain such action. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
B. A commission order for remedial action and a commission order that has been substantially affirmed by judicial review, do not affect a contract, sale,
encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the commission issued the order and involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant
who did not have actual notice of the charge issued under this title.
C. If the commission issues an order with respect to a discriminatory housing practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to a licensing or
regulation by a governmental agency, the commission, not later than thirty (30) days after the date of the issuance of the order, shall do all of the
following:
1. Send copies of the findings and the order to the governmental agency.
2. Recommend to the governmental agency appropriate disciplinary action.
D. In an action under section 2-4-11 of this chapter, if the district court finds that a discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to
occur, the district court may award or issue to the plaintiff one or more of the following:
1. Actual and punitive damages.
2. Reasonable attorney fees.
3. Court costs.
4. Subject to subsection E of this section, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order
enjoining the defendant from engaging in the practice or ordering appropriate affirmative action.
E. Relief granted under this section does not affect a contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the granting of the relief and
involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant who did not have actual notice of the filing of a complaint under this title or a civil action under
this section.
F. The city attorney, on behalf of the commission or other party at whose request a subpoena is issued, may enforce the subpoena in appropriate
proceedings in district court. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
G. A court in a civil action brought under this section, or the commission in an administrative hearing under subsection 2-4-4K of this chapter, may award
reasonable attorney fees to the prevailing party and assess court costs against the nonprevailing party. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 99-3905,
10-12-1999; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-13: TIME LIMITS:
With respect to any time limit within this chapter that is stated as a number of days, said time period shall be computed in accordance with Iowa Code
section 4.1(34). (Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
Chapter 5
FAIR HOUSING
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
Chapter 6
DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 47/715
A. The city recognizes that nationwide debate has advanced an expanded concept of familial relationships beyond traditional marital and blood
relationships. This expanded concept recognizes the relationship of two (2) nonmarried but committed adult partners. Recognizing this, the city hereby
adopts a process to provide persons to declare themselves as domestic partners, thus enabling employers to voluntarily provide equal treatment in
employment benefits for such partners and their dependents.
B. This chapter establishes a mechanism for the public expression and documentation of the commitment reflected by the domestic partnership whose
members cannot or choose not to marry.
C. It is appropriate and fair that certain of the societal privileges and benefits now accorded to members of a marriage be extended to those who meet the
qualifications of a domestic partnership. The mechanism established by this chapter will facilitate the definition of those entitled to such privileges. (Ord.
94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-2: REQUIREMENTS AND ELIGIBILITY:
A domestic partnership shall exist between two (2) adults if all of the following are true:
A. The persons are not related by blood closer than permitted under the marriage laws of the state.
B. Neither person is married.
C. The persons are competent to enter into a contract.
D. The persons declare that they are each other's sole domestic partner.
E. The persons declare that they are in a relationship of mutual support, caring and commitment and are responsible for each other's welfare. For these
purposes, "mutual support" means that they contribute mutually to each other's maintenance and support.
F. The persons file a statement of domestic partnership as set forth in this chapter.
G. The persons agree to notify the city of the termination of their domestic partnership, or a change in their employment or residence which would render
them ineligible to register as domestic partners under this chapter. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-3: STATEMENTS OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP; REGISTRATION:
A. The city clerk shall accept an application to register as domestic partners from persons who state in such application that they meet the definition of
"domestic partners" in this chapter. The city clerk shall provide forms as necessary to interested individuals.
B. The city clerk shall only accept applications for registration of domestic partnership from those persons:
1. In a partnership where at least one person resides in Iowa City; or
2. In a partnership in which at least one person is employed in Iowa City.
C. The city clerk shall charge an application fee as set by resolution of the city council for the registration of a domestic partnership. The payment of this
fee entitles the person filing a statement on behalf of the domestic partnership to two (2) copies of the statement certified by the city clerk. Additional
certified copies may be purchased by the person. These copies of the certified statement shall not be issued prior to the third working day after the date
of application.
D. The application and certified statement may be used as evidence of the existence of a domestic partners relationship. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-4: TERMINATION:
A. Either person in a domestic partnership may initiate termination of the domestic partnership by written notification to the city clerk. The person filing the
termination statement must declare that:
1. The domestic partnership is terminated; and
2. A copy of the termination statement has been mailed to the other domestic partner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
B. A domestic partnership terminates when the earlier of the following occurs:
1. One of the persons in the domestic partnership dies; or
2. Ninety (90) days elapse after both partners file a notice of termination of domestic partnership; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 48/715
3. Ninety (90) days elapse after one partner files a notice of termination of domestic partnership and provides the city clerk proof that the notice of
termination of partnership has been mailed to the other partner at the last known address, or that the partner cannot be located or refuses to accept
the mailed notice. A properly mailed notice which is returned as refused or undeliverable shall be adequate proof.
C. If any of the criteria under section 2-6-2 of this chapter cease to exist, the parties shall be ineligible for any benefits based upon the domestic
partnership unless otherwise provided by law or the employer.
D. When an employer permits or provides benefits to the domestic partner of an employee, the domestic partner may be eligible to continue to receive
benefits for a period of sixty (60) days after the death of the employee. The employer shall give the domestic partner written notice by U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, at the address provided by the employee stating whether such benefits are available to the partner. Said notice shall state the date on
which group benefit coverage, if any, terminates, and shall state the right, if any, of the domestic partner to transfer benefit coverage to a nongroup plan
without lapse of coverage and without providing evidence of good health.
E. No person who has registered as a domestic partner pursuant to section 2-6-3 of this chapter shall be eligible to file a new application for registration as
a domestic partner until ninety (90) days have elapsed after the domestic partnership has terminated. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-5: RECORDS:
The city clerk shall maintain records of domestic partnership statements, showing the name and address of applicants for domestic partnership, and the
date of application, certification and termination of domestic partnerships. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
Title 3
FINANCES, TAXATION AND FEES
Chapter 1
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
3-1-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
There is hereby imposed a hotel and motel tax at a rate of seven percent (7%) upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all sleeping rooms,
apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, mobile home which is tangible personal property or tourist
court or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals, within the corporate limits
of the city, all as authorized in the code of Iowa, as amended, and subject to the limitations, restrictions, conditions, provisions and penalties contained
therein. (1978 Code §32.1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 2
PARTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ACTUAL VALUE ADDED: The actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except actual value added by improvements to
machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A building or storage used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
"Distribution center" does not mean a building or structure used primarily for any of the following purposes: to store raw agricultural products, by a
manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, for the storage of petroleum products or for the retail sale of goods.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New buildings and structures and new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. "New construction" does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific
products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products,
which determination shall receive prior approval from the city council upon the recommendation of the Iowa development commission or its successor.
NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT: New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, unless the
machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status.
RESEARCH SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including but not limited to
the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on site services to the public.
WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, except it does not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 49/715
mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail. (1978 Code §32.1-32; amd. 1994
Code)
3-2-2: EXEMPTION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment
assessed as real estate pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §32.1-31; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-3: TERM AND AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION; LIMITATIONS:
A. Term And Amount Of Exemption:
1. The actual value added to industrial real estate for the reasons specified in section 3-2-2 of this chapter is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five (5) years. The amount of exemption from taxation allowed for actual value added shall be as follows:
For the first year 75 percent
For the second year 60 percent
For the third year 45 percent
For the fourth year 30 percent
For the fifth year 15 percent
2. However, if property ceases to be classified as industrial real estate or ceases to be used as a research service facility, warehouse or distribution
center, the partial exemption for the value added shall not be allowed for subsequent assessment years. (1978 Code §32.1-33)
B. Limitations: The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure
shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value for the industrial real estate before the start
of the new construction added. (1978 Code §32.1-34)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed with the city assessor for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. The application for
exemption shall be filed by the property owner by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. Applications
for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the state director of revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost and other information deemed necessary by the state director of revenue or successor. (1978 Code §32.1-35; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-5: APPLICATION FOR PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the city council to receive prior approval for eligibility for tax exemption on new construction. The city council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with title 14, "Zoning Code", of this
code. The ordinance may be enacted not less than thirty (30) days after a public hearing is held in accordance with the code of Iowa, as amended. Such
prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found by the city assessor to be
qualified real estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal to the city council to
approve or reject. (1978 Code §32.1-36; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-6: DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (1978 Code §32.1-38)
3-2-7: REPEAL OF EXEMPTION PROVISIONS:
When, in the opinion of the city council, continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the city, the city council may repeal
this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (1978 Code §32.1-37)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL BOND FINANCING
3-3-1: LOST OR STOLEN BONDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 50/715
In the event of claim made for payment of the principal of or interest on bonds issued by the city, the director of finance shall be provided with satisfactory
evidence of proof of ownership and of loss of said bonds or coupons and shall require the filing with the director of finance of a satisfactory indemnity bond
of a surety acceptable to the director of finance, indemnifying the city in the event any or all of the original bonds or coupons are inadvertently paid or
presented for payment by a bona fide holder in due course. (1978 Code §32.1-100)
3-3-2: DUPLICATE BONDS:
A. Issuance; Costs: Upon receipt of such proof of ownership, loss and indemnity bond, the controller is authorized to proceed with the printing of duplicate
bonds or coupons and shall charge for the issuance of the duplicate bonds and coupons any amount sufficient to reimburse the city for the actual
expense incurred by it in connection with the issuance thereof. The city officials designated are authorized to execute the duplicate bonds and coupons
in the same manner as provided with respect to the original bonds. (1978 Code §32.1-101)
B. Substitute For Original Issue Bonds: Duplicate bonds and coupons of like tenor, amount, date and maturity shall be deemed to be issued in lieu of and
in substitution for each of the bonds or coupons so numbered of the original issue and shall be so noted on the books of the city kept for that purpose.
(1978 Code §32.1-102)
3-3-3: INADVERTENT PAYMENT OF ORIGINAL BONDS; ENFORCEMENT OF INDEMNITY BOND:
In the event any or all of the original bonds or coupons shall be inadvertently or for any reason paid by the city or presented for payment by a bona fide
holder in due course or if the city shall incur any expense or liability by reason of refusing to honor the original bonds or coupons, the indemnity bond on
file shall be immediately enforced. (1978 Code §32.1-103)
Chapter 4
SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES, CHARGES, BONDS, FINES AND PENALTIES
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth those fees, rates, charges, bonds, fines and penalties authorized to be charged by the City pursuant to State law
governing City utilities or enterprises, as defined in chapter 384, Code of Iowa, as amended, and to set forth specific fines for certain simple misdemeanor
offenses. (Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003)
3-4-2: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE2:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-3700, 12-5-1995)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4792 - WATER SERVICE CHARGES AND STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES. Go to
new ordinance.
3-4-3: POTABLE WATER USE AND SERVICE:
Description Of Fee, Charge,
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge,
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Water service charges (see section 16-3A-4 of this Code):
Meter Size
(Inches)
Charge
July 1, 2018
For first 100 cubic feet or less of water used, based on meter size 5/8, 5/8 x 3/4
3/4
1
11/2
2
3
4
6
$ 7.42
$ 8.11
9.56
19.06
25.63
47.37
82.62
166.25
There will be no minimum monthly charge for a single purpose water meter for the months of November to March if no water is used.
User charges for water in excess of 100 cubic feet per month:
Monthly
Usage
(Cubic Feet)
Charge Per 100 Cubic Feet
July 1, 2018
Dual purpose meters 101 - 3,000
Over 3,000
$3.47
2.49
Single purpose meters Over 100 3.47
Other charges and discounts: Charge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 51/715
July 1, 2018
Low income discount
60 percent of minimum monthly
water charge
Temporary water use (see subsection 16-3A-4B of this Code):
During construction for the first 90 days from the date of the connection
to the water main for a new water service or a maximum of 90 days for
reconstruction:
Charge Per Month
July 1, 2018
Single- and two-family residences $ 17.37
Multi-family residences 17.37
Commercial structures 28.94
After 90 days for any structure, until the water meter is installed 115.76
Charge
July 1, 2018
Direct purchase of water fee, per 100 gallons or fraction thereof (see
subsection 16-3A-4C of this Code)
$ 0.50
Deposit and delinquency fee for combined City water and/or sanitary sewer
and/or solid waste collection accounts (see section 16-3A-5 of this Code):
Residential owner account 0.00
Residential tenant account 120.00
Commercial account An amount equal to an average 2-month billing for commercial
service for City water and/or sanitary sewer service, or $120.00,
whichever is greater
5 percent delinquency charge on current billed portion of the outstanding amount on combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste
account that is not paid within 22 days of billing date. Can be waived once every 12 months
Delinquency deposit fee for combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or
solid waste collection accounts (see section 16-3A-5 of this Code)
An amount equal to an average 2-month billing for the delinquent
account. Can be waived if the account holder enrolls in SurePay
To connect water main extensions, per acre
Charge
July 1, 2018
$456.75
Service Fees
During Normal
Working Hours
After Normal
Working Hours1
Reconnection of discontinued service $45.00 $84.00
Posting fee for shutting off water in collection procedure $45.00; can be waived once in the
lifetime of the account
Not done after normal working
hours
Frozen water meters $36.75, plus cost of meter $84.00, plus cost of meter
Shut off water service at curb and check for exterior leaks No charge $84.00, plus hourly overtime
rate beyond 2 hours
Broken or damaged hydrant Repair cost $84.00, plus repair cost
Location of City owned water main for other utilities No charge No charge
Location of City owned water main for private enterprise No charge $84.00, plus hourly overtime
rate beyond 2 hours
Check water meter for accuracy at consumer's request $80.85 Not done after normal working
hours
Annual fire hydrant fee for inspection and operation of fire hydrants which
are privately owned or owned by other government agencies
95.55 Not done after normal working
hours
After-hours callout fee for any water work done outside of normal working
hours
Not applicable $84.00, plus hourly overtime
rate beyond 2 hours
Note:
1. The Water Division's normal working hours are 7:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
3-4-4: WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 52/715
Minimum monthly charge (includes the first 100 cubic feet of water used) $8.15 16-3A-4
Monthly charge for each additional 100 cubic feet of water used 3.99 16-3A-4
Low income discount 60 percent of monthly minimum charge 16-3A-4
Monthly surcharge:
BOD (per pound) 300 or less MPL1 Included in charge for 100 cubic feet of water
used
16-3A-4
BOD (per pound) from 301 MPL to 2,000 MPL1 $ 0.284 16-3A-4
BOD (per pound) greater than 2,000 MPL1 0.425 16-3A-4
Suspended solids (SS) (per pound) 0.227 16-3A-4
Monthly minimum, unmetered user 33.36 16-3A-4
Manufactured housing park, monthly minimum per lot 33.36 16-3A-4
Holding tank waste - plus landfill fees 0.032 per gallon 16-3A-4
Holding tank waste hauler - annual permit 907.00 per year 16-3A-4
Deposit and delinquency fee for combined City water and/or sanitary sewer
and/or solid waste collection accounts:
16-3A-5, 16-3A-7
Residential owner account, per combined residential service for City
water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste collection service
0.00
Residential tenant account, per combined residential service for City
water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste collection service
120.00
5 percent delinquency charge on current billed portion of the outstanding
amount on combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste
account that is not paid within 22 days of billing date
5.0 percent current billed portion. Can be waived
once every 12 months
Delinquency deposit fee for combined City water and/or sanitary sewer
and/or solid waste collection accounts
An amount equal to an average 2-month billing
for the delinquent account. Can be waived if the
account holder enrolls in SurePay
16-3A-5
Note:
1. Milligrams per liter (MPL).
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
3-4-5: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL3:
Yard waste collection fees:
Per dwelling unit, per month $2.00
Low income discount 75 percent of monthly charge
Untreated wood waste Free
Collection of large items fees:
Appliance collection, per item collected $20.00
Bulky solid waste $12.50 per stop and 1 item; $6.00 per additional items
Tire collection $3.75 per tire; $7.50 tire and rim
Residential solid waste collection fees:
Curbside household refuse:
Per dwelling unit, per month $12.00
Low income discount 75 percent of monthly charge
Per sticker for each additional bag beyond each unit's monthly allotment $ 2.50 each
Sanitary Sewer Service Charges;
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
City Code
Chapter, Article
Or Section
Reference
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 53/715
Additional refuse carts over 1, per month 12.00 each
Per 2 rooming units, per month (in addition to the dwelling unit fees) 15.90
Electronic waste TVs or monitors less than 18 inches $18.50 per item;
TVs or monitors 18 inches or greater $23.50 per item
Curbside recycling:
Per dwelling unit, per month $5.10
Low income discount 75 percent of monthly charge
Iowa City community compost $20.00 per ton, $2.00 minimum
Wood chip mulch $10.00 per ton, $2.00 minimum
Deposit and delinquency fee combined for City water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid
waste collection accounts:
Residential owner account, per combined residential service for City water and/or
sanitary sewer and/or solid waste collection service
$ 0.00
Residential tenant account, per combined residential service for City water and/or
sanitary sewer and/or solid waste collection service
120.00
5 percent delinquency charge on current billed portion of the outstanding amount on
combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste account that is not paid
within 22 days of billing date
5 percent current billed portion. Can be waived once
every 12 months
Delinquency deposit for combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste
collection service
An amount equal to an average 2-month billing for the
delinquent account. Can be waived if the account holder
enrolls in SurePay
Special wastes disposal fees:
Disposal of special wastes (except for asbestos containing material and contaminated
soils)
2 times the landfill use fees in this section
Minimum fee 2 times the landfill use fee for 1 ton
Asbestos containing material (ACM):
Nonfriable ACM, from Iowa City premises subject to a Property Tax and City owned
property
$100.00/ton
Nonfriable ACM, from other locations 105.00/ton
Friable ACM, from Iowa City premises subject to a Property Tax and City owned
property
100.00/cubic yard
Friable ACM, from other locations 105.00/cubic yard
Minimum fee for any regulated ACM 100.00
Contaminated soil: 15.00/ton
Minimum fee for contaminated soil 150.00
Disposal of large items fees (see also Collection of large items fees above):
Appliance disposal fees:
Commercial per item disposed 1.00/cubic foot
Residential per item disposed $12.50 (at landfill scale house)
Tire disposal fee:
Per pound $ 0.15
Subject to minimum fee 3.00
Untreated wood waste and yard waste: 24.00/ton
Minimum 2.00
Landfill use fees:
Arriving at the landfill with an unsecured or uncovered load:
First instance in trailing 12 months Warning
Second or subsequent instances in trailing 12 months $50.00
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 54/715
Electronic waste $3.00 per item; TVs or monitors less than 18 inches
$12.00 per item; TVs or monitors 18 inches or greater
$17.00 per item
Solid waste from Iowa City premises subject to a Property Tax and City owned
property:
Total landfill fee per ton (includes State fee per ton) $42.50
All other solid waste:
Total landfill fee per ton (includes State fee per ton) 47.50
Minimum fee in lieu of tonnage fees (300 pounds or less):
Solid waste from Iowa City premises subject to a Property Tax and City owned
property
6.50
All other solid waste 7.00
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4792 - WATER SERVICE CHARGES AND STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES. Go to
new ordinance.
3-4-6: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE:
Description Of Fee, Bond, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
Stormwater utility fee. Users include all users owning or occupying developed property in the City
of Iowa City
1 equivalent residential unit (ERU) = $4.50
Low income discount 60 percent of monthly charge
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
3-4-7: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION:
General fares and rates:
Standard fare, general public $ 1.00
24 hour pass 2.00
Children (K - 12) 0.75
Children under 5 years old Free
School field trip (per person) 0.75
Bus passes:
31 day pass (adult, 18 years old and up) 32.00
31 day pass (youth, K - 12) 27.00
31 day pass (bulk sales) 28.00
31 day pass (low income) 27.00
31 day pass (City employee) Half price of 31 day pass (adult)
10 ride pass $ 8.50
20 ride pass (University of Iowa) 17.00
University of Iowa semester pass (prorated) 100.00
Kirkwood semester pass (prorated) 100.00
Youth semester pass (K - 12, prorated) 100.00
Special fares:
Elderly persons (off peak only, 60+ years) 0.50
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 55/715
General fares and rates:
Elderly low income (off peak only, pass required) Free
Person with disability (off peak only, pass required) Free
Saturday family fare (up to 2 adults and 2 children) 1.00
Bicycle lockers:
Annual (prorated) 75.00
Miscellaneous:
Use of City vehicle and operator Fully allocated cost per hour
Bus and shop $0.35
(Ord. 12-4474, 4-3-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
3-4-8: PARKING:
Parking ramp fees:
Hourly parker (Court Street Transportation Center, Tower Place, Capital Street, and
Dubuque Street parking ramps), per hour
First hour = Free
Hours 2+ = $1.00 per hour
Hourly parker (Chauncey Swan), per hour $ 0.75
Monthly all day permits with advance payment (Court Street Transportation Center,
Chauncey Swan, Harrison Street, Tower Place, Capital Street, and Dubuque Street
parking ramps), per month
85.00
Annual all day permits with advance payment (Court Street Transportation Center,
Chauncey Swan, Harrison Street, Tower Place, Capital Street, and Dubuque Street
parking ramps), per year
969.00
Reissue of monthly, quarterly or annual permit, each reissue 25.00
City employee monthly all day permits, per month Half price
City council monthly all day permits, per month No charge
Lost ticket fee $ 23.00
Surface lot fees:
Monthly all day permits, per month 65.00
Monthly all day permits (annual advance payment), per year 741.00
Monthly off hours permits (after 5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, all day Saturday and
Sunday), per month; all city surface lots
59.00
Parking meter fees (except as otherwise marked):
Central business district on street meter, per hour 1.50
Central business district lot meter, per hour 1.50
100 - 300 blocks of East Jefferson Street, per hour 1.50
100 - 200 block of North Clinton Street, per hour 1.00
10 block of West Court Street, per hour 1.00
10 - 300 block of East Court Street, per hour 1.00
300 block of South Linn Street, per hour 1.00
300 block of South Dubuque Street, per hour 1.00
300 block of South Clinton Street, per hour 1.00
100 - 300 blocks of East Market Street, per hour 1.00
100 - 200 block of North Linn Street, per hour 1.00
400 block of Iowa Avenue, per hour 1.00
Market Street and Schuman parking lots, per hour 1.00
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 56/715
Peripheral lot meter (outside central business district), per hour 0.75
Peripheral on street meter (outside central business district), per hour 0.75
Fee for contractor reservation of space, per day 20.00
Moped/scooter/motorcycle permit (annual permit):
January 1, 2014 - December 31, 2014 70.00
January 1, 2015 - 90.00
Fines for parking violations:
Overtime parking 10.00
Commercial loading zone 25.00
Expired meter; each period runs from July 1 until June 30 of the subsequent year:
First citation each period Warning
Second citation each period $ 7.00
Third citation each period 12.00
Fourth citation each period 15.00
Fifth citation each period 20.00
Sixth+ citation each period 25.00
Prohibited zone 15.00
Illegal parking; handicapped parking space $100.00, or as specified in Iowa Code section
321.236(1)(b), as amended, for violations of Iowa
Code section 321L.4(2)
1 hour restricted zone, city hall lot $10.00
Library patron only parking 10.00
Library outside book drop off only:
First offense 10.00
Second and subsequent offenses 20.00
Parking in passenger loading zone 15.00
Parking where prohibited or restricted during a snow emergency 50.00
All other illegal parking violations 15.00
Increases:
30 days after issue, all parking violations, if not already paid or appealed, shall
increase in amount by $5.00, or as allowed by Iowa Code section 321.236(1)(b), as
amended
Original ticket amount plus $5.00
(Ord. 13-4535, 6-4-2013, eff. 7-1-2013; amd. Ord. 15-4647, 11-10-2015; Ord. 16-4684, 11-1-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 17-4699, 3-21-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
3-4-9: VIOLATION OF VARIOUS CODE SECTIONS:
Animal bites reporting requirements $ 65.00 8-4-4B
Animal licensing and vaccination requirements
65.00 8-4-3
Animal nuisances 65.00 8-4-5
Animal owner responsible 65.00 8-4-2
Animal permits 65.00 8-4-12
Animal prohibited acts and conditions 65.00 8-4-10C to G
Animal prohibitions and requirements 65.00 8-4-6
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
City Code Chapter, Article Or Section
Reference
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 57/715
Cigarette sales to persons under 18 years of
age:
8-6-1
Civil Municipal infraction, civil penalty:
First offense 75.00
Second offense 150.00
Subsequent offenses 250.00
Simple misdemeanor As set in Iowa Code section 903.1(1)(a), as
amended
Engine braking $ 50.00 8-5-8
Littering except for City Plaza1 70.00 16-3H-10A
Littering in City Plaza1 300.00 16-3H-10A
Nuclear weapons free zone $500.00 fine and 30 days' imprisonment for each
violation
6-5-5A
Open container of alcohol $ 50.00 4-5-5
Public urination and defecation 50.00 8-5-13
Note:
1. "City Plaza" is defined in section 10-5-2 of this Code.
(1978 Code §§24-8, 24-145; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003; Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004; Ord. 05-4182, 10-4-2005; Ord. 06-4209, 4-18-2006; Ord.
06-4233, 9-5-2006; Ord. 08-4314, 9-9-2008; Ord. 09-4350, 6-30-2009; Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-2019)
3-4-10: NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE VIOLATIONS:
Clinging onto motor vehicles $15.00 9-1-8
Follow flow of traffic 10.00 9-1-7A2b
Must yield to pedestrians on sidewalks 10.00 9-1-7C
Obey traffic laws 10.00 9-1-7A2d
Operate in careful and prudent manner 10.00 9-1-7A2c
Prohibited in parking ramps and lots 10.00 9-1-7B
Prohibited on arterial streets in central business district
10.00 9-1-7A1
Prohibited on sidewalks in central business district 10.00 9-1-7D
Reflective device or clothing required after dusk 10.00 9-1-7A2e
Stay far to the right of the road (except when making a
left turn)
10.00 9-1-7A2a
(Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003; amd. Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
Chapter 5
MISCELLANEOUS FINANCE PROVISIONS
3-5-1: COSTS FOR ISSUANCE OF INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS:
A. Financing Fee: The city shall charge a financing fee at the time that industrial revenue bonds are issued. The fee shall reflect the actual costs incurred
by the city in preparation for the issuance of the industrial revenue bonds, including but not limited to the fees of legal counsel and of a bond consultant
retained by the city, the time of city staff and publication costs. The applicant shall receive a detailed statement of estimated costs at least three (3)
days prior to the public hearing.
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
City Code Chapter, Article Or Section
Reference
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty
City Code Chapter, Article Or Section
Reference
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 58/715
B. Payment For Actual Costs: Should the applicant withdraw the application or should the project be terminated for any reason, the city shall charge the
applicant for actual costs incurred, and the applicant shall reimburse the city within thirty (30) days of receipt of the statement of costs. (1978 Code §2-
206)
3-5-2: AMORTIZATION OF CONDITIONAL DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS ON PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
Amortization of conditional deficiency assessments on public improvement projects shall be as set out in the code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
Chapter 6
CITY ASSESSOR
3-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE:
The office of the city assessor is hereby established, as provided by chapter 441, code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
Chapter 7
IOWA CITY DOWNTOWN SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
3-7-1: ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with Iowa code chapter 386 there is hereby established and created in the city of Iowa City, a self-supported municipal improvement district
as defined in the act, the name of which shall be the "Iowa City downtown self-supported municipal improvement district" (herein the "district"), which
district is also known as the Iowa City downtown district. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-2: BOUNDARIES:
The district shall include all property within the following described boundaries:
Beginning at the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street where it intersects the south line of the east-west alley in block 57, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence west along the south line of said alley to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Linn Street;
Thence south along the west right-of-way line of Linn Street to the northeast corner of the south 60 feet of lot 8, block 69, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence west along the north line of said south 60 feet of lot 8, to a point on the west line of said lot 8;
Thence south along the west line of said lot 8 and its southerly extension to a point on the south right-of-way line of Bloomington Street;
Thence east 5.00 feet along said southerly right-of-way line of Bloomington Street to the northwest corner of auditor's parcel 2012099 as recorded in plat
book 57 at page 120 in the records of the Johnson County recorder's office;
Thence southerly, along the westerly line of said auditor's parcel 2012099, to the southwest corner of said auditor's parcel 2012099;
Thence east along the north line of the platted east-west alley in block 68, original town of Iowa City, Iowa, to a point on the west right-of-way line of Linn
Street;
Thence south along said west right-of-way line to a point on the south line of said platted east-west alley in said block 68;
Thence west along said south line of the platted east-west alley in block 68, to a point on the east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Jefferson Street;
Thence east along the south right-of-way line of Jefferson Street, to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street;
Thence south along said west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street, to a point 10 feet south of the northeast corner of lot 3, block 60, original town of Iowa City,
Iowa;
Thence east along the westerly extension of the north line of lot 5, block 45 original town of Iowa City, Iowa and along the north line of said lot 5, to the
northeast corner of said lot 5;
Thence south along the east line of said lot 5, to a point on the north right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue;
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue, to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Clinton Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Clinton Street to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Washington Street;
Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Washington Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Capitol Street;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 59/715
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Capitol Street to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Burlington Street;
Thence east along the south right-of-way line of Burlington Street to a point on the west line of the east 25 feet of lot 8, block 101, original town of Iowa
City, Iowa (see retracement plat of survey recorded in plat book 57 at page 336 in the records of the Johnson County recorder's office);
Thence south along said west line and along the west line of the east 25 feet of the north 50 feet of lot 7, block 101;
Thence east to a point on the east line of said lot 7;
Thence north along the east line of lot 7, 10 feet;
Thence east 20 feet to a point on the west line of lot 2, block 101;
Thence south along the east line of a north-south alley in block 101, to a point on the north line of the south 70 feet of lot 4;
Thence east along said north line, and its easterly extension to a point on the east right-of-way line of Clinton Street;
Thence north along the east line of Clinton Street, to a point on the south line of the north 44 feet of lot 5, block 102, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence east along said south line and its easterly extension, to a point on the east line of the platted north-south alley in said block 102;
Thence north along the east line of said platted north-south alley, to a point on the south line of the north 37 feet of lot 1, block 102;
Thence east along said south line of the north 37 feet of lot 1, block 102, and its easterly extension, to a point on the east right-of-way line of Dubuque
Street;
Thence south along said east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street to the southwest corner of lot 8, block 103, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence east along the south line of said lot 8 and the south line of lot 1, block 103 and its easterly extension, to a point on the east right-of-way line of Linn
Street;
Thence south along the east line of Linn Street, to a point on the south line of the north 35 feet of lot 10, Johnson's Subdivision of out lot 24, in Iowa City;
Thence east along said south line of the north 35 feet of lot 10, Johnson's Subdivision of out lot 24 and its easterly extension, to a point on the east line of
the platted north-south alley in said Johnson's Subdivision of out lot 24;
Thence north along the east line of said platted north-south alley, in said Johnson's Subdivision of outlot 24 to the southwest corner of lot 6, said Johnson's
Subdivision of out lot 24;
Thence east along the south line of said lot 6, a distance of 35.44 feet more or less;
Thence north 4.71 feet more or less;
Thence east 115 feet more or less to a point 105 feet south of the northeast corner of said lot 6;
Thence continuing east to a point on the east right-of-way line of Gilbert Street;
Thence north along the east right of way line of Gilbert Street to a point 85 feet south of the northwest corner of lot 1, Lyman Cook's Subdivision of outlot
25 of the original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence east 185 feet;
Thence north 81 feet;
Thence west 10 feet;
Thence north 4 feet to a point on the south right-of-way line of Burlington Street;
Thence east to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Van Buren Street;
Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Van Buren Street, to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue;
Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue to the northeast corner of lot 3, block 44, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence north along the southerly extension of the east line of lot 6, block 45, original town of Iowa City, Iowa, along said east line of lot 6 and along its
northerly extension to a point on the north line of the east-west alley in said block 45;
Thence west along the north line of said east-west alley, to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Gilbert Street;
Thence north along the east right-of-way line of Gilbert Street, to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of Jefferson Street;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Jefferson Street to its intersection with the east line of the west 65 feet of lot 6, block 46, original town of
Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence north along the east line of the west 65 feet of lot 6, block 46 and its northerly extension, to its intersection with the north line of the east-west alley
in block 46;
Thence west along the north line of the east-west alley in block 46, to the southeast corner of lot 4, block 46;
Thence north along the east line of lot 4, block 46 and its northerly extension and along the east line of the south 25 feet of lot 5, block 47, original town of
Iowa City, Iowa;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 60/715
Thence west along the north line of the south 25 feet of lot 5, block 47, and its westerly extension to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Gilbert
Street;
Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street to the point of beginning; and excepting those properties zoned neighborhood public, which
are as follows:
The north 110' of the west 58.5' of lot 4 block 65
Lots 7, 8, and the east 20' lot 6 block 65
The west 58.5' of N 110' of lot 4 block 65
Lot 5 and the west 28.66' of lot 6 block 61
The east 38.3' lot 6, all of lot 7, and the west 39.7' of lot 8 block 58.
(Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-3: BENEFIT TO PROPERTY WITHIN DISTRICT:
It is hereby found and determined that all of the property within the district is similarly related so that the present and potential use or enjoyment of the
property is benefited by the condition, performance of administration, redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance of the district and the owners of
property in the district have a present and potential benefit from the condition, performance of administration, redevelopment, revitalization and
maintenance of the district. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-4: OPERATION FUND:
Pursuant to the provisions of the act, there is hereby established and created a self-supported municipal improvement district operation fund with respect
to the district to be known as the "Iowa City downtown self-supported municipal improvement district operation fund" (herein the "operation fund"), for
which the city may certify taxes (the "operation tax") against the property, as defined in the act (excluding property assessed as residential property for
property tax purposes), within the district (the "property") each year, in addition to all other taxes, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection in the
fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016, for the purposes of paying the administrative and operational expenses of the district, as defined and authorized in the
act or paying part or all of the maintenance expenses of "improvements" or "self-liquidating improvements", as defined in the act, for a period of ten (10)
years. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-5: DISBURSEMENTS:
The city may disburse the amounts collected in the operation fund, in accordance with the recommendations of the Iowa City downtown district board of
directors as described in paragraph 5 of the petition, for one or more of the following purposes:
A. Development and management of activities in support of marketing, business retention and attraction, including, but not limited to:
A contingency fund for extraordinary expenses.
Establish customer relations management (CRM) or other property databases.
Establishment and promotion of special events, festivals, and activities.
Marketing, advertising, and informational campaigns, including advertising, social media, print and digital media releases.
Miscellaneous business support services.
Space referrals and assistance.
B. Physical or other improvements designed to enhance the image and appearance of the district, including, but not limited to:
Decorative enhancements, signage and campaign banners.
Landscaping.
Lighting improvements.
Public or private art.
C. To employ an executive director and staff who shall work for the board of directors of the district to manage the work of the district and to fulfill the intent
of the petition and ordinance. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-6: TAX RATE:
The rate of the operation tax to be levied annually, in addition to all other taxes, as aforesaid, shall not exceed: a) for the period of July 1, 2016 through
June 30, 2021, a rate of two dollars ($2.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of taxable value, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 61/715
five (5) fiscal years beginning July 1, 2016; and b) for the period July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2026, a rate of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of taxable value for collection in the five (5) fiscal years beginning July 1, 2021. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
Title 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
Subject to the following additional definitions, this chapter shall incorporate by reference the definitions contained in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as
amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth herein:
CLUB: Any nonprofit corporation or association of individuals, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a permanent building or part thereof, membership
in which entails the prepayment of regular dues and is not operated for a profit other than such profits as would accrue to the entire membership.
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREA: An area outside of but immediately adjacent to a building housing a licensed premises, which area has been approved for
use for the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages or beer pursuant to the provisions of this title, chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended,
and chapter 150 of the Iowa administrative code, as amended. An outdoor service area shall include any outdoor area where beer or liquor is to be sold,
served, carried or consumed by the public and shall be considered as part of the licensed premises. The same federal and state laws and local ordinances
which apply to the licensed premises shall also apply to the outdoor service area.
PERFORMER: Live person(s) performing for the entertainment of an audience by doing at least one of the following:
A. Playing musical instrument(s).
B. Singing.
C. Performing comedy.
D. Reading works of poetry or prose.
E. Performing theater.
For purposes of this title, disc jockeys (DJs) are not considered performers. Anyone marketed or advertised as a DJ shall be considered a DJ. Also,
anyone playing prerecorded music outside performances of theater shall be considered a DJ.
PROFESSIONAL LIGHT AND SOUND: That lighting and sound equipment needed to meet all requirements of the professional light and sound
specification sheet, as approved by city council by resolution.
RESTAURANT: A business whose primary function is the service of food to customers and which meets the following criteria:
A. Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service to each floor of the premises which is open to the public while the kitchen is open;
B. Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
C. Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
D. Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with all of the following: a stove, a griddle, a grill or broiler, and a food refrigeration unit with a capacity
in excess of twenty (20) cubic feet;
E. Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of the hours that the business is open to the public; and
F. Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a restaurant if it advertises.
G. Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop, lunchroom, or tearoom.
SHOW: A showing of entertainment at least ninety (90) minutes in duration of actual performance time by a live performer(s), in which at least fifty percent
(50%) of any fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, including, but not limited to, cover charges and ticket sales, are paid to the
performer(s). The performer(s) must be capable of being heard throughout the licensed premises through the audio components of the professional light
and sound system, and must be the focus of activity at the licensed premises throughout the time the performer(s) is performing.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE AREA: Either an area outside of but immediately adjacent to a licensed premises approved for the temporary sale of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 62/715
liquor, beer or wine under the license or permit for that premises or an area not within a building licensed for the temporary sale of liquor, beer or wine
under a seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit.
THEATER: A depiction or dramatic representation by live performers of people and/or events real or imagined. Theater performances must provide seating
with a view of the stage sufficient to accommodate at least fifty percent (50%) of the occupant load. Additionally, during the time of the show, there can be
no venue space dedicated to patron dancing, or any other patron activity other than eating, drinking, and watching the theater performance. (1978 Code
§5-1; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995; Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3790, 6-18-1997; Ord. 10-4412, 10-26-2010; Ord. 13-4538, 6-18-2013;
Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR LICENSES AND BEER PERMITS
4-2-1: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter shall incorporate by reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained
in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth
herein.
License or permit required
Application for license or permit
Qualifications of applicant
Investigation of applicant; action forwarded to state
Proof of financial responsibility
Classes of beer permits
Classes of liquor control licenses
Classes of wine permits
Separate beer permits for separate locations
Fees for permits and licenses
Transferability of license or permit
Surrender of permit or license; refund of fee
Application for renewal
Hours of operation
Premises requirements and inspections
Grounds for suspension or revocation of license or permit
Specific terms for revocation or suspension of license or permit
Judicial review
Effect of revocation
(1994 Code)
4-2-2: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to any other requirements, the premises for which a beer permit or liquor control license is sought shall meet the following requirements:
A. No liquor control license or beer permit shall be approved for premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, provisions of this code and other
ordinances, resolutions and health and fire regulations. (1978 Code §26)
4-2-3: LOCAL REVIEW OF APPLICATION/INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a liquor control license, beer permit, or wine permit, or a renewal of any of those, to complete the
applications provided by the state alcoholic beverages division and the city addendum. The city's addendum shall require a listing of all persons with an
ownership or management interest in the applicant, identification of any administrative sanctions imposed, and authorization of each such person for an
Iowa criminal history report from the division of criminal investigation. (Ord. 06-4221, 7-18-2006)
B. The Iowa City fire chief, the Iowa City building official, and the Iowa City chief of police must approve or disapprove the application. The fire chief and
building official must determine if the premises complies with all applicable state and local laws, rules, and regulations and will, if necessary to make
such determination, inspect the premises. The chief of police shall make an investigation to determine if the applicant is of good moral character as
defined in section 123.3(26) of the Iowa Code, the rules of the Iowa alcoholic beverages division and guidelines developed by the chief of police and
approved by the city council. Each official must approve or disapprove a completed application and if applicable, provide a memo setting forth the
reasons for disapproval no later than seven (7) calendar days prior to the expiration of the current license in the case of renewals, or within seven (7)
days of completion of the application, including the state requirements, in the case of applications for a new license. Renewal applications will not be
accepted more than seventy (70) days prior to expiration of the present license. The application must be reviewed and approved or denied by the city
council. (Ord. 09-4357, 10-6-2009)
4-2-4: NOTICE AND HEARING:
The city council shall provide the licensee or permittee an opportunity to be heard prior to the imposition of a civil penalty, suspension or revocation or
disapproval of an application for renewal. Notice may be given by personal service or first class mail directed to the manager or contact person of the
applicant as listed on the application. Notice by personal service must be given at least five (5) days before the hearing. Notice by first class mail is
effective on mailing and must be given at least six (6) days before the hearing. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 63/715
4-2-5: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Any violation of state law, local ordinance, or the rules of the alcoholic beverages division by any employee, agent, or servant of a licensee or permittee
shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee or the permittee and shall subject the license or permit of said licensee or permittee to civil penalties,
including suspension or revocation.
B. The city council may suspend a license or permit for a period not to exceed one year, revoke the license or permit, or impose a civil penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Before suspension, revocation, or imposition of a civil penalty the license or permit holder shall
be given written notice and opportunity for a hearing in accordance with section 4-2-4 of this chapter.
C. A license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked, or a civil penalty may be imposed on the license or permit holder by the city council for any of
the following causes:
1. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such license or permit.
2. Violation of any of the provisions of chapter 123, the alcoholic beverages control provisions of the Iowa Code.
3. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under a class A, class B, or class C liquor control license, or any wine or beer
permit, which change was not previously reported to and approved by the city council.
4. Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving a license or permit when originally issued.
5. Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of the license or permit.
6. The failure or refusal on the part of any licensee or permittee to render any report or remit any taxes due under chapter 123 of the Iowa Code.
D. A license or permit issued may be suspended for a period not to exceed one year for violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city of Iowa City
relating to the purchase, possession, sale, supply, dispensing or giving of alcohol when such ordinance or regulation has no counterpart under state
law.
E. When a liquor license or wine or beer permit is suspended after a hearing as a result of violation by the licensee, permittee, or the licensee's or
permittee's agents or employees, the premises which were licensed by the license or permit shall not be relicensed for a new applicant until the
suspension has terminated or time of suspension has elapsed, or ninety (90) days have elapsed since the commencement of the suspension,
whichever occurs first. However, this section does not prohibit the premises from being relicensed to a new applicant before the suspension has
terminated or before the time of suspension has elapsed or before ninety (90) days have elapsed from the commencement of the suspension, if the
premises prior to the time of the suspension have been purchased under contract, and the vendor under that contract had exercised the person's rights
under chapter 656 of the Iowa Code and sold the property to a different person who is not related to the previous licensee or permittee by marriage or
within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity and if the previous licensee or permittee does not have a financial interest in the business of the new
applicant.
F. A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to a suspension, revocation, or imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to this section.
G. If the cause for suspension is a first offense violation of section 123.49, subsection 2, paragraph h of the Iowa Code or subsection 4-5-4B of this title,
the city council shall impose a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in lieu of suspension of the license or permit.
H. The city council shall notify the alcoholic beverages division of any action taken under this section and shall notify the licensee or permit holder of the
right to appeal a suspension, revocation, or imposition of a civil penalty to the alcoholic beverages division.
I. If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a licensee or permittee is convicted of selling, giving, or otherwise supplying any alcoholic
beverage, wine, or beer to any person in violation of section 123.49, subsection 2, paragraph h of the Iowa Code or subsection 4-5-4B of this title, in
addition to criminal penalties fixed for such violations, the city council shall assess a civil penalty as follows:
1. Upon a first conviction, the violator's liquor control license or wine permit or beer permit shall not be suspended, but rather, the violator shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty will result in automatic suspension of the
license or permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. Upon a second conviction within a period of two (2) years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be suspended for a
period of thirty (30) days and the violator shall also be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
3. Upon a third conviction within a period of three (3) years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be suspended for a
period of sixty (60) days and the violator shall also be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
4. Upon a fourth conviction within a period of three (3) years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be revoked. (Ord. 01-
3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
Chapter 3
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS; SEASONAL, FIVE DAY OR FOURTEEN DAY LICENSES
AND PERMITS
4-3-1: OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 64/715
A. Approval Required: Any permittee or licensee under this title or any applicant for a license or permit under this title desiring to operate an outdoor
service area adjacent to and in conjunction with a licensed premises must obtain the approval of the city council and of the Iowa beer and liquor control
department or its successor before commencing operation of such outdoor service area. (1978 Code §5-39)
B. Application For Permission To Operate Outdoor Service Area; Approval Or Disapproval:
1. An application for an outdoor service area shall be made upon the form provided by the city and/or the state. Such application may accompany the
initial application or any renewal application for a license or permit under this title or may be submitted at any time in conjunction with an amended
application for a license or permit. (1978 Code §5-40; amd. 1994 Code)
2. An application for the approval of an outdoor service area shall include all information required to be submitted with applications for beer and liquor
licenses. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date it is to be considered by the city council. An
outdoor service area shall be subject to the same annual renewal requirements as are all beer and liquor licenses. Approval by the city council of an
outdoor service area shall be by application to the Iowa beer and liquor control department or its successor with regard to the diagram, dramshop
insurance coverage and all other state requirements. (1978 Code §5-40)
3. Upon submitting an application for an outdoor service area, the applicant shall provide the name and address of the owner of each abutting property
as well as every other property which is within one hundred feet (100') of applicant's premises. The applicant shall also post on the applicant's
premises in an area readily observable to the public a sign provided by the city regarding the applicant's intent to establish or renew an outdoor
service area. Such notice must be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the date and time when the application will appear on the agenda for
approval by the city council. (Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997)
4. Approval or disapproval of an application for an outdoor service area shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such discretion shall be exercised
with due regard to public health, safety and welfare considerations. In the event that there is a change of ownership, the outdoor service area use
shall be permitted to continue, provided the usage is continuous. (1978 Code §5-40)
C. Regulation Of Outdoor Service Areas: The operation of an outdoor service area shall be subject to the following terms, conditions and regulations:
1. Location Restrictions:
a. An outdoor service area must be located on private property and may not encroach on the public right of way.
b. An outdoor service area shall not be located on any side of a licensed establishment which fronts on a street unless the outdoor service area is
being operated in conjunction with a "restaurant" as defined in section 4-1-1 of this title.
c. An outdoor service area must be immediately adjacent to the licensed establishment of which it is a part. (Ord. 14-4596, 8-19-2014)
d. An outdoor service area may be located on a rooftop if it is in compliance with the standards of this title and the applicable standards and approval
processes for rooftop service areas, as set forth in title 14, chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this code. Note that a special
exception may be required. (Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
e. An outdoor service area is permissible in any central business zone, according to the provisions of this chapter.
f. An outdoor service area is permissible in any riverfront crossings zone in accordance with this chapter and subject to the following: (Ord. 14-4596,
8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
(1) For outdoor service areas located in the RFC-G zone, hours of operation are limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
daily, or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more restrictive. For all other RFC zones, hours of operation for outdoor service areas are
limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sundays through Thursdays; and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on Fridays and Saturdays, or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more restrictive. However, if an outdoor service area is
located within one hundred feet (100') of a residential zone, hours of operation are limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
daily, or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
(2) Where the outdoor service area is within one hundred feet (100') of a residential (R) zone, the occupancy limit shall not exceed thirty (30)
persons.
(3) A lighting plan for the outdoor service area must be filed with the application and approved by the city manager, or designee.
(4) The city council may impose additional conditions on the outdoor service area permit if sufficient conflicts with properties in an adjacent R
(residential) zone have been identified or are to be reasonably expected.
(5) In the event that property within one hundred feet (100') of an established outdoor service area is rezoned to any R (residential) zone
classification, such outdoor service area shall be permitted to continue in operation so long as it is continuously authorized as such by the city
council without lapse, suspension or revocation. The city council may waive operation of this provision to permit continued operation of the
outdoor service area in the event of lapse or suspension of the license or permit for the establishment or in the event of lapse or suspension of
city council authorization for the outdoor service area.
g. An outdoor service area is permissible in the CO-1, CN-1, CH-1, CI-1, and CC-2 zones, according to the provisions of this chapter and subject to
the following limitations where any part of such outdoor service area is located within one hundred feet (100') of an R (residential) zone:
(1) The outdoor service area shall be operated in conjunction with a "restaurant", as defined in section 4-1-1 of this title.
(2) The outdoor service area shall only be operational while the establishment is serving food from an on premises kitchen. Outdoor service areas
must be closed to all patrons by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or whenever the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
(3) The outdoor service area occupancy limit shall not exceed thirty (30) persons.
(4) A lighting plan for the outdoor service area must be filed with the application and approved by the city manager, or designee.
(5) The city council may impose additional conditions on a permit for such an outdoor service area if sufficient conflicts with properties in the
adjacent R (residential) zone have been identified or are to be reasonably expected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 65/715
(6) In the event that property within one hundred feet (100') of an established outdoor service area is rezoned to any R (residential) zone
classification, such outdoor service area shall be permitted to continue in operation so long as it is continuously authorized as such by the city
council without lapse, suspension or revocation. The city council may waive operation of this provision to permit continued operation of the
outdoor service area in the event of lapse or suspension of the license or permit for the establishment or in the event of lapse or suspension of
city council authorization for the outdoor service area.
h. An outdoor service area located within an R (residential) zone or an MU (mixed use) zone may be allowed as a temporary use under certain
circumstances set forth in title 14, chapter 4, article D of this code, and shall not be treated as a temporary outdoor service area for the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 14-4596, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
2. Screening From Public View: Outdoor service areas are required to provide a permanent decorative fence or other suitable barrier at least three feet
(3') in height but no more than eight feet (8') in height which is detectable by persons who are visually impaired.
3. Exits: Emergency exits shall comply with all building, housing and fire codes. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
4. Occupancy Limits: The owner or operator of an outdoor service area shall be required to observe the same per square foot occupancy limits that
apply to the building which it abuts. The occupancy limit for each outdoor service area shall be determined by the city building official. In the event
inclement weather requires early closing of the outdoor service area, the licensee or permittee shall not allow patrons of the outdoor service area to
enter that portion of the licensed premises housed in the adjacent building if to do so would result in exceeding the occupancy limits therefor as
determined by the city building official. (1978 Code §5-41; amd. 1994 Code)
5. Noise Restrictions: Compliance with the city noise ordinance shall be required. A noise mitigation plan outlining the techniques to be used to
minimize the carry of noise across property boundaries shall be included with the outdoor service area application. The outdoor service area shall be
designed to minimize the carry of noise outside the outdoor service area through the use of specialized screen wall materials, sound deadening
techniques, placement and orientation of speakers, control of volume, or similar. The plan shall include anticipated decibel levels and note how the
volume will be controlled. After an outdoor service area is established, the city reserves the right to require additional noise minimization techniques.
Amplified sound shall be prohibited in outdoor service areas, except as allowed by title 14, chapter 4, articles C and D of this code. (Ord. 17-4694, 3-
7-2017)
6. Advertising And Signs: Additional advertising or identification signage beyond that permitted for the main licensed establishment shall not be
permitted.
7. Compliance With City And State Provisions: Outdoor service areas shall comply with appropriate building, housing and fire codes and with all other
applicable state and city laws. (1978 Code §5-41; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Reserved. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
E. Inspections: Outdoor service areas shall be subject to inspection at least annually at the same time inspection of the adjacent licensed establishment
occurs. The city may, in its discretion, inspect an outdoor service area at any other time. (1978 Code §5-43)
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permission To Operate An Outdoor Service Area:
1. The city council may, after written notice to the licensee or permittee and after hearing, suspend or revoke authorization for the operation of an
outdoor service area for any establishment when the licensee or permittee has violated or has permitted or allowed the violation of any provision of
the code of Iowa, as amended, or this code pertaining to the operation of an outdoor service area or when the continued operation of the outdoor
service area constitutes a threat to public health, welfare or safety or constitutes a "nuisance" as defined in title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
2. The suspension/revocation procedure shall be initiated by the police chief by the filing of an administrative hearing complaint with the city council or
the department. Written notice of hearing, as well as a copy of said complaint, shall be served upon the licensee or permittee at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the date set for hearing. In the event of suspension or revocation, the city shall notify the department hearing board, pursuant
to section 123.39, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §5-44; amd. 1994 Code)
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections C4 and C5 of this section, the city council may order the immediate closure of an outdoor service area
if it is determined that its continued operation presents a clear and imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare.
4. Suspension or revocation of authorization by the city for operation of an outdoor service area shall not affect the licensing of the principal
establishment unless separate action to suspend or revoke that license/permit is also initiated. (1978 Code §5-44)
4-3-2: TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
A. Application For Permission; Approval Or Disapproval:
1. An application for permission to operate a temporary outdoor service area in conjunction with a licensed premises shall be made upon the form
provided by the city clerk. Such application may be made at any time. The application shall include all information required to be submitted with
applications for beer and liquor licenses. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date it is to be
considered by the city council. Approval by the city council of a temporary outdoor service area shall be by application to the department with regard
to the diagram, dramshop insurance coverage and all other state requirements.
2. Approval or disapproval of an application for a temporary outdoor service area shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such discretion shall be
exercised with due regard to public health, safety and welfare considerations.
B. Restrictions: A temporary outdoor service area can be operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment on not more than two (2) occasions in the
licensing year for that establishment and for not more than three (3) days per occasion, whether consecutive or separated.
C. Regulations And Requirements: A temporary outdoor service area shall be subject to the regulations and requirements set forth in section 4-3-4 of this
chapter. Inspections shall be made as necessary prior to approval, to determine if the temporary outdoor service area will conform with said regulations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 66/715
and requirements.
D. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permission: Permission to operate a temporary outdoor service area may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the
procedure and for the same cause as provided in subsection 4-3-1F of this chapter. (1978 Code §5-45; amd. 1994 Code)
4-3-3: SEASONAL, FIVE DAY OR FOURTEEN DAY LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter shall incorporate by reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained
in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth
herein. (1994 Code)
4-3-4: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS AND SEASONAL, FIVE DAY
AND FOURTEEN DAY PERMITS AND LICENSES:
The sale of liquor or beer in a temporary outdoor service area or under a seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit shall be subject to
the following regulations and requirements:
A. Location:
1. Temporary sales under a seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit may be conducted in a building owned or leased by the
applicant or in a clearly designated temporary outdoor service area owned or leased by the applicant. A temporary outdoor service area must be
located on private property and may not encroach on any public right of way. (1978 Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
2. A temporary outdoor service area operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment shall not be located on any side of the licensed
establishment which fronts on a street unless the outdoor service area is being operated in conjunction with a "restaurant" as defined in section 4-1-1
of this title. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
3. If a temporary outdoor service area is operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment, it shall be immediately adjacent thereto and shall not be
accessible except from the licensed premises which it adjoins. (1978 Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
4. The sale of liquor or beer under a seasonal five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit may occur in any principal structure which does not
house a residential use, regardless of the zone in which it is located and regardless of its proximity to other residential uses. A temporary outdoor
service area may be permitted in any one of the following qualifying situations:
a. In any zone other than a commercial zone, provided the temporary outdoor service area is not located within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use; or
b. In any commercial zone other than the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10 zones, regardless of the temporary outdoor service area's proximity to a residential
use, but provided the temporary outdoor service area is not within one hundred feet (100') of a residential zone; or
c. In the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10 zones, regardless of the temporary outdoor service area's proximity to a residential zone or a residential use. (Ord.
11-4444, 9-20-2011)
B. Fence Requirements: The perimeter of temporary outdoor service areas shall be double fenced with snow fencing or construction fencing not less than
three feet (3') in height, with the outside fence located no less than six feet (6') distant from the inside fence. Fencing may be deleted at locations where
the temporary outdoor service areas adjoin a building. An emergency exit shall be required of all outdoor service areas and shall comply with all
building, housing and fire codes. (Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997)
C. Security Personnel: A uniformed security officer shall be continuously present at the site of a temporary outdoor service area if more than one hundred
(100) persons are in attendance, and an additional uniformed security officer shall be provided for each additional fifty (50) persons attending.
D. Parking: Parking shall be provided for a temporary outdoor service area or for a building wherein the sale of liquor or beer occurs under a seasonal five
(5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit. The required number of parking stalls shall be determined by applying the parking requirements for that
zone to that use, if any.
E. Building Requirements: A building which is utilized for liquor or beer sales under a seasonal or temporary license or permit shall comply with appropriate
building, housing and fire codes and with all other applicable state and city laws and shall be subject to inspection prior to issuance of the license or
permit and at any time while being operated under such license or permit.
F. Occupancy Limits: The owner or operator of a temporary outdoor service area operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment shall be required to
observe the same per square foot occupancy limits that apply to the licensed establishment which it abuts. The occupancy limit for each such
temporary outdoor service area shall be determined by the city building official. In the event inclement weather requires early closing of such temporary
outdoor service area, the licensee or permittee shall not allow patrons of the temporary outdoor service area to enter that portion of the licensed
premises housed in the adjacent building if to do so would result in exceeding the occupancy limits therefor, as determined by the city building official.
G. Sanitary Facilities: A trash container or trash containers equaling fifty (50) gallons in volume and one restroom/toilet facility, either permanent or
temporary, must be provided on the site of the temporary outdoor service area for each fifty (50) persons expected to attend.
H. Noise Control: Amplified sound equipment may be operated in a temporary outdoor service area upon issuance of a permit as provided in subsection 4-
3-1C5 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 67/715
I. Dancing: Dancing may occur in a temporary outdoor service area or in a building which is utilized for liquor or beer sales under a seasonal or temporary
license or permit upon issuance of a permit pursuant to section 4-4-1 of this title.
J. Advertising And Signs: Identification signage shall not be permitted. (1978 Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 4
DANCING REGULATIONS1
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4787 - DANCING RESTRICTED . Go to new ordinance.
4-4-1: DANCING RESTRICTED IN CONNECTION WITH BUSINESS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any license or permit holder under this title to allow dancing in connection with the operation of such business
without first securing a permit therefor from the city clerk.
B. Application For Permit: A verified application for a permit to allow dancing in connection with the sale of liquor, beer or wine by the drink shall be filed
with the city clerk and shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The location of the place of business wherein dancing is to occur in conjunction with the sale of liquor, beer or wine by the drink.
3. Indicate that the applicant is a bona fide holder of a liquor control license or a beer or wine permit.
4. Indicate that the applicant consents to the entry of members of the city police, fire and health departments without a search warrant to inspect the
premises for violations of this title.
5. A statement from the chief of police, the fire chief and the building inspector that the premises comply with the ordinances of the city and the statutes
of the state.
6. A detailed sketch and description of the premises. Such sketch shall include all rooms or enclosures which are operated in connection with the liquor
control license or beer or wine permit wherein the dancing shall be allowed and shall show the area designated for dancing and its dimensions.
7. A check, money order or bank draft for the permit fee required by the provisions of this section.
C. Permit Fee: The annual fee for a dancing permit shall be in the amount set by the city council by resolution. Such fee shall be prorated for fractions of
the square foot requirements. The initial permit shall be valid for the same time period as the applicant's liquor control license or beer or wine permit,
and the cost shall be prorated on that basis of time.
D. Permit Issuance: If an application is in the proper form, the city clerk shall place the application on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting at
which the city council may, by resolution, grant a permit if the requirements of this section have been met.
E. Revocation Of Permit: In the event a dancing permittee violates any of the provisions of this title or chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended, the dancing
permit may be revoked by the city clerk, and no refund shall be made.
F. Refunds Of Fees: Any dancing permittee who shall voluntarily surrender a dance permit shall be entitled to a quarterly refund for the balance of the term
remaining. (1978 Code §5-6; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 5
PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS1
4-5-1: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
A. No person or club holding a liquor license, retail wine or beer permit under this title, nor the holder's agents or employees, shall do any of the acts
enumerated in this chapter.
B. This chapter shall incorporate by reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as
amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth herein. (1978 Code §5-2; amd.
1994 Code)
4-5-2: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
No signs or other matter advertising any brand of alcoholic beverages shall be erected or placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a licensee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 68/715
or permittee under this title authorized to sell alcoholic beverages at retail. This section shall not prohibit use of signs inside a fence or similar enclosure
around the licensed premises. All such signs formerly erected shall be removed by the owner thereof by July 1, 1974. (1978 Code §5-3; amd. 1994 Code)
4-5-3: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION IN PUBLIC PLACES AND CITY BUILDINGS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons to consume or drink any alcoholic beverages on any public street, ground, highway, sidewalk, alley, or public right of
way in the city, except at the farmers' market or if said person has purchased said alcoholic beverage from an "authorized entity", and is on an
"authorized site", as those terms are defined in this section. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic beverages in any public place within the city,
except premises covered by a license or permit, and when applicable a public right of way easement agreement. (Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010)
B. A person shall not consume or possess an alcoholic beverage in a city park, except if said person has purchased said alcoholic beverage from an
"authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site", as those terms are defined in this section2, or is doing so pursuant to a permit issued by city staff.
Any permit issued will abide by and incorporate administrative rules approved by the city manager. This subsection shall not apply to the farmers'
market or property within a city park that is leased to another entity for ninety nine (99) years or more.
C. A person shall not use or consume any alcoholic beverages in any city building, except a city building covered by a valid license or permit. Any permit
issued will abide by and incorporate administrative rules approved by the city manager. (Ord. 12-4492, 9-4-2012)
D. 1. The city may enter into a written agreement with an authorized entity that allows for the sale of beer and/or wine in a city park, on public right of way,
or on a city ground excluding city buildings. The term of said agreement shall not exceed one year.
2. As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AGREEMENT: The official agreement between the city and an authorized entity to sell beer and/or wine on an authorized site for consumption and
possession only on an authorized site, which includes, at a minimum, the following provisions:
a. Authorized Site: Both a written description and a physical illustration of the authorized site.
b. Dramshop Insurance: The authorized entity shall provide proof that it is in compliance with the liability insurance requirements of Iowa Code
section 123.92, as amended, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
c. Indemnification: The authorized entity shall pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability
imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from the sale of beer and/or wine on the authorized site, whether sustained by any person
or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of
the use of the authorized site or consumption of beer and/or wine on the authorized site.
d. Inspection: City staff, including the police department, may periodically inspect the authorized site without any prior notice to the authorized
entity for the purpose of enforcing the terms of the agreement.
e. License: The authorized entity has a state license to sell beer and/or wine for the term of the agreement.
f. Premises Insurance: The authorized entity shall provide a certificate of insurance for general liability and casualty insurance, naming the city of
Iowa City as an additional insured, which provides coverage in the following minimum amounts: comprehensive general liability for bodily injury
and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The
authorized entity shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city before cancellation of said insurance.
AUTHORIZED ENTITY: A nonprofit corporation (meaning those entities granted tax exempt status by the IRS under section 501(c)(3) of the internal
revenue code).
AUTHORIZED SITE: A precisely described area in a city park, on public right of way, or on a city ground excluding city buildings over which the
authorized entity has control for specified hours on specified days pursuant to a written agreement with the city. (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004)
4-5-4: REGULATION OF PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE:
A. 1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine, or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a
physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer
during the regular course of the person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under this chapter. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-
2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
2. Effective July 1, 2005, a person who is under legal age, other than a licensee or permittee, who violates this section regarding the purchase of or
attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, or possessing or having control of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, commits the following:
a. A simple misdemeanor, a scheduled violation under section 805.8 of the Iowa Code, punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the
first offense.
b. A second offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to any other applicable
penalty, the person in violation of this section shall choose between either completing a substance abuse evaluation or the suspension of the
person's motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
c. A third or subsequent offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the suspension of the
person's motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 69/715
d. The court may, in its discretion, order the person who is under legal age to perform community service work under section 909.3A of the Iowa
Code, or an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this section. (Ord. 05-4162, 6-21-2005)
e. In determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent offense, conviction for violation of this section, section 123.47 of the Code of Iowa,
or an ordinance of any city or county in the State of Iowa that substantially corresponds to this section or section 123.47 of the Code of Iowa shall
be counted as previous offenses. (Ord. 07-4249, 1-23-2007)
B. 1. An employee or agent of a person or club holding a liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any
alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, or
permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, to consume any alcoholic
beverage, wine, or beer.
2. Any person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under section 805.8, subsection 10,
paragraph "a" of the Iowa Code.
3. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverages,
wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee. If any person under legal age misrepresents the person's age, and the licensee or permittee
establishes that the licensee or permittee made reasonable inquiry to determine whether the prospective purchaser was over legal age, the licensee
or permittee is not guilty of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to a person under legal age. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4791 - OPEN CONTAINERS. Go to new ordinance.
4-5-5: OPEN CONTAINERS:
A. Open Containers Prohibited Outside Licensed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person or for any licensee or permittee under this title and/or
agents or employees of a licensee or permittee to permit any person to carry from a licensed premises any open container of alcoholic beverages,
including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, glasses, mugs and cups, except when such carryout is related to and necessary for custodial, maintenance
and other bona fide employment purposes, unless the person is carrying the open container from one (1) licensed premises directly into another
licensed premises. (Ord. 17-4707, 5-16-2017)
B. Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any persons to possess any open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage on any public street, ground, highway, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-way in the City, except if said person has purchased said alcoholic
beverage from an "authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site", as defined in this chapter. A person shall not possess any open or unsealed bottle,
can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage in any public place within the City, except premises covered by a license or permit, and
when applicable a public right-of-way easement agreement. This subsection shall not apply to the farmers' market. (Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010)
4-5-6: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS:
A person shall not sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. A person who violates
this provision shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
4-5-7: LIMITATIONS ON SALES:
A. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for a holder of a liquor control license, or wine permit or beer permit, or its employees or agents, to do any of the following:
1. Sell, offer to sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption, two (2) or more servings of any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to any one (1)
person for the price of one (1) such drink.
2. Sell, offer to sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption an unlimited number of servings of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for a fixed price or
an unlimited number of servings for free.
3. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, for on premises consumption, without proportionally increasing the price charged for
such drink. (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
4. Dispense or serve for on premises consumption, more than two (2) containers of any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer at any one time to any one
person. For purposes of this section a "container" is a receptacle, such as a glass or a cup, that holds a substance or substances.
5. Encourage or permit any game or contest or tournament of any kind which involves drinking any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer or the awarding of
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer as a prize.
6. Dispense, pour, or otherwise serve any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer directly into a person's mouth. (Ord. 03-4061, 2-4-2003)
B. Exceptions: Nothing in subsection A of this section shall be construed to prohibit any of the following:
1. The holder of a liquor control license, or wine, or beer permit, or its employees or agents, from including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor, wine,
or beer as part of a hotel or motel package which includes overnight accommodations.
2. An "authorized entity", as defined in section 4-5-3 of this chapter, from hosting a tasting event, as defined and regulated by the Iowa alcoholic
beverage division, as part of a community wide attraction that supports the economic vitality of the downtown. (Ord. 15-4644, 10-6-2015)
4-5-8: PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE IN LICENSED OR PERMITTED ESTABLISHMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 70/715
A. No person, individual, association, corporation, partnership or club holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which authorizes on the
premises consumption, nor his or her agents or employees shall allow a person who has not yet attained the legal age to enter or remain in the
licensed or permitted establishment between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and closing. (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003; amd. Ord. 10-
4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010)
B. However, the provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply when:
1. The person under the legal age is an employee of the license or permit holder, or performing a contracted service for the license or permit holder on
the premises, and is on the premises during his or her scheduled work hours.
2. The person under the legal age is accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or domestic partner registered as such under section 2-6-3 of this
code who is the legal age or older.
3. The licensee or permittee applies for and qualifies for an exception certificate from the chief of police, or his or her designee, as follows: (Ord. 12-
4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
a. Qualification: A licensee or permittee whose primary business purpose is not the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer may qualify for an
exception by filing with the city clerk a verified statement from an accountant which establishes that on average over a calendar year more than
fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's or permittee's gross sales on the premises are from the sale of goods or services other than alcoholic
beverages, wine or beer. Income from fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, such as cover charges, as well as drink mixes, or
any part of an alcoholic beverage as defined in chapter 123 of the state code are to be counted as alcohol sales. Any purchases required to gain
entry shall be considered cover charges. Ticket sales for any event performed in a theater in which the entire audience area is consistent with
traditional theater seating shall be counted as nonalcohol sales. The statement shall recite the actual percentage of nonalcohol sales, as defined
herein, and be based on records made in the regular course of the licensee's or permittee's business. No certificate will be issued to the
establishment if any of the following is true:
(1) Applicant possesses a trailing twelve (12) month possession of alcohol under the legal age (PAULA) ratio over the allowable limit, as defined
and set by city council by resolution.
(2) Where operation under the exception certificate would be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or delivered alcohol
to any patron under the legal drinking age more than once within the last two (2) years, the licensee or permittee shall serve the suspension
called for under subsection B3g of this section before being eligible for issuance of the exception certificate. Said suspension will commence on
the day the chief of police would otherwise have approved the application. Assuming the applicant remains eligible at that time, the chief of
police shall issue the exception certificate following completion of the suspension. (Ord. 16-4679, 10-4-2016)
b. Proof Of Qualification; Audit: In addition to the aforementioned statement, proof of qualification for the exception may include the business records
on which the statement is based, profit and loss statements, state and federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance and audits
performed to determine dramshop insurance premiums, and receipts from vendors for goods purchased, which records shall be made available to
the chief of police or designee for review upon request. The chief of police or designee may require an audit of the establishment by an auditor
selected by the chief of police or designee, which audit will be performed at the expense of the applicant. In that event, the applicant must submit a
deposit to the city in an amount set by city council via resolution for the payment of the audit. At the conclusion of the audit, any additional costs
over the deposit amount must be paid by the applicant before an application will be considered further. Any surplus funds from the deposit will be
promptly returned to the applicant. Failure to submit the deposit or pay costs of the audit will result in a denial of the application. The factors the
chief of police or designee will consider in determining whether to require an audit will be established by resolution of the city council, but the final
decision to require an audit will be that of the chief of police or designee.
c. Issuance: If the chief of police or designee determines that the licensee has satisfied the above requirements an exception certificate shall be
issued.
d. Duration: An exception certificate shall be effective for the duration of the alcoholic liquor control license, wine or beer permit.
e. Temporary Certificate: A new licensee or permittee, as opposed to one applying for a renewal of an existing license or permit, whose primary
business purpose is not the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer may obtain a temporary six (6) month exception certificate if the licensee's or
permittee's business plan anticipates sales as required by subsection B3a of this section and the licensee or permittee submits an affidavit which
details the nature of the new establishment and the anticipated percentage of sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages. At the end of the six (6)
month period the licensee or permittee may obtain an exception certificate for the remainder of the duration of the license or permit in accordance
with subsections B3a through B3c of this section if sales during the six (6) month period support an exception, and the licensee or permittee has
met the PAULA ratio requirement referenced in subsection B3a of this section. No more than one temporary exception certificate may be granted
for any location within a three (3) year period. Applicants who sign an affidavit pursuant to this subsection but fail to secure renewal of the
exception certificate following the six (6) month certificate for the subject location may not be awarded an exception certificate for any other new
location within three (3) years of the granting of the subject six (6) month certificate.
f. Posting Required: To be effective in excepting the licensee or permittee from the prohibition in subsection A of this section, the exception certificate
issued by the chief of police or designee must be posted at every entrance to the licensed or permitted establishment in view of patrons of the
licensed or permitted establishments. In addition, the licensee or permittee must provide staff of sufficient number and capability to monitor all
patrons to prevent underage possession of alcohol. (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
g. Revocation: Exception certificates may be revoked by the chief of police, or designee, for good cause. Licensees or permittees may appeal a
revocation to the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing, by first class
mail, of the revocation decision. Appeals will ordinarily be heard no later than fourteen (14) days, and in no event later than thirty (30) days,
following the filing of an appeal in the office of the city clerk. In the event of a revocation, the licensee may continue to operate with their exception
certificate until the ten (10) day appeal period has passed, or in the event of an appeal to the city manager or designee, until after the city manager
or designee has issued his or her ruling on appeal. In the event the city manager or designee affirms the revocation, the establishment's exception
certificate will expire seven (7) days from the mailing, by first class mail, of the appeal decision. Good cause for revocation includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
(1) Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or delivered
alcohol to any patron under the legal drinking age more than once within the last two (2) years; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 71/715
(2) Where at the end of any month the venue's trailing twelve (12) month PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the chief of police, rises above the
maximum allowed PAULA ratio, as established by city council by resolution; or
(3) Where the establishment has failed to cooperate fully with the police department; or
(4) Where continued operation under the exception certificate would be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Revocations for violations of subsection B3g(1) of this section shall last for thirty (30) days for the second violation within the last two (2) years,
and for ninety (90) days for the third and subsequent violations within the last two (2) years. All other revocations shall last twelve (12) months.
Following the period of revocation, the applicant may reapply for an exception certificate. (Ord. 16-4679, 10-4-2016)
4. The person under the legal age is on the premises during a time that the licensee or permittee has, in accordance with a written notice and plan
given in advance to and approved by the chief of police or designee, suspended dispensing alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. Said plan
must provide a method by which alcoholic beverages will be out of sight and reach of patrons. If the plan is approved, the chief of police or designee
shall issue a certificate approving the event, which certificate shall be posted at every entrance to the licensed establishment in view of patrons of the
licensed or permitted establishment. It shall be the strict duty of a licensee or permittee permitting such persons under the legal age onto the licensed
premises pursuant to such a plan, and the agents and employees of the licensee or permittee, to prevent persons under the legal age from
consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages on said premises.
5. The person under the legal age is a patron of an "authorized entity" which has entered into an agreement with the city for use of an "authorized site"
in a city park, pursuant to subsection 4-5-3D of this chapter.
6. The person under the legal age is on the alcohol free portion of the premises during a time that the licensee or permittee has, in accordance with a
written notice and plan given in advance to and approved by the chief of police or designee, divided the premises into alcohol free and alcohol
permitted sections. Said plan must provide a method by which alcoholic beverages will be out of sight and reach of underage patrons. If the plan is
approved, the chief of police or designee shall issue a certificate approving the event, which certificate shall be posted at every entrance to the
licensed establishment in view of patrons of the licensed or permitted establishment. It shall be the strict duty of a licensee or permittee permitting
such persons under the legal age onto the licensed premises pursuant to such a plan, and the agents and employees of the licensee or permittee, to
prevent persons under the legal age from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages on said premises. In addition, the following requirements
must be met:
a. The physical setup and separation of the alcohol free and alcohol permitted portions of the establishment must earn prior approval by the director
of housing and inspection services, or designee, for matters of safety and code compliance, including, but not limited to, occupancy, bathrooms
and exits.
b. Both the alcohol free and alcohol permitted portions of the establishment shall include city code compliant bathrooms.
c. The director of housing and inspection services may, but is not required to, allow those establishments with a PAULA ratio under that set by city
council by resolution during the trailing twelve (12) months prior to the event application, to permit patrons of both the alcohol free and alcohol
permitted spaces to share the same bathrooms, as long as the establishment strictly enforces a rule prohibiting alcoholic beverages in the
bathrooms. For purposes of this section, the PAULA ratio shall be based on the twelve (12) PAULA reports immediately preceding the licensee's
event application, all as calculated by the chief of police, or designee.
d. The alcohol free and alcohol permitted portions of the establishment must be separated by one hour construction walls and doors, as approved by
the director of housing and inspection services, or designee, or comparable barriers, as approved by the chief of police, or designee.
e. It shall be the strict duty of the licensee to exclude those under legal age from the alcohol permitted area, and to exclude all alcoholic beverages
from the alcohol free area.
f. All patrons of legal age must be marked with a wristband indicating they are of age. All patrons under legal age must be marked indicating they are
under legal age.
7. The licensee or permittee applies for, qualifies for, and is granted an entertainment venue exception certificate, as follows:
a. Requirements: In order for an entertainment venue exception certificate to be issued by the chief of police, or designee, the establishment must
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the chief of police, or designee, that all the following requirements have been met:
(1) The venue has hosted and will continue to host shows on at least one hundred fifty (150) calendar days each year; and
(2) The venue has a permanently installed (not risers) and dedicated performance stage of at least eight feet by six feet (8' x 6') in dimension,
which shall never be used for any purpose other than by performers during shows; and
(3) The venue must distribute at least fifty percent (50%) of any fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, including, but not limited
to, cover charges and ticket sales, from the period of opening until closing, to the show performer(s) within forty eight (48) hours of the
completion of the show; and
(4) The venue subscribes to at least one industry tracking service, such as Pollstar Pro, or comparable alternative; and
(5) The venue has a PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the chief of police or designee, of no greater than that allowed by city council, as
established by resolution; and
(6) The venue has permanently installed professional light and sound; and
(7) The venue marks all patrons of legal drinking age with a wristband, and marks all patrons under legal drinking age with either a wristband of a
different color from the legal age patrons, or permanent marker on the hand; and
(8) The venue provides staff of sufficient number and capability to monitor all patrons at all shows; and
(9) The venue provides to the chief of police, or designee, a report of all upcoming show dates at least seven (7) days prior to any show; and
(10) The venue provides to the chief of police, or designee, reports detailing all dates on which a show took place, including the name of the
performer(s) for each show, which reports shall be due no later than the ninetieth, one hundred eightieth, two hundred seventieth, and three
hundred sixtieth day following issuance of the entertainment venue exception certificate; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 72/715
(11) The venue employs at least one salaried employee responsible for booking shows by performers, and promptly provides both the employee
name and most recent salary paystub upon request from the city; and (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
(12) The venue employs only bartenders and servers who have completed the alcohol compliance employee training program (e.g., I-PACT)
pursuant to Iowa Code section 123.50A; and (Ord. 13-4517, 2-19-2013)
(13) The venue allows city inspection, at any time and for any reason, of the venue, professional sound and lighting equipment, and show and
performer financial records, including, but not limited to, show settlement sheets; and (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012; amd. Ord. 14-
4579, 4-1-2014)
(14) The venue's licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, has not sold, given, or delivered alcohol to any patron under the legal
drinking age more than once within the last five (5) years; and
(15) Granting the venue entertainment venue status would not be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the city.
These requirements apply to all pending and future applications for entertainment venue exception certificates. (Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014)
b. Duration: Entertainment venue exception certificates shall be valid for one year, or until expiration of the premises liquor license, whichever is
sooner.
c. New Businesses: New businesses may be granted an entertainment venue exception certificate by satisfying all requirements of subsection B7a
of this section, save subsections B7a(1) and B7a(5) of this section. For establishments previously operating under the same or substantially similar
ownership and/or management, the PAULA ratio restrictions of subsection B7a(5) of this section apply, and will be utilized in assessing the
establishment's application. For establishments not previously meeting the minimum show day requirements of subsection B7a(1) of this section, a
credible business plan must be accompanied by a notarized affidavit by the establishment owner (or largest shareholder) attesting that the
establishment will meet all requirements of subsection B7a of this section.
d. Revocation: Entertainment venue exception certificates may be revoked by the chief of police, or designee, for good cause. Venues may appeal a
revocation to the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing, by first class
mail, of the revocation decision. Appeals will ordinarily be heard no later than fourteen (14) days, and in no event later than thirty (30) days,
following the filing of an appeal in the office of the city clerk. In the event of a revocation, the venue may continue to operate as an entertainment
venue until the ten (10) day appeal period has passed, or in the event of an appeal to the City Manager, or designee, until after the City Manager,
or designee, has issued his or her ruling on appeal. In the event the City Manager affirms the revocation, the venue's entertainment venue
exception privileges will cease seven (7) days from the mailing, by first class mail, of the appeal decision. Good cause for revocation includes, but
is not limited to, the following: (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
(1) Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or delivered
alcohol to any patron under the legal drinking age more than once within the last five (5) years; or (Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014)
(2) Where at the end of any month the venue's trailing twelve (12) month PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the Chief of Police, rises above the
maximum allowed PAULA ratio set by City Council, as established by resolution; or
(3) Where the venue has failed to cooperate fully with the Police Department; or
(4) Where the venue has failed to maintain compliance with all requirements of subsection B7a of this section; or
(5) Where continued operation under the entertainment venue exception certificate would be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the
residents of the City.
Revocations shall last twelve (12) months. Following the period of revocation, the applicant may reapply for an exception certificate. (Ord. 12-
4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
C. Between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and closing, no person under the legal age shall enter into or remain on the premises of a licensed or permitted
establishment which authorizes on the premises consumption unless:
1. The person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or domestic partner registered as such under section 2-6-3 of this Code who is the legal
age or older; (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010)
2. The person is an employee of the licensee or permittee or performing a contracted service for the license or permit holder on the premises, and is on
the premises during his or her scheduled work hours;
3. A valid exception certificate is posted pursuant to subsection B3 of this section or a valid certificate approving a nonalcoholic event is posted
pursuant to subsection B4 of this section; or (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003)
4. The person under the legal age is a patron of an "authorized entity" which has entered into an agreement with the City for use of an "authorized site"
in a City park, pursuant to subsection 4-5-3D of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010)
5. The person under the legal age is in the alcohol free portion of an establishment hosting a split premises event approved by the Chief of Police
pursuant to subsection B6 of this section. (Ord. 10-4411, 10-26-2010)
6. The person is at least nineteen (19) years of age and is in an establishment with a current and valid entertainment venue exception certificate, as
long as all of the following are true: (Ord. 10-4412, 10-26-2010)
a. The entertainment venue hosted or is hosting at that time a show, lasting past ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the evening on which the person is
found there; and
b. The person bears the venue's official marking as being under legal age. (Ord. 10-4412, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 13-4517, 2-19-2013)
7. The person is working in conjunction with a law enforcement agency in performance of their official duties. (Ord. 17-4724, 9-19-2017)
D. Unless a valid exception certificate under the provisions of subsection B3 of this section has been obtained and posted, or a certificate approving a
nonalcoholic event under the provisions of subsection B4 of this section has been obtained and posted for the duration of the event or the licensed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 73/715
premises is an "authorized entity" which has entered into an agreement with the City for use of an "authorized site" in a City park, pursuant to
subsection 4-5-3D of this chapter, the holder of a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which authorizes on premises consumption, shall obtain
from the City Clerk and post a notice at every entrance to the licensed or permitted establishment in view of patrons of the licensed or permitted
establishment, stating: (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004)
Notice to Persons Under The Legal Age.
You are subject to a fine ranging from $300 to $625 for being on these premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and closing unless:
1.you are accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or domestic partner registered as such under Section 2-6-3 of the City Code who is the
legal age or older; or
2.you are an employee of this establishment or performing a contracted service with respect to this establishment and are on the premises during
your scheduled work hours.
(Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010; Ord. 11-4432, 6-7-2011, eff. 7-1-2011)
Said notices will be prepared by the City Clerk and available at no charge. (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004)
The posting of this notice shall not be considered an element of the offense delineated in subsection C of this section, and failure by a liquor license
establishment to post said notice shall not be considered a legal defense to such charge for a patron.
E. 1. A person under the legal age who violates the provisions of subsection C of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as follows:
a. For a first offense, a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
b. For a second offense, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
c. For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of six hundred twenty five dollars ($625.00). (Ord. 11-4432, 6-7-2011, eff. 7-1-2011)
2. Violation of the provisions of subsection A or D of this section shall be a Municipal infraction. (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003)
Title 5
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
5-1-1: LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in any business for which a license or authorization is required by this title or any other provision of this code
without first obtaining a license or authorization and paying the license fee therefor as prescribed for such business by this title or other provisions of this
code. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION:
A. All persons who are required under any ordinance of the city to procure a license or authorization for the purpose of engaging in any business or
vocation shall first make application to the city clerk for such license or authorization, except as otherwise provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly misrepresent, falsify or conceal any information required by the city in any form of application for a
license or authorization required in the ordinances of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly orally misrepresent, falsify or conceal any
material information requested by any duly authorized officer or employee of the city in connection with the granting of any license or authorization
required by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-3: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION1:
All licenses or authorizations shall be issued by the city clerk or designee, and a record thereof kept by the city clerk or designee. The city clerk or
designee may refuse to grant a license or authorization in any case based on health, safety and public welfare concerns. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION2:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 74/715
The city clerk may revoke any license or authorization issued under the provisions of this title, after proper hearing before the city manager or designee, by
sending written notice of said hearing by regular mail to the taxicab business or driver at the last known address not less than five (5) calendar days before
the date of said hearing; or by personal delivery with seventy two (72) hours' notice of date of said hearing, for any of the following causes:
A. Any misrepresentation on the application for license or authorization.
B. Violation of any federal, state or local law. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
Upon hearing, the city manager or designee may uphold the revocation, may reverse the revocation, or may suspend the license or authorization. (Ord.
14-4573, 3-4-2014, eff. 5-31-2014)
Chapter 2
TAXICABS
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AIRPORT SHUTTLE: A vehicle furnished with a driver that carries passengers for hire exclusively on a route that either starts at or ends at a commercial
airport, and operates without a taximeter.
APPLICANT: A person or entity wishing to operate as a taxicab business within the corporate city limits or a person wishing to drive a taxicab.
CERTIFIED CALIBRATOR: Individual who possesses a certificate showing completion of a taximeter calibration course. Said certificate must state the
individual qualifications to program, calibrate, repair and maintain a taximeter. Said certificate must also include the name of the meter manufacturer(s),
and models for which the individual is qualified to calibrate.
CHARTER TRANSPORTATION: A vehicle furnished with a driver that carries passengers for hire either on a fixed route in the city or pursuant to a written
contract with reservations at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the service. The vehicle shall operate without a meter installed and charge for
services on an hourly basis or longer periods of time.
CONNECT: The network communication process by which a driver accepts a requested ride via a web based application system.
DECAL: A sticker issued by the city clerk for each taxicab operated by a taxicab business.
DESTINATION RATE: A flat fee charged by a metered taxicab business to carry a passenger from anywhere within the corporate limits of Iowa City to a
specified geographic location outside the corporate limits of Iowa City that is applicable at all times and on all days. A destination rate cannot be charged
for a ride that originates and terminates within the corporate limits of Iowa City. Examples of a destination rate are: Iowa City to Riverside Casino $ and
Iowa City to Eastern Iowa Airport $ .
DISPATCH: The communication process, such as by means of telephone, radio, or mobile device, by which a metered taxicab business assigns a
particular metered taxicab driver to a location to pick up a passenger.
DRIVER: A person who is authorized by the city to drive a taxicab.
ENTRY FEE: The fee charged when the taximeter is turned on regardless of the distance traveled.
EXTRA PASSENGER FEE: A flat per passenger fee a metered taxicab business may charge that is calculated by and shown on the taximeter.
HORSEDRAWN VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated or pulled by a horse, furnished with a driver and carrying passengers for hire within the City, and
operates without a taximeter.
LICENSE: Written permission by the City to operate a taxicab business.
MANIFEST LOG: A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by said driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. A manifest log may be stored electronically.
METERED TAXICAB: A taxicab in which the taxicab business dispatches a driver to a passenger or the driver responds to a passenger via traditional
street hail, including hand gestures and verbal statements. A metered taxicab does not include a pedicab or horsedrawn vehicle.
METERED TAXICAB BUSINESS: A taxicab business that operates at least one taxi by means of dispatching drivers and/or by means of traditional street
hail, including hand gestures and verbal statements. A metered taxicab business does not include taxicab services provided by pedicabs and horsedrawn
vehicles.
NETWORK REPRESENTATIVE: The person that a network taxicab business has authorized to file an application for a taxicab business license and
receive and accept all correspondence and notices from the City pertaining to the network taxicab business and its affiliated drivers.
NETWORK TAXICAB: A taxicab in which the driver connects with passengers via a web based application.
NETWORK TAXICAB BUSINESS: A taxicab business that operates its business entirely via a web based application system to connect drivers with
passengers for taxicab services.
PASSENGER: An individual being transported by a taxicab business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 75/715
PEDICAB: A vehicle propelled primarily by human power through a belt, chain or gears, having two (2) or more wheels, furnished with a driver and
carrying passengers for hire. A motor may assist or supplement the human power, but the pedicab cannot be propelled exclusively by the motor. It shall be
equipped with properly functioning front and rear lights for nighttime operation, right and left rearview mirrors and right and left turn signals, and operates
without a taximeter.
PREARRANGED RIDE: A period of time that originates when a driver accepts a requested ride through a web based application, continues while the
driver transports the passenger, and terminates when the passenger departs from the network taxicab.
RATE CARD: A card containing the maximum fare rates. A rate card must include the information shown on the City Clerk's rate card template, and it must
be filed with the City Clerk.
SOFT TAXIMETER: A type of taximeter that utilizes a tablet or similar electronic device to calculate the charge instead of a mechanical device.
STREET: Any street, alley, court, lane, bridge or public place within the City.
SURCHARGE: A flat per passenger fee a metered taxicab business may charge in addition to the rate shown on the taximeter on the following days:
"University of Iowa home football games" (defined as the day prior to, the day of and the day following the game, which typically will be Friday, Saturday
and Sunday), "University of Iowa graduation weekends" (defined as Friday, Saturday and Sunday of the December and May commencements), "New
Year's Eve" (defined as 12:00 noon on December 31 to 12:00 noon on January 1), and a "special event" (defined as a notable event as solely determined
by the City, notice of which will be provided to the taxicab businesses as set forth in the administrative rules).
TAXICAB: All vehicles furnished with a driver that carry passengers for hire within the City, including, but not limited to, metered taxicabs, network
taxicabs, pedicabs, and horsedrawn vehicles. "Charter transportation" and "airport shuttle", as defined in this section, and a vehicle owned or operated by
any governmental entity that provides public transportation are not taxicabs.
TAXICAB BUSINESS: A person or entity that provides taxicab services originating within the corporate limits of the City of Iowa City.
TAXICAB SERVICES: All activities conducted as part of or in furtherance of a taxicab business.
TAXIMETER: A device attached to a taxicab that automatically calculates at a predetermined rate or rates and indicates the charge for hire of a metered
taxicab.
WEB BASED APPLICATION: A program that is accessed over a network or internet connection that connects passengers and drivers and provides
passengers with driver, vehicle, and rate information prior to engaging in a prearranged ride. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016; Ord.
18-4750, 5-1-2018)
5-2-2: BUSINESS LICENSES:
A. Taxicab business licenses shall be valid for one year. All business licenses shall commence on June 1 of each year, and shall expire on May 31. No
business licenses will be issued unless an application is filed by May 1, except for pedicabs and horsedrawn vehicles.
B. Each applicant for a taxicab business license shall file an application with the City Clerk by May 1 on forms provided by the City.
C. If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant has no outstanding judgments arising from
Municipal infraction citations, and the Police Chief or Chief's designee has determined that there is no information which would indicate that the
issuance of the license would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a license to conduct a
taxicab business.
D. If the City Clerk subsequently finds that the taxicab business is not in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter or if the Police Chief or
Chief's designee finds that continued operation of the taxicab business would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of residents of the City, the
City Clerk may revoke or suspend the license to conduct a taxicab business as provided in section 5-1-5 of this title.
E. No taxicab business shall allow a person to drive a taxicab unless the driver has the authorization of the City Clerk. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
F. The license may be sold, assigned, or transferred. (Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018)
G. Taxicab businesses shall maintain manifest logs, stored electronically or otherwise. Manifest logs must be maintained and accessible to the City for a
minimum of sixty (60) days. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
H. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, taxicab businesses may provide nonemergency medical transportation services. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
5-2-3: ACCESSIBILITY OF RECORDS:
A. Taxicab businesses shall maintain manifest logs, stored electronically or otherwise, for a minimum of sixty (60) days. The manifest logs shall be
accessible to the City during the sixty (60) day period. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
B. Taxicab businesses shall provide the following vehicle information and driver information on demand to the City of Iowa City and this information must
be accessible to the City in at least one of the following ways:
1. a. A taxicab business shall have an accessible business office. An "accessible business office" means a telephone number available to the Iowa City
Police Department twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 76/715
b. Manifest logs must be maintained by the taxicab business and made available to the Iowa City Police Department within twelve (12) hours of a
request. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
2. A web based application used to connect passengers and drivers shall display for the passenger prior to engaging in a prearranged ride, at a
minimum:
a. The driver's first name and a photograph of the driver;
b. The license plate number of the vehicle; and
c. The vehicle's make and model. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-4: DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
A. No person shall operate a taxicab without authorization of the City Clerk.
B. 1. Each person desiring to drive a taxicab shall file an application with the City Clerk.
2. If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with the requirements of this chapter and the Police Chief or Chief's designee has
determined that there is no information which would indicate that authorization to drive a taxicab would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare
of residents of the City, the City Clerk shall authorize the individual to drive a taxicab. Names of authorized drivers will be made available in the Office
of the City Clerk during regular business hours and on the City website.
3. Driver authorization shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance.
C. 1. Beginning March 1, 2015, each driver while operating a taxicab, which includes a prearranged ride, shall prominently display in locations in both the
front and rear compartments a picture identification card that is visible to all passengers. The City shall provide the picture identification card and shall
approve the locations where it is displayed.
2. Prior to March 1, 2015, each driver while operating a taxicab in the City, shall prominently display in locations in both the front and rear
compartments an identification card that is visible to all passengers which is issued by the taxicab business showing the full name of the driver and
the taxicab business. The card must be at least eight and one-half inches (81/2") in width and five and one-half inches (51/2") in height. The City
issued identification card satisfies this provision.
D. No driver shall smoke while transporting a passenger. No driver shall allow a passenger to smoke.
E. No driver shall take a circuitous route to a destination, or any route other than the most direct route, without the express consent of the passenger.
F. No driver operating a network taxicab, unless it is also a metered taxicab, may solicit potential passengers. "Solicit" means an appeal by words or
gestures for immediate patronage of a taxi. A network taxicab driver shall not direct people to a network taxicab that is parked, stopped, standing or
moving upon the street.
G. No driver operating a network taxicab, unless it also is a metered taxicab, may accept or respond to passengers' or potential passengers' request for
service via traditional street hail, including hand gestures and verbal statements. (Ord. 15-4806, 2-9-2015)
H. "Shared ride" means a taxi ride in which one or more passengers expressly request to share a ride with one or more additional passengers. No driver
may request a passenger to share a ride, and no driver shall pick up an additional passenger at any point after the taxi ride begins without the express
request of the passengers in the taxicab. If shown on the rate card, the driver may charge a fee for each passenger ("extra passenger fee") who shares
the ride. (Ord. 15-4611, 2-23-2015)
I. A network taxicab is not a "commercial vehicle" for purposes of the parking restrictions in title 9, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-5: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided herein, each taxicab shall be subject to an annual inspection, and no taxicab shall pass inspection unless it complies with this
chapter, the vehicle equipment requirements of the Code of Iowa, and administrative rules. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
B. The City may require reinspection of a taxicab on belief that it is not mechanically fit.
1. In the event any taxicab is determined by the City Equipment Superintendent or designee not to be mechanically fit, the decal shall be confiscated
and returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and determination that the taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new decal will be
issued and charged as established by Council resolution.
2. The Police Chief or designee may require reinspection of a taxicab on belief that it is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person. In the
event any taxicab is determined by the Police Chief or designee to be in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, the decal shall be
confiscated and returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and determination that the taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new
decal will be issued and charged as established by Council resolution.
3. In the event any network taxicab is determined by the City Equipment Superintendent or designee not to be mechanically fit, the City shall notify the
network representative, and the network representative must immediately deny the driver access to the network's system. After reinspection and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 77/715
determination that the taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, the City shall notify the network representative and the driver may be
allowed access to the network's system.
C. In order to solicit passengers, be hailed, or be dispatched to a passenger, a metered taxicab business and driver, and pedicabs and horsedrawn
vehicles as applicable, must meet the following requirements: (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
1. Taximeter: All taxicabs must be equipped with a taximeter that is in good operating order.
a. A taximeter that is not a soft taximeter shall be calibrated and sealed by a certified calibrator. Dated documentation must be provided to the City
Equipment Superintendent, on a form provided by the City, with each inspection and filed with the City Clerk when the inspection is completed.
Calibration date must be within thirty (30) days prior to the annual inspection.
b. A soft taximeter shall be certified by a third party as required by the City Clerk within thirty (30) days prior to the annual inspection. The certification
shall include requirements that the device is programmed remotely by an authorized representative and is password protected.
c. Signage must be conspicuously displayed on the inside of a taxicab that states, "If The Meter Is Not Working, This Vehicle Cannot Operate As A
Taxi. Receipt For Fare Available Upon Request." The City may require verification of a certified calibration for taximeters or certification for soft
taximeters without prior notice for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018)
2. Lettering Required: Each taxicab shall have the name of the taxicab business on each side of the vehicle in letters at least four and one-half inches
(41/2") in height. Removable signs and peel off letters shall not be allowed. If a phone number is provided, the number shall be the same number that
appears on the taxicab business application and rate card. All other letters and numbers shall not be greater than three inches (3") in height.
Lettering may be allowed on a window, if approved by the City Equipment Superintendent or designee.
3. Lighted Dome: Every metered taxicab shall have a lighted dome attached permanently to the exterior roof of the taxicab with lettering that identifies
the vehicle as a taxicab visible from the front and back of the taxicab. The lighted dome shall be a minimum size of twelve inches by one inch by
three inches (12" x 1" x 3"). In the event the City Equipment Superintendent or designee determines that the permanent attachment of a dome to the
exterior roof is not possible, the City Equipment Superintendent or designee may approve an alternative placement. If a phone number is provided
the number shall be the same number that appears on the taxicab business application and rate card.
4. Color Scheme: Beginning June 1, 2015, all metered taxicabs must have a unique and distinctive color scheme and design, which must be approved
by the City.
D. Except for pedicabs and horsedrawn vehicles, each taxicab business shall provide a minimum of four (4) taxicabs, and one taxicab shall be in operation
at all times. At least four (4) taxicabs shall be insured and shall have a decal at all times. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
E. Taxicabs that are ten (10) model years old or newer (by way of example, during the calendar year 2016, the model must be 2006 or newer) need only
be inspected annually for color scheme, taximeter, lighted dome, and lettering. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
5-2-6: DECALS:
A. Each taxicab business shall file an application for a decal for each taxicab with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City.
B. No person shall operate a taxicab on any street unless a decal has been issued by the City Clerk, and no taxicab business shall allow a taxicab to be
operated on any street unless a decal has been issued by the City Clerk. The decal shall be attached to the lower corner of the front windshield on the
passenger side. Pedicabs or horsedrawn vehicles shall display the decal on the left rear of the taxicab.
C. If the City Clerk finds that the taxicab business has fully complied with the requirements of this chapter and the City Equipment Superintendent or
designee determines that there is no information which would indicate that issuance of the decal would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a decal for the taxicab.
D. The decal shall be nontransferable as between taxicabs and taxicab businesses.
E. Decals will be issued by the City Clerk on the next business day at least twenty four (24) hours after the filing of a completed application for such decal
with the City Clerk.
F. The taxicab business shall return the decal within two (2) business days of when the vehicle is no longer operating as a taxicab. Additionally, metered
taxicab businesses shall remove the bubble light and lettering within two (2) business days of when the vehicle is no longer operating as a taxicab.
Failure to comply with this provision is grounds to suspend and revoke the taxicab business license.
G. If, after the issuance of a decal, the license plate for the taxicab is changed, the taxicab business shall inform the City Clerk in writing of the new license
plate number and have the City Equipment Supervisor or designee verify that the VIN, license plate number, and decal match. No driver shall operate a
taxicab until the City Equipment Supervisor or designee has verified that the VIN and decal match the new license plate number. No taxicab business
shall allow a taxicab to be operated until the City Equipment Supervisor or designee has verified that the VIN and decal match the new license plate
number. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
H. (Rep. by Ord. 15-4651, 12-15-2015)
I. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle, a horsedrawn vehicle, or a pedicab that has a decal attached to it if the decal is not valid. A decal that is not
valid includes, but is not limited to, the following situations: 1) the decal is outdated; 2) the insurance for the taxicab as required in this chapter has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 78/715
been canceled or otherwise terminated; or 3) the taxicab business has notified the City Clerk that the vehicle is no longer part of its fleet. (Ord. 15-
4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-7: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The taxicab business shall insure each driver consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The minimum limits of the insurance policy shall be determined by the City's risk manager.
C. The taxicab business shall file with the City Clerk evidence of liability insurance coverage in the form of one certificate of insurance that lists all taxicabs
insured. The certificate of insurance must be acceptable to the City.
D. The insurance company must be authorized to do insurance business in the State of Iowa and be acceptable to the City.
E. Insurance coverage for the driver of a network taxicab shall, at a minimum, be for incidents involving the driver during a prearranged ride and shall
provide coverage at all times the driver is engaged in a prearranged ride. Insurance coverage of a metered taxicab, which is not titled in the name of
the business, shall be for incidents involving the driver when the vehicle is operated as a taxicab and shall provide coverage at all times a driver is
operating the taxicab. Insurance coverage of a metered taxicab, which is titled in the name of the business, and pedicabs and horsedrawn vehicles,
shall be for all incidents.
F. Notwithstanding section 5-1-5 of this title, the cancellation or other termination of an insurance policy required by this chapter shall automatically
suspend the business license. The City Clerk shall immediately issue written notification to the taxicab business of the suspension of the license. The
City Clerk will schedule a suspension hearing before the City Manager or designee in the same manner as in section 5-1-5 of this title. If the taxicab
business obtains insurance coverage that complies with this chapter prior to the hearing on the suspension, the City Clerk may withdraw the
suspension and cancel the hearing. Upon the City Clerk suspending the license, the taxicab business shall return all decals to the City Clerk. If the
suspension of the business license is subsequently withdrawn, the taxicab business must apply for new decals in accordance with the terms of this
chapter and at its expense. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-8: RATES:
A. Rates must be based on time, distance, or a combination thereof.
B. Taxicab businesses and drivers shall provide rate information to all passengers in at least one of the following ways:
1. A web based application system that minimally provides:
a. The total fare or fare range is clearly displayed on the application and the passenger positively acknowledges he or she agrees to the rate
structure being charged for the ride requested before the ride is confirmed. All other rates, charges, or fees are prohibited.
b. Upon completion of the prearranged ride, the driver or taxicab business shall transmit to the passenger an electronic receipt, either by electronic
mail or text message. The receipt shall document the point of origin and destination of the ride, the total distance and duration of the ride, the total
fare paid, and the driver's first name.
c. No taxicab business or driver shall charge a fare that exceeds the amount communicated through a web based application.
2. A rate card that is prominently displayed to all passenger seats and each driver shall provide a copy of said card to a passenger, when requested. A
copy of the rate card shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
a. A rate based on distance includes destination rates. Except for destination rates, all rates based on time and/or distance must utilize a taximeter.
All other rates, charges, or fees, except for a surcharge, extra passenger fee and cleanup fee, are prohibited. Only one rate may be certified by the
calibrator at one time, and said rate must match the rate card filed in the City Clerk's Office and verified by the City Equipment Superintendent or
designee. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
b. No driver of a metered taxicab shall operate a taxicab without utilizing a taximeter that has been calibrated by a certified calibrator and inspected
or certified as required by the City Clerk if a soft taximeter.
c. Whenever the taxicab business desires to change the rate charged, the taxicab business shall file a rate card with the City Clerk setting forth the
new rates.
(1) For taximeters that are not soft taximeters, the business must have all taximeters recalibrated by a certified calibrator on a form provided by the
City and returned to the City Clerk no later than ten (10) business days after filing the new rates with the City Clerk. The business must have the
taximeter recalibrated by a certified calibrator no sooner than the filing date of a rate card change and no later than ten (10) business days after
said filing date. The business must have all taximeters recalibrated by a certified calibrator before the business may again change the rate
charged.
(2) For soft taximeters, the business must have all soft taximeters certified as required by the City Clerk no later than ten (10) business days after
filing the new rates with the City Clerk. The business must have the certification completed no sooner than the filing date of a rate card change
and no later than ten (10) business days after said filing date. The business must have all soft taximeters certified before the business may
again change the rate charged. (Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018)
3. No taxicab business or driver shall charge a fare exceeding the amount communicated to passengers through a web based application, rate card, or
taximeter. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 79/715
5-2-9: HORSEDRAWN VEHICLES:
A. Routes: A horsedrawn vehicle applicant must adhere to the routes specified in the application for a license. A new or temporary route must be filed with
the City Clerk before an applicant may use such route.
B. Removal Of Animal Waste1:
1. All horses pulling horsedrawn vehicles shall be equipped with adequate devices to prevent manure and other excrement from falling on the streets of
the City.
2. Any excrement which falls on the City streets shall be removed immediately at the applicant's expense.
3. All animal waste for disposal shall be transported to sites or facilities legally empowered to accept it for treatment or disposal.
C. Animal Treatment And Health:
1. Treatment Of Animals:
a. Applicants shall assure adequate rest periods, feeding schedules, health and related animal performance and well being for each animal under the
applicant's ownership, care or control. This responsibility shall include carriage load limits, hours of operation and daily hours of animal usage.
b. The feeding of an animal drawing a horsedrawn vehicle from a feedbag or bucket along any street or alley is permitted so long as the animal is not
permitted to graze.
c. No animal shall be left unattended while in service.
2. Health Certificate:
a. For each animal that will be pulling a horsedrawn vehicle, the applicant shall provide to the City Clerk a certificate of soundness, issued by a
veterinarian licensed by the State, finding each animal to be free from infectious disease, in good health and fit for hack and carriage service under
this chapter.
b. After initial inspection, each animal shall be reinspected at intervals of no more than six (6) months, and a certificate of soundness shall be issued
by a veterinarian and filed with the City Clerk in order for each animal to remain in service.
D. Equipment Requirements:
1. Every horsedrawn vehicle shall conform to such requirements as may be imposed by State law with respect to equipment.
2. Each vehicle shall be equipped with rubber tires. (Ord. 06-4243, 11-14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007; amd. Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-10: REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND AUTHORIZATIONS:
Licenses and authorizations issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in section 5-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-11: FEES:
Fees for licenses, decals, inspections, and authorizations shall be set by Council resolution. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-12: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The City Manager and City Clerk, and their designees, are authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance adopted by the
City Council. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the City Clerk and available on the City website. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-13: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or Municipal infraction. The fine for a simple misdemeanor shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), and the civil penalty for a Municipal infraction shall be as provided in subsection 1-4-2B of this Code. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
Chapter 3
MASSAGE BUSINESS INFORMATION REQUIREMENT
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST (OR LMT): Means an individual who has a license issued by the State of Iowa to perform massage therapy.
MASSAGE THERAPY: Means the same as it does in the massage therapy licensing provision in the State Code found at section 152C.1 of the Code of
Iowa: performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage including
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 80/715
hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration and topical applications, or other therapy which involves manipulation of the muscle and
connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health, muscle relaxation,
increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving circulation. "Reflexology", as defined in section 152C.1 of the Code of Iowa, is not
massage therapy.
MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS: Means a place of business where "massage therapy" is practiced or administered. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-2: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No massage business shall employ or contract with a person to perform massage therapy unless the person is an LMT. No person shall perform massage
therapy unless the person is an LMT, unless exempted from chapter 152C of the Code of Iowa. No business shall engage in or offer to engage in the
practice of massage therapy, or use the initials "L. M. T." or the words "licensed massage therapist", "massage therapist", "masseur", "masseuse", or any
other word or title that implies or represents that a person practices massage therapy at the business, unless the person is an LMT. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-
2018)
5-3-3: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
A. A massage business shall immediately produce upon request by City staff certain information on a form provided by the City entitled "Business
Information Form". The "Business Information Form" shall be available from the City Clerk and on the City's website.
B. The "Business Information Form" shall include the following information:
1. Name of the business;
2. Names of all LMTs employed or contracted by the business and their State license numbers;
3. Names and addresses of all other persons who work on the business premises whether employees or independent contractors of the business along
with a description of the work performed;
4. Name(s) of the business owner;
5. Name(s) and mailing address(es) of all individuals who have an ownership interest in the business;
6. Name, email address, telephone number, and residential address of the manager of the business who must be an Iowa resident; and
7. Name of the commercial tenant leasing the business premises.
C. To confirm the identity of the LMT on the Business Information Form, a government issued photo identification card of the LMT shall be provided upon
request of City staff. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-4: PLACARDING:
A. If the "Business Information Form" containing all the required information is not immediately produced to City staff upon request, the business premises
may be placarded. If the "Business Information Form" that is produced is either inaccurate or incomplete, the business may be placarded.
B. If a business premises is placarded, no person shall enter the business premises.
C. No person shall remove the placard.
D. The business premises shall remain placarded until the "Business Information Form" containing the information is provided to City staff and is complete
and accurate. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-5: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. A massage therapy business that has a permit for a home occupation.
B. A business that employs or contracts with a person who is exempt from chapter 152C of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-6: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code or a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-
4766, 9-4-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 81/715
Title 6
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED/VACANT BUILDING: Any building or portion of a building which is: a) unoccupied and unsecured; or b) unoccupied and secured by means
other than those used in the design of the building; or c) declared a dangerous building under the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings;
or d) unoccupied and unfit for occupancy as determined by a government agency; or e) unoccupied and has housing and building code violations; or
f) unoccupied for a continuous period of time over one hundred eighty (180) calendar days.
COMPOST PILE: A collection of yard waste, such as grass, leaves, trees, brush and garden residue, and also including raw and uncooked kitchen food
wastes but specifically excluding bones, meat, fat, grease, oil, raw manure and milk products, which collection is screened from the street view, is located
in a confined area, is no larger than twenty five (25) square feet in area, is located more than twenty feet (20') from a habitable structure and at least five
feet (5') from a property boundary line, is located more than five feet (5') from any wood structure, excluding fences, is not located in a natural drainageway
and is not located in the area between any building and the street right of way and is collected for reuse as a soil amendment.
DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be
deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its
occupants are endangered.
A. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
B. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
C. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (11/2) times the
working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
D. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
E. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
F. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or
is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
G. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.
H. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 1) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 2) faulty construction; 3) the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 4) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or 5) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
I. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
J. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base.
K. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
L. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become: 1) an attractive nuisance to children; 2) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 3) enable persons to resort thereto for
the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 82/715
M. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to
such building or structure provided by the building regulation, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or ordinance of this
state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
N. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty six percent (66%) of the: 1)
strength, 2) fire resisting qualities or characteristics, or 3) weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly
constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
O. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official officer to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
P. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire
resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire
hazard.
Q. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
R. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance
or hazard to the public.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city manager or designee.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Those wastes included by definition in chapter 455B, code of Iowa, as amended, and the rules of the Iowa administrative code, as
amended.
INOPERABLE/OBSOLETE VEHICLE1: Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street,
excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include, but not be limited to, motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof, and not licensed for the current year as required by law and/or
which exhibits any one of the following characteristics:
A. Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken windshield or any other broken glass.
B. Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, trunk top or tailpipe.
C. Any vehicle lacking an engine or one or more wheels or other structural parts which renders such vehicle totally inoperable.
D. Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which is a habitat for rats, mice or snakes or any other vermin or insects.
E. Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
F. Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse gears.
JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Any discarded or salvaged building material or fixture; any obsolete or inoperable machinery and/or equipment or parts
thereof; scrap iron or steel.
NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES: Substances, solid or fluid, which are offensive, detrimental to health, hurtful or dangerous. "Noxious substances" shall include,
but not be limited to, any dead animal or portion thereof, together with human or animal excrement.
OWNER: The person or persons who are the record owners of real property, together with any person having a property interest in the property, including
legal or equitable interests.
PROPERTY: Includes both real property, such as land or buildings, as well as personal property, such as vehicles and appliances.
REFUSE: Any waste that is putrescible, nonputrescible, combustible or noncombustible, including, but not limited to, paper, garbage, material resulting
from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food, vegetable or animal matter, offal, rubbish, yard waste such as tree
trimmings or grass cuttings, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, construction debris and solid industrial waste.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person having possession or control of real or personal property, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the
following:
A. Agent.
B. Assignee or collector of rents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 83/715
C. Contract seller or contract purchaser.
D. Holder of a deed.
E. Mortgagee or vendee in possession.
F. Receiver, executor, administrator or trustee.
G. Lessee and lessor.
H. Other person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity exercising apparent control over a property.
UNOCCUPIED: A building in which there is a lack of physical presence on a regular basis for the purpose for which it was erected or a building unfit for
occupancy due to failure to meet minimum standards set out by city ordinance for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include, but not be limited to, motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof, whether or not licensed for the current year. (1978 Code §24-102; amd. 1994 Code; Ord.
00-3954, 12-19-2000; Ord. 01-3963, 4-3-2001; Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
6-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED; PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Whatever is injurious to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property by the public or community shall be deemed a "public nuisance". Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Accumulation Of Solid Waste And Noxious Materials2:
1. Causing, permitting or allowing any refuse, solid waste, garbage, noxious substances, hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials to be collected
or to remain in any place.
2. Causing, permitting or allowing any refuse, solid waste, garbage, noxious substances or hazardous wastes, junk, salvage material or other offensive
substances to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure, lot, whether vacant or
occupied, or upon any pond or pool of water, except for:
a. Solid waste deposited and stored in accordance with provisions of title 16, chapter 3, article H of this code.
b. Any compost pile located or maintained in compliance with this chapter so as to allow its proper aeration.
c. Junk or salvage materials properly stored in a junk or salvage yard permitted under title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code3.
B. Diseased Or Damaged Trees Or Plant Materials4: Any dead, diseased or damaged trees or plant materials which may harbor serious insect or disease
pests or disease injurious to other trees or plant materials, or any healthy tree in such a state of deterioration that any part of such tree is likely to fall
and damage property or cause injury to persons.
C. Weeds: Any condition relating to weeds described as a nuisance in chapter 3 of this title.
D. Ditch, Drain Or Stormwater Detention Basins5:
1. Any ditch, drain or watercourse which is now or hereafter may be constructed so as to prevent or unduly interfere with the surface and overflow
water drainage from adjacent lands.
2. Any stormwater detention basin not properly maintained as determined by the city engineer.
E. Stagnant Water: Stagnant water standing on any property, including any container or material kept in such a condition that water can accumulate and
stagnate.
F. Vermin And Pests:
1. Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of vermin.
2. Infestations of vermin, such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats, starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches or flies.
G. Private Sewer Facilities6:
1. Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools and drainfields, which have
failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors.
2. Septic tanks, cisterns and cesspools which are abandoned or no longer in use unless properly emptied and filled with clean fill.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 84/715
3. Any vault, cesspool or septic tank which does not comply with the county department of health regulations. (1978 Code §24-101; amd. 1994 Code)
H. Abandoned, Vacant Or Dangerous Buildings:
1. Vacant buildings, or vacant portions of buildings.
2. Abandoned buildings.
3. Dangerous buildings or structures. (Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000)
I. Hazardous Conditions:
1. Generally: Any hazardous thing or condition on property which may contribute to injury of any person present on the property. Hazards shall include,
but not be limited to, open holes, open foundations, open wells, dangerous trees or limbs, abandoned refrigerators and trapping devices.
2. Fire Hazards: Any thing or condition on property creating a fire hazard, as determined by the fire marshal, or in violation of the fire code.
3. Health Hazards: Any thing or condition on property creating an imminent threat to human health or in violation of any health or sanitation law.
J. Noisy Conditions: Any violation of chapter 4 of this title.
K. Snow Removal7: Any violation of ice and snow removal provisions set forth in section 16-1A-8 of this code.
L. Junkyard Or Salvage Operations: All junkyard or salvage operations, as defined in title 14 of this code, except as permitted by ordinance8.
M. Obstructing Public Ways And Property:
1. The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, structures, signs or otherwise of public streets, alleys, sidewalks and commons, except as
permitted by agreement, easement, permit or ordinance.
2. Any gathering of persons or vehicles upon a public street or sidewalk or any use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk which obstructs
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other lawful use of streets or sidewalks, except as permitted by permit or ordinance9.
N. Depositing Mud, Dirt And Debris On Public Ways: The depositing or allowing the depositing of any mud, dirt, gravel or other debris in violation of title
16, chapter 1 of this code.
O. Inoperable/Obsolete Vehicle: The storage, parking, leaving or permitting the storage, parking or leaving of an inoperable/obsolete vehicle upon private
property within the city for a period in excess of forty eight (48) hours unless excepted herein. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed
within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a junkyard or auto and truck oriented use operated in accordance with the
zoning laws of this code.
P. Unlawful Sale Or Manufacture Of Liquors10: Any building or place in or upon which intoxicating liquors are unlawfully manufactured, sold or kept with
intent to sell in such a manner as to become offensive. (1978 Code §24-101; amd. 1994 Code)
Q. Building Construction Sites: Building construction sites maintained in violation of the building code. (1978 Code §24-101; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-
4098, 9-23-2003)
R. Graffiti Vandalism: All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism which is visible to the public view. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997; amd. Ord. 03-4098, 9-23-
2003)
S. Consumption On Unlicensed Premises: Any building, place or premises where food, beverages or entertainment is sold or provided for compensation,
or where persons are charged to enter, upon which alcoholic beverages are consumed between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Monday through Saturday, and between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday, when said building, place or premises has not
been issued a liquor control license or wine or beer permit. (Ord. 08-4304, 4-29-2008)
6-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
A. The creation or maintenance of a public nuisance is unlawful and prohibited, subject to penalties set forth in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-
4044, 10-8-2002)
B. The city manager or designee is authorized to abate public nuisances by either the municipal infraction process or administratively. Administrative
procedures shall be established by the city manager or designee and shall be available for public inspection in the department of housing and
inspection services or its successor. (1978 Code §24-103; amd. 1994 Code)
6-1-4: ABATEMENT REMEDIES; PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 85/715
A. Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to, repair, removal, cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining, securing,
repairing a building or structure, boarding unoccupied buildings, barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures and
demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings.
B. The cost of abatement may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property taxes as provided by state law. Abatement
costs shall include the cost of removing or eliminating the public nuisance, the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and testing, the
cost of notification, filing costs and other related administrative costs. Inoperable/obsolete vehicles which have been impounded may be sold in
accordance with state law governing abandoned vehicles. If an inoperable/obsolete vehicle is not sold or if the proceeds of such sale or redemption are
not sufficient for payment of the cost of abatement, storage and sale of said inoperable/obsolete vehicle, such cost or the balance of such cost may be
assessed against the real property from which the vehicle was removed or abated for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by
state law.
C. Abatement remedies and penalties are as provided in chapter 364, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §24-107; amd. 1994 Code)
6-1-5: VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Vacant Building Registration:
1. The owner shall register a vacant or abandoned building with the city not later than thirty (30) calendar days after any building in the city becomes an
"abandoned/vacant building" as defined in this chapter. Failure to register an abandoned/vacant building or providing false information to the city
shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
2. The registration shall include the following information:
a. A description of the premises;
b. The names and addresses of the owner or owners;
c. The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other parties with an ownership interest in the building;
d. The name of the agent designated to act on the behalf of an out of town property owner to accept legal processes and notices, and to authorize
repairs as required; and
e. The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant and/or a plan and timetable to comply with applicable city codes.
B. Vacant Building Registration Fees: The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual fee reasonably related to the administrative cost of registering
and processing the vacant building owner registration form and the costs of the city in monitoring and inspecting the vacant building site. This fee shall
be established by resolution of the city council and shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any permits or acceptance of the registration form for the
subject property.
C. Inspections: The owner shall allow inspections upon request and allow annual inspections of the interior and exterior of the premises for the purpose of
enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter and housing and building codes. (Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000)
6-1-6: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
When the city manager or designee determines that a public nuisance exists on a property and the public nuisance constitutes an imminent and
compelling danger to health, safety or welfare of persons or property, the city manager or designee is authorized to abate or have abated the public
nuisance without prior notice and opportunity of hearing. Administrative procedures for such emergency abatement shall be set forth by rule and approved
by the city council. The costs of such action may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property taxes. However, prior to
such assessment, the city shall first seek abatement as a municipal infraction or other equitable action and provide the offending party and/or property
owner an opportunity to appear and be heard. (1978 Code §24-108; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000)
6-1-7: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-
2002)
Chapter 2
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CLEANUP: The same as set out in section 455B.381(1), code of Iowa, as amended.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION: The same as set out in section 455B.381(4), code of Iowa, as amended.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined in section 455B.381(5), code of Iowa, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 86/715
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Those wastes which are included in the definition in chapter 455B, code of Iowa, as amended, and the rules of the Iowa
administrative code, as amended.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which
creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs,
whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous
substance.
TREATMENT: A method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition
of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance nonhazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage
or to reduce it in volume. "Treatment" includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous
substance to render it nonhazardous. (1978 Code §24-160; amd. 1994 Code)
6-2-2: NOTIFICATION OF APPROPRIATE DEPARTMENTS:
The first city officer or employee who arrives at the scene of an incident involving hazardous substances, if not a peace officer, shall notify the police
department which shall notify the appropriate state department which requires notification as provided by state law. (1978 Code §24-162; amd. 1994
Code)
6-2-3: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
A. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous waste or substance, so that
the hazardous substance or waste or a constituent of the hazardous waste or substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup as required by state
or federal law.
B. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the city
may, by an authorized officer, give to the responsible person reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting
deadlines for commencing and completing the cleanup and stating that in the event the responsible person fails to comply with said deadlines, the city
may proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all reasonable expenses associated with the cleanup. (1978 Code §24-
161; amd. 1994 Code)
6-2-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-
2002)
Chapter 3
WEED CONTROL
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CHEMICAL CONTROL: The application of a herbicide (weed killer) in strict accordance with the directions on the product and the regulations of the code
of Iowa and the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
CONSERVATION AREA: An area of property that is planted with ground cover plants of a size and texture compatible with the environment and
maintained accordingly.
DEVELOPED LOT OR AREA: An improved or commercial lot; an improved area of land.
FIRE MARSHAL: The city fire marshal or designee.
GROUND COVER: Plants with the growth and root capacity to cover and stabilize an area of soil and to prevent erosion.
LAND: Includes land, buildings, structures, tenements, hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein, equitable as well as legal.
NATURAL AREA: An area of land allowed to retain native plant material in a natural prairie state.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Primary and secondary classes of weeds as defined by the code of Iowa and the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
PARKING: That part of the street, avenue or highway in the city not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; on unpaved
streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying between the lot lines and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
PLANT: Shall include all manner of vegetation, including, but not limited to, grass, shrubs, trees and weeds, excluding cut firewood and compost piles.
RIGHT OF WAY: The entire width of a platted street or alley, whether the width is in use for travel or is undeveloped.
SOIL EROSION CONTROL: A method of planting and cultivation, or lack of same, designed to retain soil and to prevent soil movement caused by natural
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 87/715
or human causes.
UNDEVELOPED LOT OR AREA: An unimproved lot or area of land.
UNMOWED OR UNTENDED AREA: An area of land allowed to grow without care and supervision, where weeds and grasses are more than ten inches
(10") in height.
WEED OFFICIAL: Person designated by the city manager to enforce this chapter.
WEEDS: Any plants growing uncultivated and out of context with the surrounding plant life with a height of ten inches (10") or more or when such plant has
a seed head forming or formed. (1978 Code §34-70; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 06-4232, 9-5-2006; Ord. 11-4429, 5-17-2011)
6-3-2: NUISANCES DECLARED1; VIOLATIONS:
The failure of a person owning, controlling or in possession of property to observe any of the following requirements shall be subject to the penalties
provided in subsection 1-4-2D of this code: (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
A. Duty To Cut Noxious Weeds: Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any land shall cut or otherwise destroy, in whatever manner
prescribed by the weed official, all noxious weeds thereon and shall keep said lands free of such growth. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Developed And Undeveloped Lots; Weeds Removal; Grass Cutting: Each owner and each person in possession or control of any developed or
undeveloped lot or land area shall be responsible to keep said lot or land area, along with the parking adjacent thereto, alleys, public ways or land
areas up to the centerline of said ways free of any weeds and to keep grasses on said land mowed so that said grass is less than ten inches (10") in
height. (Ord. 11-4429, 5-17-2011)
C. Obstructing Public Ways: Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any lands shall not allow any plant growth of any sort to remain
in such a manner as to render the streets, alleys or public ways adjoining said land unsafe for public travel or in any manner so as to impede
pedestrians or vehicular traffic upon any public place or way. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Interference With Weed Official: No persons shall interfere with the weed official or any appointed assistant while engaged in the enforcement of this
chapter. (1978 Code §34-72)
E. Watercourses:
1. Where waterways or watercourses are found upon any developed or undeveloped lot or land area, the owner or person in possession or control of
the land shall keep the flat or level part of the bank of said waterway free of any weeds and grasses more than ten inches (10") in height.
2. Should such waterways or watercourses be found within the right of way of a street or alley, the owner or person in possession or control of the
adjacent land shall be responsible to keep the flat or accessible portion of the creek bank free of any weeds and the grasses more than ten inches
(10") in height. (Ord. 11-4429, 5-17-2011)
F. Fire Hazards: No owner or person in possession or control of any developed or undeveloped lots or land areas shall allow plant growth or accumulation
of plant materials so as to constitute a fire hazard, as determined by the fire marshal. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994 Code)
6-3-3: NATURAL AREAS:
A. Designation Of Natural Areas:
1. The weed official, upon application of the owner or person in possession or control of any land, may designate such land or portion thereof as a
natural or conservation area. Prior to designating such area, the weed official shall consider the following factors: grade and incline of said land, the
difficulty to control or maintain such land, whether said land is being maintained as either a soil erosion control area or a conservation area. Any
person affected by the designation or lack thereof may appeal said determination to the city manager or designee.
2. Any protected sensitive area and associated buffer designated on an approved sensitive areas site plan or sensitive areas development plan under
the provisions of the sensitive areas ordinance (title 14, chapter 5, article I of this code) shall be considered a natural area. (Ord. 95-3704, 12-19-
1995)
B. Natural Or Conservation Areas: Natural or conservation areas need not be mowed and shall be left in their natural state, except all noxious weeds shall
be removed or controlled.
C. Public Ways Near Conservation Areas: Sidewalks or other public ways that lie adjacent to or extend through a natural or conservation area shall be
open and free from any obstructions to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. (1978 Code §34-74)
6-3-4: EMERGENCY CONTROL MEASURES:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever in the judgment of the weed official, the fire marshal or the city engineer, a property exhibits
uncontrolled weed growth which creates a health, safety or fire hazard, the weed official may undertake immediate action to abate said condition without
prior notice and opportunity for hearing. The costs of such action may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 88/715
taxes as provided by state law. However, prior to such assessment, the city shall give written notice to the property owner, by certified mail, and the
opportunity for an administrative hearing. (1978 Code §34-76; amd. 1994 Code)
6-3-5: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-
2002)
Chapter 4
NOISE CONTROL
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMPLIFIED SOUND: To increase sound in intensity and duration by electrical, electronic, mechanical or other nonhuman means, including an electronic
device.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound for which the information content of the sound is transferred to the listener such as, but not limited to, understanding of
spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or lowered or comprehension of musical rhythms.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place owned or controlled by the city, including any structure or park.
REAL PROPERTY LINE: An imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions.
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE: Radio, tape player, disc player, loudspeaker, digital audio player, portable media player or other electric, electronic or
mechanical device that produces or reproduces sound. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-2: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall play or operate, or permit the playing or operating of, a sound production device within a motorized vehicle that is plainly audible by any
person: 1) either across a real property line or at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the vehicle; and 2) for more than thirty (30) continuous
seconds.
B. No person shall cause or create, or permit the causing or creating of, a noise disturbance that is plainly audible by any person: 1) either across a real
property line or at a distance of fifty feet (50'); and 2) for more than thirty (30) continuous seconds.
C. No person shall use amplified sound in City Plaza except with a permit authorized in title 10 of this code.
D. No person shall use amplified sound in violation of section 8-5-5 of this code.
E. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects outdoors between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following morning as to create a noise disturbance across the property line of
residentially zoned property.
F. No person shall unload or handle garbage dumpsters or similar objects outdoors between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. the following morning as to create a noise disturbance across the property line of residentially zoned property.
G. No person shall operate construction equipment before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless a permit therefor has been
obtained from the city engineer. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
The provisions herein shall not apply to:
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the time of day, the existence of an emergency or the approved testing thereof.
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work, including snow removal and maintenance of trees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 89/715
C. Emergency vehicles, such as firetrucks and ambulances.
D. Essential services, such as electrical substations and safety devices.
E. Construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. "Maintenance activities" shall be nonroutine
operations, temporary in nature and conducted infrequently.
F. Cement sawing of freshly poured concrete street, alley, sidewalk or road surface.
G. Any person emitting sound pursuant to a permit under title 10 of this code.
H. Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in
which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events.
I. Events conducted by affiliated groups, as that term is defined in title 10, chapter 1 of this code or if, sponsored or funded, in whole or in part, by a
governmental entity.
J. Equipment used for political advertisements.
K. Equipment used for public health and safety purposes.
L. Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes or other reasonable sounding of devices from houses of worship.
M. Parades, processions or other public events for which a parade or other permit has been issued, provided the conditions of the permit are complied
with.
N. Car or truck horns or similar devices when used to denote danger or a warning or possible danger. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D1 of this code or a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00). (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
Chapter 5
NUCLEAR WEAPONS FREE ZONE
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the city as a nuclear weapons free zone in which work on nuclear weapons is prohibited. The people of the city
find that the presence of nuclear weapons facilities within the city is in direct conflict with the maintenance of the community's public health, safety, morals,
economic well being and general welfare. (1978 Code §24-142)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPONENT OF A NUCLEAR WEAPON: Any device, radioactive or nonradioactive, designed to be installed in and contribute to the operation of a
nuclear weapon.
NUCLEAR WEAPON: Any device, the purpose of which is use as a weapon, a weapon prototype or a weapon test device, the intended detonation of
which results from the energy released by fission and/or fusion reactions involving atomic nuclei. "Nuclear weapon" also includes the weapon's guidance,
transportation, propulsion, triggering and detonation systems.
PERSON: A natural person, as well as a corporation, institution or other entity. (1978 Code §24-143)
6-5-3: NUCLEAR WEAPONS WORK PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly engage in work within the city, the purpose of which is the development, production, deployment, launching, maintenance or
storage of nuclear weapons or components of nuclear weapons. (1978 Code §24-144)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 90/715
6-5-4: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate city officials shall post signs on major entrances to the city stating "Nuclear Weapons Free Zone" in a manner that conforms with standards set
forth in the federal highway administration's "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways", as amended. (1978 Code §24-146;
amd. 1994 Code)
6-5-5: PENALTIES1:
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
B. Residents of the city shall also have the right to enforce this chapter by appropriate private civil actions for declaratory or injunctive relief. Reasonable
attorney fees shall be awarded to a prevailing plaintiff in such litigation. (1978 Code §24-145)
Chapter 6
OPEN BURNING
6-6-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, allow or maintain any open fire. (1978 Code §24-170)
6-6-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Open burning of the following types may be permitted, in compliance with fire department guidelines, with a valid open burning permit from the fire
department:
1. Ceremonial Or Controlled Bonfires: Ceremonial or controlled bonfires may be permitted.
2. Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, may be permitted for the duration of the disaster in cases where an
officially declared emergency exists.
3. Prescribed Agricultural Burns: The open burning of fields may be permitted if necessary for the maintenance of native prairie grass. "Fields", for the
purposes of this chapter, means an open land area more than fifty feet (50') from a building or wooded areas.
4. Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public, institutional or industrial employees in the methods of
firefighting.
5. Flare Stacks: Open burning or flaring of waste gas may be permitted.
B. Open burning for campfires and outdoor cooking is permitted without any burning permit if performed in an approved container constructed of steel,
brick or masonry. (1978 Code §24-171; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Open burning in portable, outdoor fireplaces is permitted. (Ord. 02-4034, 8-20-2002)
6-6-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Chapter 7
SMOKING IN FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 03-4085, 6-10-2003)
Chapter 8
PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PUBLIC BUSES
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 91/715
For purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle operated by the city of Iowa City to provide public transportation service within the city, for a fare, shall be a
"bus". (Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996)
6-8-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No passenger on any bus shall do any of the following acts:
A. Smoke or possess any lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette.
B. Possess open containers of alcoholic beverage or consume alcoholic beverage.
C. Destroy, deface, soil or remove any part of any bus.
D. Spit, urinate, or defecate in or upon or from any part of any bus.
E. Throw, deposit or place any paper, bottles, cans or any other solid waste in or upon any bus except in a designated trash receptacle.
F. Throw any object of any kind within any bus.
G. Throw any object of any kind out any door, window or opening of any bus.
H. Play or operate any radio, television, tape player, record player or similar electronic sound amplification device unless the sound therefrom can only be
heard through an earphone and is totally inaudible to all other passengers.
I. Bring any pet or animal onto any bus. Animals trained to assist persons with disabilities are exempted from this subsection.
J. Stand or remain in front of any white line marked on the forward end of the floor of any bus while the same is in motion or after being asked to step back
behind the white line by the driver.
K. Interfere with the driver's operation of a bus.
L. Engage in fighting or violent behavior, make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to an occupant or operator of the bus, or direct
abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996)
6-8-3: DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY:
The driver or personnel supervising the operation of a bus shall advise a passenger who is violating any of the foregoing subsections that the prohibited
conduct must cease, and that the passenger may be required to leave the bus if the prohibited conduct does not stop. If the passenger does not comply
with the driver's direction, the driver shall immediately contact a supervisor and/or the Iowa City police to report the prohibited conduct. A supervisor or a
police officer who finds that the passenger has engaged in prohibited conduct may remove the passenger from the bus. (Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996)
6-8-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be a violation of this code to engage in conduct prohibited by this chapter. Such violation may be prosecuted as a simple misdemeanor or as a
municipal infraction, as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996)
Chapter 9
GRAFFITI
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DEFACE: To alter the appearance of something by removing, distorting, adding to, or covering all or a part of it.
GRAFFITI VANDALISM: Defacing public or private real property by painting, drawing, writing, etching, or carving by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife, or
any similar method.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 92/715
REAL PROPERTY: Land and whatever is constructed or growing upon or affixed to land, including fences and walls. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997)
6-9-2: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE; REGULATION:
All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism which is visible to the public view is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to city
abatement procedures if not removed within seven (7) calendar days from the date of written notice from the city. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997)
6-9-3: NOTIFICATION TO ABATE NUISANCE:
The owner of any real property located within the city which is defaced by graffiti vandalism shall be notified of such graffiti vandalism by the city prior to
any city abatement procedures. Such notice shall be in written form and shall direct the property owner to remove or eradicate the graffiti vandalism from
the real property within seven (7) calendar days from the date of such notice. The notice shall be sent by first class mail and shall contain:
A. A description of the real property upon which the graffiti vandalism occurred and a description of the nature of the vandalism;
B. A demand that the owner remove or eradicate the graffiti vandalism from the real property within seven (7) calendar days from the date of such notice;
and
C. A statement that warns that the owner's failure or refusal to remove or eradicate the graffiti vandalism may result in the city's commencement of
abatement procedures, and if the cost of such abatement is not paid to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after a notice of assessment is mailed to
the property owner, such costs may be assessed against the property in the same manner as a property tax as provided by state law. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-
29-1997)
6-9-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-
2002)
Chapter 10
SMOKE FREE PLACES
6-10-1: SMOKE FREE PLACES ITEMIZED:
It is illegal to smoke in a smoke free place. Pursuant to HF 2212, section 5, to be codified at section 142D.5 of the Iowa Code, the City declares the
following areas to be smoke free places:
A. Iowa City Municipal Airport. (Ord. 08-4314, 9-9-2008)
B. Municipal parking ramps except in privately owned vehicles that are not located in the Chauncey Swan Parking Ramp during the farmers' market as
provided in this section.
C. City Plaza except the public alleys. "City Plaza" is defined in section 10-5-2 of this Code.
D. The area between the public library and Linn Street including the sidewalk, as illustrated on the diagram below, and the area within ten feet (10') of a
sidewalk cafe that is not in City Plaza. "Sidewalk cafe" is defined in section 10-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-2010)
E. All City parks except when in a privately owned vehicle. (Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017)
F. Farmers' market beginning thirty (30) minutes prior to the opening of the farmers' market. "Farmers' market" is defined in section 10-11-1 of this Code.
G. The area within fifty feet (50') of any outdoor stage or location where musicians are performing during any outdoor entertainment venues where
members of the general public assemble to witness entertainment events, such as, but not limited to, Arts Fest and Jazz Fest. (Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-
2010; amd. Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017)
H. The streets and adjacent sidewalks along the parade route of the University of Iowa homecoming parade from five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. on Friday evening of the homecoming parade. (Ord. 08-4314, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 93/715
(Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-2010)
6-10-2: ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES:
It is illegal to use an electronic cigarette in any smoke free place listed in section 6-10-1 of this chapter or in any place where chapter 142D of the Iowa
Code prohibits smoking a tobacco product. "Electronic cigarette" means vapor product as defined in section 453A.1 of the code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-4634, 7-
15-2015)
6-10-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 10-4410, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 15-4634, 7-15-
2015)
Title 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Chapter 1
FIRE CODE
7-1-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Iowa City, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, 2018 edition, including errata and appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, and N as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Iowa City, in the State of Iowa regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided, providing for the issuance of permits and each, and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 94/715
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, prescribed in the following sections of this chapter. (Ord.
19-4778, 2-5-2019)
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: Iowa City, Iowa
Section 102.1 Modify by adding a fifth applicability requirement to the end as follows:
5. All A-2 Occupancies that existed prior to August 1, 2007 with an occupant load of 100-298 with an ABDL shall comply with Section 903.2.1.2,
provided that there is a change in business ownership, defined as the sale, transfer, or assignment of any legal or equitable ownership interest,
except that the owner may show to the building official's satisfaction that said change in ownership is one of form and not substance.
Section 104.1.1 Add a new section to read as follows:
The code official and members of the fire prevention bureau shall have the powers of a peace officer in performing their duties under this Code.
Section 104.1.2 Add a new section to read as follows:
The Fire Chief may appoint and designate such members of the Fire Department as fire/police investigators upon being certified by the Iowa Law
Enforcement Academy. Fire/police investigators shall have the powers of a peace officer in performing their duties under this Code, including full
powers of arrest to effectuate their duties of enforcing city ordinances and state statutes. Notwithstanding his/her status as a peace officer, a
fire/police investigator shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Iowa City Fire Department for all purposes and shall perform such functions
as the Fire Chief shall assign.
Section 104.12 Add a new section to read as follows:
The code official is authorized to order an operation or use stopped, or the evacuation of any premises, building, or vehicle or portion thereof which
has or is a fire, life safety or health hazard.
Section 105.2 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Application for an operational permit shall be submitted with all required information not less than 14 days prior to the event requiring a permit.
Section 105.4 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The fire code official at the official's sole discretion may send plans to a qualified agency for review. The fire code official shall designate the plans
review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency. A certificate of occupancy shall not be
issued until the review fees have been paid.
Section 105.6 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The fire code official at their discretion may send plans for operational permits requests to an outside agency for review. The fire code official shall
designate the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency. The permit shall
not be issued until the review fees have been paid.
Section 109. Delete in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof:
See Title 17, Chapter 12 of the City Code.
Section 110.4 Delete the section and replace with:
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or
do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of
this code, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction, as prescribed in Title 1, Chapter 4 of the City Code. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 112.4 Delete the section and replace with:
No person shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 95/715
Section 202 Add a new definition to read as follows:
Code Official. The Chief Officer of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal, or the Chief's authorized representative.
Section 202 Add a new definition to read as follows:
Crowd Management. Crowd management meshes the design features of a facility, the established operating features of that facility, and an
understanding of the occupants' expected natural behavior in that facility for a specific type of event.
Section 202 Add a new definition to read as follows:
Emergency Communication Center. The Johnson County Joint Emergency Communications Center.
Section 202 Add a sentence to the end of Fire Lane definition to read as follows:
See City Code 9-4-13 for additional rules and regulations.
Section 307 See also 6-6 of the City Code.
Section 307.1.2 Add a new section to read as follows:
Hours of operation. A person shall not maintain any outdoor burning from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. unless permitted and approved by the fire code official.
Section 401.9 Add a new section to read as follows:
Building evacuation. Upon activation of the building fire alarm system or upon notification by other means of detecting and reporting unwanted fire, all
building occupants shall promptly evacuate the building.
Exception: When the emergency evacuation plan, as approved by the fire code official, does not require the immediate total evacuation of the
building.
Section 402.1 Add a new definition to read as follows:
Crowd Management. Crowd management meshes the design features of a facility, the established operating features of that facility, and an
understanding of the occupants' expected natural behavior in that facility for a specific type of event.
Section 403.2.5 Add a new section to read as follows:
A-2 Occupancy Crowd Managers. Group A-2 occupancies shall be provided with a minimum of one (1) trained crowd manager anytime occupancy
reaches 50 or more. Where the occupant load exceeds 250, additional trained crowd managers shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) crowd manager
for every 250 occupants. The crowd manager shall annually receive training approved by the fire code official in crowd management techniques.
Section 405.2 Add to the end of the section as follows:
Fire and evacuation drills in Group E occupancies shall be conducted in accordance with Section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa. Emergency
evacuation/fire drills shall be conducted at least four times a year. Not less than two drills shall be conducted between July 1 and December 31 each
year and not less than two drills shall be conducted between January 1 and June 30 of each year. The Iowa City Fire Department shall conduct one
of the two drills between July 1 and December 31 and one of the two drills between January 1 and June 30 of each year. Fire drills in Group R,
Division 2, Fraternities and Sororities, shall be conducted once per academic semester.
Section 405.2 Table Add footnote e. as follows:
Group E occupancies, excluding Preschools and Daycares shall conduct fire and evacuation drills at least four times a year in accordance with
Section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa. Footnote shall be added to Group E occupancy frequency.
Section 503.2.9 Add a new section to read as follows:
Thickness. Fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete conforming to the specifications of the Iowa Department of
Transportation C-3 or M-3 mixes. The concrete access road shall be a minimum of 7 inches thick over compacted soil.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 96/715
Section 505.1 Delete the section and replace with:
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address
numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
From 100-199 ft from the street the number shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inches. From 200-299 ft from the
street the number shall be a minimum of 8 inches high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inches. For each additional 100 ft from the street, the number
shall increase by an additional 2 inches in height. Measurements to determine the minimum number size shall be measured from the approved
address location to the center line of the street for which the premises is addressed. Where access is by means of a private road and the building
cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be
maintained.
Section 506.1 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
An approved key box shall be installed in an approved location on all new construction.
Exception: Group R-3 and unsecured R-2 occupancies.
Section 507.3 Delete the section and replace with:
Fire flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings shall be determined by "Appendix B" of this code.
Section 507.5.1 Delete exceptions 1 & 2.
Section 507.5.1.1 Delete the section and replace with:
Hydrant for fire sprinkler and standpipe systems. A fire hydrant shall be located not more than 100 feet from a fire sprinkler or standpipe system
connection on hard surface, easily accessible by fire apparatus and meeting the approval of the Code Official.
Section 507.5.7 Add a new section to read as follows:
Fire hydrant threads: All new hydrants within the limits of Iowa City installed after January 1, 2020 shall have National Standard Threads (NST) on
the two and one-half (21/2) inch connections and the four and one-half (41/2) inch connection will have a Storz connection.
Section 510.1 Delete exception 1.
Section 604.9 Delete the section and replace with:
Temporary wiring. Temporary wiring for electrical power and lighting installations is allowed for a period not to exceed 90 days for holiday decorative
lighting, carnivals and similar purposes. Temporary wiring methods shall meet the applicable provisions of the Iowa City Electrical Code.
Exception: Temporary wiring for electrical power and lighting installations is allowed during periods of construction, remodeling, repair or
demolition of buildings, structures, equipment or similar activities. Temporary wiring methods shall meet the applicable provisions of the Iowa City
Electrical Code.
Section 604.10 Delete the section and replace with:
Portable electric space heaters. Portable electric space heaters shall comply with Sections 604.10.1 through 604.10.6.
Section 604.10.6 Add a new section to read as follows:
Fully enclosed. Portable, electric space heaters shall be fully enclosed space heaters that by design have no external surfaces that reach
temperatures capable of igniting materials placed against the surface.
Section 606.7 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The Fire Code Official may require an approved elevator key box in an approved location to secure required elevator keys.
Section 607.4 Delete the last sentence and replace with:
Movement of new and existing cooking appliances with caster(s) under a Type 1 hood shall be limited by an approved floor mounted restraining
device and flexible gas connector installed in accordance with the connector and appliance manufacturer's instructions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 97/715
Section 804.5 Add a new section to read as follows:
Maintenance. The interior finish of buildings shall be maintained in accordance with the conditions of original approval. Any change to the interior
finish that is regulated by the provisions of this code or the building code shall be made in accordance with all applicable requirements.
Section 806.1 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Natural or resin-bearing cut trees and natural decorative vegetation used in buildings open to the general public shall be properly treated with an
approved flame retardant.
Section 807.5.2.1 Delete exception 2.
Section 807.5.5.1 Delete exception 2.
Section 901.2(a) Add a new section to read as follows:
Water based fire protection systems. Working plans submitted to the fire department for water based fire protection systems shall be stamped and
approved by a qualified person to be in compliance with applicable NFPA standards and the Iowa City Fire Code. Any changes to the working plans
shall be approved by a qualified person. A qualified person shall have a minimum National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies
[NICET] Level III certification for Automatic Sprinkler System Layout OR be a licensed engineer with experience in life safety system design. Other
qualifications may be approved by the code official.
Section 901.2(b) Add a new section to read as follows:
Fire alarm systems. Working plans submitted to the fire department by a qualified person for fire alarm systems shall be stamped and approved by a
qualified person to be in compliance with applicable NFPA standards and the Iowa City Fire Code. Any changes to the working plans shall be
approved by a qualified person. A qualified person shall have a minimum National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies [NICET]
Level III certification for Fire Alarm Systems OR be a licensed engineer with experience in life safety system design. Other qualifications may be
approved by the code official.
Section 901.6.3.2 Add a new section to read as follows:
Inspection record submission. Contractors who perform installation, inspection, testing, and/or maintenance services on fire and life safety systems
are required to electronically submit all installation and compliant & non-compliant inspection reports to the Fire Department via a method approved
by the Fire Code Official within 30 calendar days of the installation/inspection date. Reports submitted after 30 calendar days may incur late fees.
Section 901.7 Add a section to the end of the section to read as follows:
A person assigned to fire watch must walk through the building at least once every 30 minutes checking for fire or smoke. A fire watch must be
continued until the fire alarm system and/or fire protection system has been restored to normal operating condition or the building has been
evacuated. A competent adult familiar with the building must conduct the fire watch. If a fire is discovered, 911 shall be called immediately and the
building evacuated.
Section 903.2.1.2 Delete Section 903.2.1.2 and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section 903.2.1.2
A. New Group A-2 Occupancies. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-2 occupancies and intervening
floors of the building where one of the following conditions exist:
1) The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet;
2) The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more; or
3) The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.
B. Existing Group A-2 Occupancies that existed prior to August 1, 2007: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the A-2
occupancy with an occupant load of 100 or more that have an ABDL and there is a change in business ownership, defined as the sale, transfer, or
assignment of any legal or equitable ownership interest, except that the owner may show to the building official's satisfaction that said change in
ownership is one of form and not substance.
Section 903.2.1.8 Add a new Section to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 98/715
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used as new Group B occupancies with an ABDL or
existing group B occupancy with a new (not a renewal) ABDL located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. The automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout the floor area where the new Group B occupancy with an ABDL or where the group B occupancy with a new ABDL is
located and in all floors between the Group B occupancy and the level of exit discharge.
Section 903.2.2 Delete the section and replace with:
Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all fire areas containing an ambulatory care facility and all
floors between the ambulatory care facility and the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.
Section 903.3.5.3 Add a new section to read as follows:
Water supply safety margin. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed with a minimum of 10% or 5 psi safety margin (whichever is greater)
above static pressure in the fire protection system hydraulic calculations.
Section 903.4.2 Delete the section and replace with:
Alarms. An approved weatherproof horn/strobe device shall be mounted directly above the fire department connection between seven (7) and ten
(10) feet in height above grade. The water-flow alarm device shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Approved and supervised audible visual notification appliances shall be installed on each level of the
interior of the building as required by the fire code official and NFPA 72.
Section 903.7 Add a new section to read as follows:
Zones. Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and shall provide a sprinkler control valve
and waterflow device for each normally occupied floor. The location of sprinkler control valves must be approved by the fire code official.
Section 905.1.1 Add a new section to read as follows:
Delete all references to Class II standpipe systems and replace with Class III standpipe systems.
Section 905.4 Requirement #1 Delete the section and replace with:
In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be
located at intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
Section 906.1 Delete exceptions 1 & 2 without substitution.
Section 906.3 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The minimum rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class A, Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 2-A, 10-B C.
Section 907.1.4 Add a new section to read as follows:
Fire alarm control panels and Fire alarm annunciator panels. Installation of fire alarm control panels and fire alarm annunciator panels shall be
installed in accordance with section 907.1.4.1 through 907.1.4.5.
Section 907.1.4.1 Add a new section to read as follows:
Fire Alarm Panel Height: Installation of fire alarm panels shall not exceed 6 feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the panel. Exception:
Panel height may be altered by the code official.
Section 907.1.4.2 Add a new section to read as follows:
Number of Fire Alarm Control Panels in Buildings: Only one listed fire alarm control panel shall be allowed per building and shall lock in the alarm
until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible - alarm silencing switch. This control panel shall only receive alarm
signals from fire protection equipment.
Section 907.1.4.3 Add a new section to read as follows:
Combination Fire/Security Alarm System Panels. A listed combination fire/security alarm system panel that meets all the requirements of this code
and amendments may be permitted by approval of the fire code official. The fire/security panel shall be capable of providing a signal that can
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 99/715
differentiate between the fire and security alarm.
Section 907.1.4.4 Add a new section to read as follows:
Password/PIN Protection Prohibited: Fire alarm control panels and/or fire alarm annunciator panels that require a password/PIN to silence an
alarm/supervisory/trouble signal and/or to reset an alarm/supervisory/trouble signal shall be prohibited.
Section 907.1.4.5 Add a new section to read as follows:
Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels: The fire code official can require the addition of fire alarm annunciator panels based on the size of building and
access to the building. These panels shall meet the requirements of Sections 907.1.4 and 907.2.
Section 907.2 Delete the section and replace with:
Where required-new buildings and structures. An approved and addressable manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system installed
in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1
through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code
or the fire code official.
A minimum of one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing
automatic fire detectors or water-flow detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a
single fire alarm box shall be installed.
Exceptions:
1. The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.
2. The manual fire alarm box is required for Group R-2 occupancies to provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a
sprinkler system impairment event. The manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that is accessible to the public.
3. Multi-tenant buildings required to have a manual/automatic fire alarm system shall install a minimum of one manual pull station per tenant
space.
Section 907.2.1 Delete the exception in Section 907.2.1 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following exceptions:
Exceptions:
1. Except for Group A-2 occupancies with occupant loads of 200 or more, manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system and the alarm notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow.
2. Group A-2. An automatic/manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group A-2 occupancies with occupant loads of 200 or more. Activation of
the fire alarm shall additionally cause:
a. Illumination of the protected premises to not less than 10 foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches above the floor; and
b. All conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distraction to automatically stop.
Section 907.2.3 Modify by adding a sentence to the end of the first paragraph as follows:
New and existing educational occupancies shall have a monitored fire alarm system.
Section 907.2.3 Modify by adding a 5th exception as follows:
5. Day care occupancies classified as Group E Occupancy shall not require a monitored fire alarm system unless required elsewhere in the code.
Section 907.2.9.1 Delete exception 2 without substitution.
Section 907.2.10.2 Modify by adding a fourth location requirement as follows:
4. Supervised smoke alarms shall be installed in all common corridors and at the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4,
and I-1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of the end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is
located for each thirty (30) feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by the code.
Section 907.2.12.2 Delete the section without substitution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 100/715
Section 907.4.2 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Where in the opinion of the code official manual fire alarm boxes may be used to cause false fire alarms, the code official is authorized to modify the
requirements for manual fire alarm boxes.
Section 907.6.4 Modify by deleting the exception and inserting in lieu thereof:
Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and
waterflow device for each normally occupied floor.
Section 907.6.4.3 Add a section to read as follows:
Zone and address location labeling. Fire alarm and/or annunciator panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and permanently labeled as
to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building, if no display is present.
Section 907.6.6 Add to the end of the section as follows:
Each address point identification shall have an alpha/numeric descriptor location. Alpha/numeric descriptor locations are required to be reported to
the Emergency Communications Center upon activation of alarm conditions as specified by the fire code official. Supervisory alarm conditions are
required to be reported to the fire code official by an approved manner.
Section 907.11 Add a new section to read as follows:
Approved hold open devices. When installed in buildings that have a fire alarm system and/or sprinkler system, all approved hold open devices shall
release upon activation of a fire alarm and/or sprinkler water-flow activation.
Section 912.4.1 Delete the section and replace with:
Locking fire department connection caps. Locking fire department connection caps approved by the fire department are required for all new
construction that have a water-based fire protection system and existing structures that have a water-based fire protection system shall be required
immediately after conducting the five-year obstruction and maintenance testing, or if one or more of the fire department caps are missing.
Section 912.8 Add a section to read as follows:
Size. Minimum fire department connection size shall be 21/2" National Standard Thread.
Section 1029.2 Add the following exception:
Exception: The main entrance/exit of A-2 occupancies shall be of a width that accommodates not less than two-thirds of the total occupant load.
Section 1030.1 Modify by deleting exceptions 1 and 3.
Section 5003.5 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Signs shall also comply with the requirements of the Iowa Right to Know law.
Section 5704.2.9 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
For aboveground storage tanks of 276 gallons capacity or more, the minimum distance between such aboveground tanks and any Residential Zone
boundary must be at least 100 feet. If the aboveground tank is located in an approved vault, the minimum separation distance from a Residential
Zone boundary may be reduced to no less than 50 feet.
Section 5704.2.11.1 Add a #4 to the end of the section to read as follows:
4. A minimum distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between underground tanks and any Residential Zone boundary.
Section 5704.2.13.2.4 Add a section to read as follows:
Existing above-ground tank hazards. Existing above-ground tank installations, even if previously approved, that are determined to constitute a
hazard by the fire code official, shall not be continued in service. Unsafe tanks shall be removed as required by the fire code official and in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 101/715
accordance with this code.
That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2018 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
Section 5704.2.9.6.1. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the entire City of Iowa City,
Iowa.
Exception: Zones I 1&2, CI 1 and/or as approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 5706.2.4.4. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in the entire City of Iowa City, Iowa.
Exception: Zones I 1&2, CI 1 and/or as approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 6104.2. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in the entire City of Iowa City, Iowa.
Exception: Zones I 1&2, CI 1 and/or as approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 19-4778, 2-5-2019)
7-1-3: FEES FOR INSPECTIONS:
Fees for inspections and other services related to enforcement of this code shall be established by the City Council by resolution and paid to the Fire
Department. (Ord. 04-4118, 4-20-2004)
7-1-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of IFC 107.6, "Overcrowding", as adopted in this title, shall be punishable as Municipal infractions punishable by a civil penalty of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense. All other violations of this chapter shall
be a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-2D of this Code. (Ord. 09-4372, 12-1-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
Chapter 2
CONTRACTS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
7-2-1: AUTHORITY:
The city council may, by resolution, approve contracts between the city and any person outside the corporate limits of the city whose premises are located
on suitably surfaced roads, as determined by the fire chief, whereby the firefighting equipment and firefighters may respond to calls for firefighting or other
emergency assistance outside the corporate limits on the property which is the subject of the contract. The city council may fix, by resolution, the charges,
period of contract, terms, conditions and deposits, and such matters may vary according to the amount and value of the property involved and its distance
and accessibility from the city. (1978 Code §12-1; amd. 1994 Code)
7-2-2: CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENTAL UNITS:
The city council may, by resolution, approve contracts between the city and any township, village, town or other governmental unit outside the corporate
limits of the city, whereby the firefighting equipment and firefighters may respond to calls for firefighting or other emergency assistance for such residents
and for such property located within the limits of such governmental units as may be located upon suitably surfaced highways as determined by the fire
chief. The city council may, by resolution, fix the charges, period of contract, terms and conditions and deposits required, and such matters may vary
according to the amount and value of the property involved, the area, population, accessibility of the governmental unit involved, the distance from the city
and any other factors which are deemed pertinent. Such contracts may provide for reciprocal agreements to furnish emergency firefighting equipment or
not, as the city council may deem advisable. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-3: CONTRACTS MAY VARY:
The city council may contract, as provided in sections 7-2-1 and 7-2-2 of this chapter, as it sees fit, and the contract may vary from other such contracts
already made. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the city council to enter into any contracts whatsoever or, having entered into certain
contracts, to approve others on equal terms. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-4: DUTIES AND RIGHTS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
All officers and members of the fire department of the city are hereby required, as part of their regular duties, to do any and all necessary acts for the
performance of such contracts, and in the course of so doing and acting, all such officers and members shall be considered to be within the jurisdiction of
the city and shall enjoy all of the privileges accorded under the laws of the state relating to pensions, retirement, disability and immunity in exactly the
same fashion as if they were performing their duties within the corporate limits of the city. (1978 Code §12-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 102/715
7-2-5: IMMUNITY AND NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
A. Immunity: In the performance of such contracts, the city shall have the same governmental immunity as when operating within its corporate limits, and
should the laws of the state be hereafter changed in such fashion as to render this unlawful or impossible, then all such contracts may be canceled by
the city council.
B. Nonliability: Every contract made by the city council under the authority of this chapter shall contain provisions insuring that nothing in such contract
shall render the city liable for or on account of any damage done by reason of failure of performance, failure to answer calls or any other cause. If no
such provision is inserted in such contract, it shall be deemed to be a part thereof by operation of law. This chapter shall be construed as an absolute
limitation on the authority of the city council to enter into contracts under sections 7-2-1 and 7-2-2 of this chapter. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-6: PRIORITY TO LOCAL CALLS:
The mayor, fire chief or person in charge of the city's fire department shall have the right to give priority to calls for fire department protection or emergency
assistance within the corporate limits of the city over contract calls from without the corporate limits and may hold some persons and equipment in reserve
for the purpose of answering calls within the corporate limits of the city. (1978 Code §12-1)
Chapter 3
FALSE FIRE ALARMS
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations and assess fees and penalties applicable to fire alarms, alarm users, and
owners as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-2: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to false fire alarm responses resulting from the activation of single station smoke detectors within single-family residences or
duplexes or to entities with whom the city has a fire protection agreement. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city or any person using such system.
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE: Person empowered by the owner or alarm user to respond on their behalf.
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER: The primary contact point between the Iowa City fire department and the community it serves.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Fire chief or designated representative.
FALSE FIRE ALARM: The activation of a fire alarm system not by fire or hazard, but through careless use, technical failure, equipment malfunction,
improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. False fire alarm does not include
alarm failures caused by water, gas, electrical, telephone or other utilities not under the control of the alarm user, or the wilful act of a person other than the
alarm owner or his or her employees or agents.
FEE: The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city of Iowa City, authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a
false alarm or fire alarm malfunction.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a fire or activated extinguishing equipment requiring urgent attention and to which fire department
personnel are expected to respond.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The publicly supported fire department of the city, or any authorized representatives.
FISCAL YEAR: The year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of next calendar year.
OWNER: Any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy, or manage the
premises.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind and the personnel therein employed or
contracted.
PREMISES: Any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units, single-family or multi-family, or any other area
within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998; amd.
Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 103/715
7-3-4: FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall maintain a fire alarm system that produces a false alarm to which fire department personnel are expected to respond.
B. Within thirty (30) minutes of the fire department's response to a location due to a false fire alarm, an owner shall personally report to the place of
business or residence to reset the alarm. However, an owner is not required to personally report if the alarm user, a designated employee, a service
provider, and/or the owner's agent reports within thirty (30) minutes of the fire department's response to a location.
C. A violation of this section will subject the person to an assessment of fees as provided in this chapter and/or to the penalty provisions contained in
section 7-3-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-5: FEE SCHEDULE:
A. False alarm and failure to report fees shall be set by resolution. All fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date that the fee is assessed.
B. As an alternative to the imposition of fees for false alarms based upon technical failure, equipment malfunction, or improper installation, the fire chief or
designated representative may waive such fees if the owner returns to the fire chief or designated representative a statement of repair deemed
satisfactory by the enforcement officer. In addition, the fire chief or designated representative may waive such fees if the owner and/or alarm user
agrees to upgrade the existing alarm system in such a manner which, in the determination of the fire chief or designated representative, will
significantly reduce or eliminate further false fire alarms. The alarm owner and/or alarm user shall submit appropriate documentation and specifications
of such alarm system upgrades to the fire chief or designated representative for review. If such alarm system upgrades are approved by the fire chief or
designated representative, imposition of the fees for false alarms based on technical failure, equipment malfunction, or improper installation may be
held in abeyance for up to ninety (90) calendar days to allow for the installation and upgrade of the fire alarm system. Notice of approval or disapproval
of the fire chief or designated representative shall be given in writing and served on the owner and/or user by regular mail. Failure of the alarm system
owner and/or user to complete such upgrades within the specified ninety (90) calendar days may result in the imposition of the specified false fire alarm
fee as provided herein. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-6: UNINTENTIONAL FALSE FIRE ALARM FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-7: NOTICE OF FALSE FIRE ALARM FEE:
Whenever the fire chief or his designated representative determines that there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be
given of such violation and of the assessed fee for such violation as follows:
A. Such notice shall include a sufficiently detailed description of the violation, a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued, and the amount
of the fee assessed. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
B. The notice shall provide that all fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
C. The notice shall further inform the alarm owner and/or user that the failure to pay the assessed fee or make the alarm system repair or upgrade will
result in the filing of a municipal infraction citation or simple misdemeanor citation against such alarm owner and/or user. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-
2D of this code. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
Chapter 4
CONFINED SPACE RESCUE
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONFINED SPACE: A space that: a) is large enough and so configured that an employee can bodily enter and perform assigned work; and b) has limited
or restricted means for entry or exit, such as tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits; and c) is not designed for continuous employee
occupancy.
CONFINED SPACE RESCUE: The personnel designed to rescue employees from permit required confined spaces.
PERMIT REQUIRED CONFINED SPACE: A confined space that has one or more of the following characteristics: a) contains or has a potential to contain
a hazardous atmosphere; b) contains a material that has the potential for engulfing an entrant; c) has an internal configuration such that an entrant could
be trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly converging walls or by a floor which slopes downward and tapers to a smaller cross section; or d) contains any
other recognized serious safety or health hazard. (Ord. 98-3845, 8-25-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 104/715
7-4-2: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees and assess costs on affected businesses and governmental units within the corporate limits of the city,
and those with contractual agreements with the city as provided in sections 7-2-1 and 7-2-2 of this title, which require the specialized services of the fire
department's confined space rescue team for permit required confined space rescue or recovery operations. (Ord. 98-3845, 8-25-1998)
Chapter 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND TRANSPORTATION RELATED INCIDENTS
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any item or chemical which is a risk to public safety or the environment, and is regulated as such under the hazardous
materials regulations (49 CFR 100-180), the international maritime dangerous goods code, the dangerous goods regulations of the International Air
Transport Association, the technical instructions of the International Civil Aviation Organization, or the U.S. air force joint manual, "Preparing Hazardous
Materials For Military Air Shipments", all as amended. Such materials shall include, but are not limited to: chemicals which are carcinogens, toxic agents,
irritants, corrosives, sensitizers; agents which act on the hematopoietic system; agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes;
chemicals which are combustible, explosive, flammable, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive or water reactive; and chemicals which in the course of
normal handling, use, or storage may produce or release dusts, gases, fumes, vapors, mists or smoke which may have any of the previously mentioned
characteristics.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT: Any incident involving the presence of hazardous materials, as defined herein, whether the chemical or substance
is in usable or waste condition.
TRANSPORTATION RELATED INCIDENT: Any response related to a means of conveyance or travel of passengers or goods. (Ord. 10-4380, 1-25-2010)
7-5-2: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees and assess costs against involved parties related to the response to any hazardous materials incident or
transportation related incident. In the case of hazardous materials incidents, the costs will be assessed against the party who brought the hazardous
materials to the scene, regardless of which party caused the need for emergency response. In the case of transportation related incidents, costs will be
assessed against the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle requiring emergency response. (Ord. 10-4380, 1-25-2010)
Title 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute such force by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law.
B. Any natural disaster or humanmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of
the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Any act of war, hostile missile or bomb directed at or near the city.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or
vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city during the hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially designated to
perform duties with reference to said civil emergency. (1994 Code)
8-1-2: PROCLAMATIONS; CURFEW; EVACUATION:
A. Proclamation By Mayor: When, in the judgment of the mayor, a "civil emergency", as defined herein, is deemed to exist, the mayor shall forthwith
proclaim, in writing, the existence of same.
B. Imposition Of Curfew: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, the mayor may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole as the mayor deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as the mayor deems
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 105/715
necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
C. Mandatory Evacuation: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, the mayor may mandate that all or any part of the city of Iowa City be
evacuated as the mayor deems advisable and applicable for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery.
D. Extraordinary Measures: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, the mayor may order that any other extraordinary measures be taken for
the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery.
E. Violation Of Order: The violation of a curfew order, evacuation order or other order regarding extraordinary measures issued by the mayor hereunder or
any directive or order issued pursuant thereto by any peace officer shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as a simple misdemeanor as provided by
subsection 1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 08-4306, 6-11-2008)
Chapter 2
ALARM SYSTEMS
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which agents of
the police department are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall include, but is not limited to, intrusion or burglar alarms of the audible or
direct line radio or electronic type.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system not by breaking and entering, but by careless use, technical failure, equipment malfunction, improper
installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. False alarm does not include alarm failures
caused by water, gas, electrical, telephone or other utilities not under the control of the alarm user, or the wilful act of a person other than the alarm owner,
lessee, or his or her employees or agents.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind and the personnel therein employed or
contracted. (Ord. 15-4646, 10-20-2015)
8-2-2: FALSE ALARMS:
A. No alarm user shall have or maintain an alarm system that produces a false alarm.
B. An alarm user shall be charged a fee for having or maintaining a false alarm. The fee shall be adopted by resolution of city council. The fee shall be
paid within thirty (30) days of the date that the fee is assessed. (Ord. 15-4646, 10-20-2015)
8-2-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 15-4646, 10-20-2015)
Chapter 3
GENERAL ANIMAL REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL SERVICES
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDON: Failure to provide adequate care on-site for a period of seventeen (17) hours or failure to provide control over and shelter, food and water for
an animal without having made satisfactory arrangements for care, custody and physical control of such animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 106/715
ADEQUATE FOOD: Providing, at suitable intervals of not more than twenty four (24) hours, unless the dietary requirements of the animal so require, a
quantity and quality of wholesome foodstuff, suitable for the physical condition and age of the animal, served in a clean receptacle or container, sufficient
to maintain an adequate level of nutrition for such animal.
ADEQUATE INDOOR SHELTER: A properly ventilated and illuminated facility, sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animal from
extremes of temperature and sufficient to provide for the animal's health and comfort.
ADEQUATE OUTDOOR SHELTER: A structurally sound and weatherproof shelter made up of three (3) solid sides, a roof and a floor off the ground, which
provides adequate protection from exposure to weather conditions and is placed in an area free of debris, feces and standing water. An adequate outdoor
shelter must meet the requirements of adequate space. An animal crate is not an adequate outdoor shelter.
ADEQUATE SANITATION: Cleaning or sanitizing of enclosures and housing facilities to remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt so as to
minimize health hazards, flies or odors.
ADEQUATE SPACE: Primary enclosures and housing facilities constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal to make
normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement to maintain physical condition. The minimum confinement area set forth in
section 8-4-6 of this chapter is an adequate space. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or
abnormal behavior patterns.
ADEQUATE VETERINARY CARE: Prompt and reasonable care provided to a sick, diseased or injured animal by a licensed veterinarian, euthanized in a
manner deemed appropriate by the City, or turned over to the City with approval of the Chief of Police, or designee.
ADEQUATE WATER: Reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water, provided in a sanitary manner.
ANIMAL: Any living creature, domestic or wild, except a human being.
ANIMAL ACTS OR EXHIBITIONS: Any act, exhibit, or display containing one or more live animals which are exposed to public view for entertainment or
advertisement regardless of whether there is a fee or consideration. Permit is required.
ANIMAL CRATE: A plastic or metal cage used for the temporary and short term containment of animals inside a building, vehicle, or other enclosed space.
ANIMAL PERFORMANCE: Any place or performance where one or more animals are used in the production of any motion picture, television, radio,
internet, digital, or theatrical performance, whether for entertainment, instruction, or advertising. Permit is required.
ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER: City employee whose duties and responsibilities are to enforce this chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER: The pound owned and operated by the City of Iowa City. The animal shelter is a pound as defined in chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa,
as amended.
ANIMAL SHELTER STAFF: A City employee who works at the animal shelter, including animal services officers.
ANIMAL SHOW: Any place where animals are being exhibited and/or judged. Permit is required.
BREEDER: Any person who causes the breeding of a male or female dog or cat, or makes or allows a dog or cat to be available for breeding, or a person
who offers to sell a puppy or kitten that is a direct offspring of their adult dog or cat. Permit is required.
CAT GROUP: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where six (6) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained by the
owner for no consideration. Permit is required.
CAT KENNEL: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where six (6) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for
consideration. Permit is required.
CIRCUS: An event or performance which charges members of the public an admission fee to watch trained lions, tigers, elephants, or other animals
perform under the whip or command of a ringmaster, trainer, or handler.
DEFILEMENT: To foul, dirty, pollute or make filthy, either by the animal's body or wastes or by the animal carrying or dragging any foul material.
DOG GROUP: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises where four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained by
the owner for no consideration. Permit is required.
DOG KENNEL: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for
consideration. Permit is required.
EDUCATIONAL ANIMAL ACT OR EXHIBITION: Any act, exhibit, or display containing one or more live animals which are exposed to public view for
education or instruction for no fee or consideration. Permit is required.
FENCE: A physical barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion, entry or exit, made of posts and wire, boards, stone, brick, or similar material. Invisible
fencing systems using underground wire or electronic collar devices are not considered fencing for the purposes of this chapter.
GROOMER: Any person who cuts the hair of, trims the toenails of, brushes the hair of, and/or bathes dogs or cats for consideration or any commercial
establishment that engages in cutting the hair of, trimming the nails of, brushing the hair of and/or bathing dogs or cats. Permit is required.
GUARD/ATTACK DOG: A dog trained to attack persons upon the command of its master or custodian or upon the actions of an individual, with the
exception of a dog owned by a law enforcement agency.
LEASH: A rope, line, thong, chain or other similar restraint, not more than ten feet (10') in length, of sufficient strength to hold the animal in check. A
restraint that is designed to extend beyond ten feet (10') and retract is a leash if: a) it cannot be extended more than twenty five feet (25') and b) it may be
manually locked such that it does not extend more than ten feet (10').
LICENSE: A permit issued by the City to possess an animal as required by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 107/715
LIVESTOCK: An animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, or porcine species; ostriches, rheas, emus; farm deer, as defined in section
481A.1, Code of Iowa, as amended; or poultry.
MAJOR PET SHOP: Any commercial establishment where animals, including dogs and cats, are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale. Permit is
required.
MICROCHIP: An encapsulated biocompatible computer chip, programmed with a unique identification number, injected under the skin of an animal to
provide permanent identification.
MINOR PET SHOP: Any commercial establishment where animals, except for dogs and cats, are bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for sale. Permit is
required.
MOLEST: Includes not only biting and scratching a human or other animal, but also any annoyance, interference with or meddling with any such human or
animal.
OWNER: In addition to its ordinary meaning, includes any person who owns, keeps, maintains, possesses, fosters, or harbors an animal or who knowingly
permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association, partnership or any other legal entity.
PIGEON OR DOVE LOFT: Any cage, loft, or enclosure where five (5) or more pigeons or doves are kept or maintained.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All buildings and other property owned by a private person, including buildings, yards and service and parking areas.
PROHIBITED ANIMALS: The following genus/species of animals are hereby declared to be prohibited and a permit is required in order for said animal to
be within the City:
A. Canidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., wolves, wolf-dog hybrids which are at least 50 percent wolf, coyotes, coyote-dog hybrids which are at least
50 percent coyote, foxes, jackals), but excluding Canis familiaris, the domestic dog.
B. Felidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, ocelots, bobcats, jungle cats), but excluding Felis domestica,
the domestic cat.
C. Procyonidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., coatis, pandas, raccoons, procynonids).
D. Ursidae of the order Carnivora (e.g., black bears, brown bears, grizzly bears, polar bears).
E. Chiroptera (e.g., bats).
F. Cetacea (e.g., whales, dolphins, porpoises).
G. Pinnipedia (e.g., seals, sea lions, walrus).
H. Sirenia (e.g., sea cows, manatees).
I. Primates, including all families (e.g., Cebidae, Cercopithecidae, Callithricedae, Lemuridae, Lorisidae, Tarsiidae, Colobinae, Hylobatidae, Pongidae;
[e.g., monkeys, baboons, marmosets, tamarins, capuchin, chimpanzees, orangutan, gorillas, apes]).
J. Formicidae within the order Hymenoptera (e.g., fire ants).
K. Apidae; specifically Africanized strains of the Apis Mellifera honey bee.
L. Proboscidea, Hyracoidea, Tubulidentata (e.g., elephants, hyraxes, aardvarks).
M. Edentata, Pholidota (e.g., anteaters, sloths, armadillos).
N. Marsupialia (e.g., kangaroos, wallabies, koala).
O. Crocodylidae of the order Squamata (e.g., crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials).
P. Helodermatidae of the order Squamata (e.g., gila monsters, beaded lizards).
Q. Lizards of the species komodoensis, salvadorii, salvator, niloticus, albigularis, and indicus.
R. Crotalidae, Viperidae, Elapidae, Opisthoglyphous Colubridae, and all other orders which include poisonous or venomous reptiles (e.g., rattlesnakes,
vipers, corals, copperheads, cottonmouths, moccasins, sea snakes, puff adders, malagasy hognoses).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 108/715
S. Eunectes of the order Squamata (e.g., green anaconda).
T. Python sebae, Python reticulatus, Python molorus, Morelia amethystina of the order Squamata.
U. Venomous spiders of the families Teridiiae and Loxoscelidae respectively, and scorpions of the order Scorpiones, excluding Pandinus imperator
(emperor scorpion).
V. Sugar gliders.
W. Camelus dromedaries (camels).
X. Ratite (e.g., ostrich, moa, kiwi).
Y. Emus.
Z. All wild animals indigenous to the State of Iowa, as defined in chapter 481A, Code of Iowa, as amended.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Buildings, right-of-way or other public property owned or dedicated to the use of the City and other governmental entities.
RESCUE: The action as that term is used in chapter 717B of the Iowa Code, as amended, that allows a local authority to take temporary possession of a
threatened animal.
RESTRICTED ANIMALS: The following genus/species of animals are hereby declared to be restricted:
A. Iguana, lizards of the order of Chamaeleontidae, and lizards of the genus Varanus, but excluding the species komodoensis, salvadorii, salvator,
niloticus, albigularis, and indicus.
B. Rheas and peafowls (also subject to zoning requirements).
C. Other small livestock type animals (also subject to zoning requirements).
RODEO: A contest, exhibition or competition which charges members of the public an admission fee to watch the skill of contestants or entrants in
horseridership where lassoing is performed involving cattle, horses, bulls, goats, pigs, and wild bovine and/or where contestants ride wild bulls or wild
horses for public entertainment. Permit is required.
VETERINARIAN: A person duly licensed by the State of Iowa to practice veterinary medicine.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: An establishment regularly maintained and operated by a veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries
to animals and which may board animals. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS:
The owner of an animal shall be responsible for obtaining licenses, permits, and vaccinations, and for the care and control of any such animal as defined
in this chapter. The owner shall be prima facie responsible for any violation of this chapter by any animal owned by said owner. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-3: LICENSING AND VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret over the age of four (4) months shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies virus.
B. Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret over the age of four (4) months shall apply for a license.
C. 1. At the time of making application for a license, the owner shall furnish to the City a veterinarian's certificate showing that the dog, cat, or ferret for
which the license is sought has been vaccinated against rabies virus.
2. Upon payment of the license fee, the City shall issue to the owner a license.
D. The owner of a dog, cat, or ferret under the age of four (4) months may apply for a juvenile tag that shall automatically expire at four (4) months from
the date of birth of the animal.
E. Every animal shall wear the license tag provided whenever such animal is off the property of its owner or not within a motor vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 109/715
F. When the ownership of an animal is transferred, the new owner shall, within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of change of ownership, make
application for a new license as provided in this section regardless of whether or not the animal was previously licensed.
G. The licensing provisions of this chapter do not apply if the owner brings the animal into the City for less than thirty (30) continuous days. (Ord. 18-4767,
9-4-2018)
8-4-4: RABIES AND DISEASE CONTROL:
A. Isolation And Quarantine Of Suspect Animals:
1. It shall be the duty of the City animal services personnel authorized to impound animals in the City to cause to be placed in isolation and under
quarantine for observation for a minimum period of ten (10) calendar days any animal that animal services personnel suspect of being infected with
rabies or other diseases communicable to humans and also any animal that is known to have bitten or caused a skin abrasion upon any human in
the City.
2. Such isolation and quarantine shall be either at the animal shelter or in a veterinary hospital, except if such animal is properly licensed and is
currently vaccinated against rabies, the animal may be placed in the custody of the owner on the owner's premises during the isolation and
quarantine period if the owner resides in the City. When isolation and quarantine is authorized on the owner's premises, it will be at the discretion of
and under the direct supervision of the City.
3. The expense of isolation and quarantine at a veterinary hospital will be borne by the owner. If the animal is placed in isolation and under quarantine
in an animal shelter authorized by the City, a fee shall be charged to the owner. Every owner or person having possession, custody or control of an
animal known to be rabid or which has been bitten by an animal infected with rabies shall immediately report such fact to the City and shall have
such animal placed in isolation and quarantine as directed by the City for such period as may be designated and at the expense of the owner.
B. Reports Required:
1. Physicians: It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner in the City to make written report to the City of the names and
addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will assist in the prevention of rabies.
2. Veterinarians: It shall be the duty of every veterinarian in the City to report to the City any diagnosis of animal rabies.
3. Owners: An owner of any animal or any person having knowledge of such animal biting or causing a skin abrasion upon any human in the City shall
promptly report such fact to the City.
C. Emergency Proclamation: Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of rabies, the City Council may issue a
proclamation ordering every owner of an animal to confine the same securely on the owner's premises at all times for such period of time as is deemed
necessary.
D. Duty To Report: Any person having knowledge of the presence of any disease among animals capable of being communicated to humans shall
immediately report such knowledge to the County Health Officer. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-5: NUISANCES:
The following acts and circumstances are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
A. Accumulation Of Wastes: The keeping of an animal on private property in such number or in such manner that allows for the accumulation of animal
waste so as to become detrimental to the public health and/or the animal's health.
B. Noisy Animals: No person shall cause or allow any animal under their care, charge, custody, or control to emit any noise which annoys, disturbs,
offends, or unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of the neighborhood or general public. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to a commercial establishment which is permitted pursuant to the Zoning Code.
C. Animals Damaging Property: Allowing an animal to cause any damage or defilement to public or private property.
D. Harassment By Animals: Allowing an animal to molest any human or animal on public or private property when the human or animal is lawfully on the
property.
E. Animals Injuring Or Killing Other Animals: Allowing an animal to molest or kill wildlife, birds, animals or domestic animals on public or private property.
(Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-6: PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prohibited Animals: No person shall keep or maintain an animal declared to be prohibited under this chapter. Notwithstanding this provision:
1. Indigenous wildlife rehabilitators who possess required Iowa State Department of National Resources, or its successor, permits may maintain
prohibited wildlife for rehabilitation purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 110/715
2. A prohibited animal which is properly and appropriately restrained may be transported to a veterinarian for emergency medical care or treatment and
may remain within the confines of the veterinary clinic or hospital as long as the animal is receiving medical treatment.
B. Restricted Animals: No person shall keep or maintain an animal declared to be a restricted animal under this chapter without a valid permit issued by
the Division of Animal Control of the City or its successor. Notwithstanding this provision:
1. Indigenous wildlife rehabilitators who possess required Iowa State Department of National Resources, or its successor, permits may maintain
restricted wildlife for rehabilitation purposes.
2. A restricted animal which is properly and appropriately restrained may be transported to a veterinarian for emergency medical care or treatment and
may remain within the confines of the veterinary clinic or hospital as long as the animal is receiving medical treatment.
C. Pigeon And Dove Lofts: Pigeon lofts and dove lofts are prohibited within the City. Notwithstanding this provision, any person who owns or operates a
pigeon and/or dove loft within the City prior to July 1, 1997, may continue to operate such pigeon and/or dove loft subject to the following restrictions:
1. As of July 1, 1997, pigeon and dove lofts shall not house more than forty (40) pigeons and/or doves at any one time.
2. As of July 1, 2000, pigeon and dove lofts shall not house more than thirty (30) pigeons and/or doves at any one time.
3. The exemption for persons who own or operate pigeon and dove lofts within the City as of July 1, 1997, shall not be transferable to another person
or another property.
D. Animals At Large Prohibited:
1. No animal shall be found at large within the City at any time. An animal shall not be deemed at large if:
a. It is tethered or on the enclosed fenced premises owned, leased, occupied, or controlled by the owner; or
b. It is tethered or on the enclosed fenced premises owned, leased, occupied, or controlled by another person with the knowledge and consent of
that person; or
c. It is a dog in a City dog park and has been issued a use permit; or
d. It is under the control of a person competent to restrain the animal and:
(1) Is on a leash; or
(2) Enclosed within a building or structure; or
(3) Properly restrained within a motor vehicle as provided herein.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, any animal shall be deemed at large at any time when the animal is attacking humans, other
animals, or destroying property or is on any public property, except when under restraint as set forth above. In addition, any female animal in estrus
shall be deemed at large at any time, except:
a. When housed in a building or structure completely enclosed; or
b. When housed in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel licensed or registered with the State; or
c. When on the premises owned, leased, occupied or controlled by the owner, provided the area in which such animal is located is completely
enclosed by a fence or other structure having a height of at least sixty inches (60"); or
d. When under the control of a person competent to restrain the animal by leash.
E. On Private Property: No animal shall be taken, allowed or permitted on private property not owned by the owner of the animal without the permission of
the person owning such property or the person in possession or control thereof.
F. In Food Establishments: No animal shall be allowed, taken or permitted on or in any building, store, restaurant, tavern, sidewalk cafe, or outdoor service
area where food or food products are sold, prepared or dispensed to humans other than the owners thereof, except for service animals as defined
under the Americans With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
G. Outdoor Confinement Area: No owner shall fail to provide an outdoor confinement area of less than the following:
1. For 1 dog under 50 pounds 60 square feet
2. For 1 dog over 50 pounds or 2 dogs under 50 pounds 80 square feet
3. For 2 dogs over 50 pounds each or 3 dogs under 50 pounds 96 square feet
4. For 3 dogs over 50 pounds each or 4 dogs under 50 pounds 140 square feet
5. 4 or more dogs over 50 pounds each 192 square feet
Note: A permit is required to maintain four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-
2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 111/715
Outdoor confinement area means an outdoor space securely enclosed, such as by chain link fencing material, that is the primary space the dog
lives, eats, and sleeps every day including overnight.
H. Solid Waste Removal: Any person who shall walk an animal on public or private property shall provide for the disposal of the solid waste material
excreted by the animal by immediate removal of the waste, except for animals properly trained and certified to assist persons with disabilities while
such animals are acting in such capacity.
I. Warning Notice: Pet shops displaying, selling, or transferring turtles, tortoises or iguanas must display in public view a notice of warning regarding the
transmission of salmonella.
J. Tethering: Tethering means fastening an animal to a fixed object so as to limit its range of movement using a rope, chain, or similar device.
1. a. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered and unattended with a rope, chain, or similar device that is less than ten feet (10') in length. An
animal is unattended if the animal is more than fifty feet (50') from the person and the animal is not in the person's line of sight.
b. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered and unattended for more than thirty (30) minutes continuously in any given 3-hour period. An
animal is unattended if the animal is more than fifty feet (50') from the person and the animal is not in the person's line of sight.
2. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary:
a. No person shall allow any of the following animals to be tethered: dangerous animal or animal in estrus.
b. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered using a collar made of metal or chain, excluding the buckle, or using a collar, even if made of cloth,
designed to continue to tighten, such as a slip lead or noose, when pulled tightly.
c. No person shall allow an animal to have access to a public sidewalk or street while tethered.
d. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered to a utility pole, parking meter, building, structure, fence, sign, tree, bush, bench, newspaper or
advertising rack or other object on public property.
e. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered in an unsafe location. An unsafe location includes, but is not limited to, near a fence whereby the
animal could asphyxiate itself if it jumped over the fence or on a deck whereby the animal could asphyxiate itself if it jumped off of the deck.
f. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered in a manner that allows it to become entangled with another tethered animal.
K. Animal Acts; Exhibitions; Performances: Animal acts or exhibitions, and animal performances in which prohibited animals are used are prohibited.
Additionally, any public showing, carnival, fair, parade, petting zoo, ride, race, film shoot or other undertaking in which prohibited animals are required
to perform tricks, fight or participate as accompaniments for the entertainment or amusement of an audience in exchange for a fee or consideration is
prohibited. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A. Definitions:
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Means:
1. An animal that has killed a human being;
2. An animal that has taken aggressive action that caused a serious injury (as defined in Iowa Code section 702.18) to a human;
3. An animal that has killed another domestic animal;
4. An animal that has engaged in exhibitions of fighting;
5. An animal that has a propensity to attack or bite humans or animals that has been shown to exist through one or more attacks or attempted
attacks and where such propensity is known to the owner or ought to reasonably be known to the owner thereof; or
6. An animal judicially or administratively determined to be a dangerous animal, or similar designation, by another jurisdiction with a substantially
similar definition.
An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if the Chief of Police or designee determine that the animal acted under the following circumstances:
1. A dog engaged in law enforcement work that is engaged in official law enforcement activities at the time of the attack, or bite;
2. An animal that attacks or bites a person who at the time of the attack or bite, is engaged in a criminal act against the person or property of
another;
3. An animal that attacks or bites another animal in order to protect a human being, domestic animal or livestock; or
4. An animal that was unreasonably or deliberately provoked by the person or animal that was harmed.
B. Prohibitions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 112/715
1. No person shall own, keep, harbor, foster, or maintain any dangerous animal except as specifically provided for herein.
2. No person shall allow a dangerous animal to be in or upon any premises or vehicle owned, leased, occupied, or controlled by the person, except as
provided herein.
3. No person shall bring any dangerous animal into the City of Iowa City without approval of the Chief of Police, or designee.
4. No person shall tether a dangerous animal.
5. No person shall allow a dangerous animal in a City dog park.
C. Impounding And Costs:
1. If animal services personnel have probable cause that an animal is a dangerous animal, the animal may be immediately impounded if found in
violation of this chapter.
2. If an animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal, the animal may be immediately impounded if found in violation of this chapter. An
animal is determined to be a dangerous animal if: a) the City Manager, or designee, determines the animal to be dangerous following a hearing as
provided herein; b) the District Court finds the animal to be a dangerous animal; or c) the animal has been judicially or administratively determined to
be a dangerous animal, or similar designation, by another jurisdiction with a substantially similar definition of dangerous animal.
3. Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, fosters, maintains or controls an animal involved in such impoundment shall pay all expenses, including
shelter, food, veterinary care, boarding and all other expenses necessitated by the impoundment and containment of the animal, during its
impoundment.
D. Spay/Neuter And Microchip/Tag:
1. The owner of a dangerous animal shall have the animal surgically sterilized at the owner's expense by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days
after being determined to be a dangerous animal as provided herein. The owner shall provide written verification of the surgical procedure to the
animal shelter within twenty four (24) hours of the procedure being completed.
2. The owner of a dangerous animal shall have the animal implanted with a microchip identification at the owner's expense by a trained microchip
technician within five (5) days after being determined to be a dangerous animal as provided herein. The owner shall provide written verification of the
implanting and provide the microchip number to the animal shelter within twenty four (24) hours after the procedure is completed.
3. The owner of a dangerous animal shall place on the animal's collar a City-issued tag that identifies the animal as such within five (5) days after being
determined to be a dangerous animal as provided herein and shall maintain the tag on the collar at all times.
E. Administrative Hearing/Terms And Conditions/Grounds For Destruction:
1. If an animal is alleged to be a dangerous animal by the Chief of Police or designee, an administrative hearing on the disposition of such animal may
be held. Pending such hearing, the animal shall be impounded in the City shelter, or in lieu of impound, the Chief of Police or designee may permit
the animal to be confined, at the owner's expense, in a City approved dog kennel or veterinary facility within the City or at the owner's residence,
provided the owner:
a. Shall not remove the animal from the kennel, veterinary facility or residence without the prior written approval of the Chief of Police or designee;
and
b. Shall make the animal available for observation and inspection by Chief of Police, or designee, and authorized representatives.
2. The hearing shall be before the City Manager, or designee, shall be public, and shall be scheduled after at least ten (10) calendar days' written
notice to the owner of said hearing. The owner may waive the notice and agree to an earlier scheduled hearing. The hearing will be informal, and the
owner will have the opportunity to offer any written or oral information relevant to the hearing, including witnesses. The standard of proof is
preponderance of evidence.
3. If, following the hearing, the City Manager or designee determines that the animal is a dangerous animal, the City Manager or designee may require
reasonable terms and conditions for the training, handling or maintenance of the animal to abate the condition which gave rise to the hearing. In lieu
of a hearing, the Chief of Police or designee may agree on reasonable terms and conditions. Terms and conditions may include, but are not limited
to:
a. Selection of locations within the owner's property where the animal shall be maintained.
b. Requirements as to size, construction or design of an enclosure where the animal may be kept.
c. Completion of obedience training from a trainer or training program approved by the City.
d. Types and method of restraint, or muzzling, or both.
e. Requirements for the owner to carry liability insurance.
4. If the Chief of Police, or designee, determines that the owner has violated the terms and conditions required by the City Manager or agreed to by the
Chief of Police or designee, the Chief of Police, or designee, may schedule an administrative hearing on the consequences of said violation with
notice to the owner and opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The only issues at the hearing will be whether the terms and conditions have
been violated, and if so, the consequences of the violation. The question of whether the animal is a dangerous animal will not be at issue as the City
Manager, or designee, has previously made that determination.
5. If the City Manager or designee determines: a) that the animal is a dangerous animal; b) that the owner has failed to restrain such animal
reasonably; and c) that it is in the public interest to destroy such animal, the animal shall be destroyed in a manner deemed appropriate to the City
after five (5) calendar days unless the determination is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 113/715
8-4-8: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
A. Authority To Impound: Any animal found in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded by the City.
B. Notice Of Impoundment: Not later than two (2) calendar days after the impoundment of any animal, the owner, if known, shall be notified, of such
impoundment.
C. Redemption Of Impounded Animals:
1. The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter may reclaim such animal upon proof of current license and rabies inoculation, payment
of the redemption fee and payment of all costs and charges incurred by the City or the agency authorized by the City to impound such animal,
including costs of maintenance of said animal.
2. If an animal four (4) months of age or older and unlicensed is impounded, the person to whom the animal is released shall apply for a license for
such animal and shall be required to first show proof of current rabies vaccination or obtain a rabies vaccination receipt in order to obtain the release
of the animal. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
3. All dogs, cats, and ferrets impounded by the animal shelter which do not have traceable identification shall have a microchip identification implanted
permanently into the animal prior to redemption. (Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-2019)
D. Period Of Impoundment; Notice: The City shall keep all animals impounded pursuant to this chapter for a period of seven (7) calendar days after the
owner has been notified, in writing, of possible disposition, which notice shall be given to the animal owner by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by
U.S. mail. U.S. mail is deemed completed four (4) days after the notice is deposited in the mail and postmarked for delivery. Electronic mail is deemed
completed twenty four (24) hours after it is sent. After such time period has expired and the owner has failed to claim and redeem any such impounded
animal, such animal shall become the property of the City. This provision does not apply to stray animals for which the owner is unknown.
E. Written Record: The City personnel or veterinarian authorized to impound animals, upon receiving any animal pursuant to this chapter, shall make a
written record of receiving such animal. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-9: ANIMAL NEGLECT AND CRUELTY:
A. 1. Prohibition Against Animal Cruelty: No person shall abandon, abuse, torture, torment, mutilate, overwork, overload, beat, starve, dehydrate,
suffocate, kill or cause the death of any animal, or take any other action which causes unjustified pain, distress, or suffering.
2. Prohibition Against Animal Neglect:
a. No person shall fail to provide any animal with adequate care, food, water, exercise, sanitation, space, outdoor confinement area, indoor shelter,
outdoor shelter, or veterinary care.
b. No person shall leave an animal in an unattended motor vehicle or trailer as provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or confine
an animal or allow such animal to be confined in a vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such periods of time as may endanger the health
or well-being of the animal or as may cause unjustified pain, distress, or suffering due to extreme temperature.
3. Threatened Animals: Threatened animal means an animal that has been subjected to animal cruelty or animal neglect as provided herein.
B. 1. A law enforcement or animal services officer, after consulting with a veterinarian licensed by the State may rescue a threatened animal as provided in
this section. The officer may enter onto private property to rescue threatened animal if the officer obtains a search warrant issued by a court or enters
onto the premises in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Iowa and the United States, including article I, section 8, of the Constitution of
the State of Iowa, and the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
2. If an animal is rescued pursuant to this section, the City shall provide for the maintenance of the threatened animal at the City shelter. The City may
also contract with an animal care provider for the maintenance of the threatened animal. The City shall post a notice in a conspicuous place at the
location where the animal was rescued. The notice shall state that the animal has been rescued by the City pursuant to this section and section
717B.5, Code of Iowa, as amended. The City shall pay the animal care provider for the animal's maintenance regardless of proceeds received from
the sale of the animal or any reimbursement ordered by a court pursuant to section 717B.4, Code of Iowa, as amended.
3. The animal shall be subject to disposition as required by a court pursuant to section 717B.4, Code of Iowa, as amended.
C. The disposition of a threatened animal rescued by the City shall occur as provided in section 717B.4, Code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-
2018)
8-4-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
No person shall:
A. Expose or permit to be exposed any poisoned meat or other poisoned substances on public or private property where the same may be removed,
handled or consumed by an animal.
B. Trap or attempt to trap any animal with other than a nonkill live trap deemed acceptable to the City. Excepted from this prohibition are instant kill traps
for the purpose of small rodent pest control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 114/715
C. Offer to give any live animal as a gift or prize for any contest or other competition, or as a business inducement or promotion. This provision does not
apply to animal shelter staff.
D. Leave an animal unattended inside the animal shelter or on the premises of the animal shelter without express permission of animal shelter staff, a
Community Service Officer, or a police officer.
E. No person shall take any animal from the custody of animal shelter staff, Community Service Officer, or peace officer or resist, oppose, obstruct or
impede any said City employee or officer in the discharge of their duties.
F. No person, except the owner of an animal or authorized agent, shall willfully open any door or gate on any private or public premises for the purpose of
enticing or enabling any such animal to leave such private or public premises, nor shall any person willfully molest, tease, provoke or mistreat an
animal.
G. No person shall transport any animal or leave any animal unattended in the back of a motor vehicle in a space intended for any load, including, but not
limited to, the cargo bed of a truck or the trunk of an automobile, except an animal may be transported or left unattended in the cargo bed of a truck if:
1) the space is fully enclosed (such as a topper); or 2) the animal is secured by an animal crate in a manner which will prevent the animal from either
being thrown from the motor vehicle or falling or jumping from the motor vehicle. This shall not apply to the transportation of livestock. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-
4-2018)
8-4-11: IRRESPONSIBLE OWNER:
A. Irresponsible owner means an owner who has been adjudged by the court to have violated this chapter four (4) or more times within a twelve-month
period.
B. For a period of twelve (12) months, an irresponsible owner shall not reside with or maintain any animal and shall not allow any animal owned by the
irresponsible owner to be maintained within the City.
C. An irresponsible owner who maintains any animal at any premises owned, leased, or controlled by the irresponsible owner in violation of this chapter
shall immediately surrender the animal to the Chief of Police or designee. If the irresponsible owner does not immediately surrender the animal, a
Municipal infraction citation may be filed for violation of this provision requesting a court order that the animal become the property of the City. (Ord. 18-
4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-12: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: No person shall keep, maintain, conduct or operate any activity that requires a permit issued by the Police Chief or designee as set
forth herein without a permit.
B. Regulations:
1. Each application for a permit hereunder shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the City.
2. All permits issued shall automatically expire one year from the date of issue, unless revoked or suspended.
3. A permittee wishing to renew a permit shall apply for and secure a renewal of the permit in the manner provided for in this chapter no later than thirty
(30) days after the expiration of any permit.
4. All permits issued to commercial establishments, animal acts or exhibitions, and rodeos shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place.
5. All applicants shall be furnished with permit rules at the time the application is made.
C. Inspection: Upon the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, the Police Chief, or designee, may make such investigation and inspection
of the animal, and the premises where the animal will be kept, as it deems proper within the law. The City shall then issue a permit to an applicant
unless the Police Chief or designee finds:
1. The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application and the conduct or operation of the business, activity, or event for which the permit
is requested will violate any law or ordinance of this City, or any law of the State; or
2. The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application and the conduct or operation of the business, activity, or event for which the permit
is requested will constitute a danger to the health, peace or safety of the community; or
3. The applicant has failed to provide any animal in his or her possession, care, or control with adequate food, drink, shelter, or protection; or
4. The premises and establishment where the animal is to be kept is not maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; or
5. The applicant has failed to protect any animal in his or her possession, care, or control from needless suffering, torment, cruelty, abuse, or neglect;
or
6. The applicant has had a permit revoked within one year prior to the date of the application; or
7. The applicant has been convicted of or has had judgment entered for the violation of chapter 717A or 717B, Code of Iowa, as amended, or any
provision of this chapter; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 115/715
8. The applicant has previously violated terms and conditions of a permit; or
9. Doing so would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of the residents of the City or an animal.
D. Revoked; Suspended: Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended if, after due investigation and after the permittee has been
given the opportunity to give a written and oral statement and present evidence, the Police Chief or designee finds:
1. The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application and the conduct or operation of the commercial establishment for which the permit
was issued violates any law or ordinance of the City, or any law of the State; or
2. The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application and the conduct or operation of the commercial establishment for which the permit
is requested will constitute a danger to the health, peace or safety of the community; or
3. The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to provide any animal in their possession, care, or control with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter,
or protection; or
4. The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to maintain the premises or caging areas in a clean and sanitary condition; or
5. The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to protect any animal in their possession, care, or control from needless suffering, torment, cruelty,
abuse, or neglect; or
6. The permittee has had a permit revoked within one year prior to the date of application; or
7. The permittee has been convicted of or has had judgment entered for any offense involving the violation of chapter 717A or 717B, Code of Iowa, as
amended, or any provision of this chapter; or
8. The applicant has previously violated terms and conditions of a permit; or
9. Doing so would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of the residents of the City or an animal.
E. Reserved.
F. Urban Chicken Permits:
1. No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens without an urban chicken permit, or other permit, issued by the City.
2. "Chicken" means a member of the subspecies of Gallus gallus domesticus, a domesticated chicken.
3. In order to obtain an urban chicken permit, an applicant must submit a completed application on a form provided by the City accompanied by the
permit fee.
4. Within thirty (30) days of submission of the application, the Police Chief, or designee, shall issue the urban chicken permit if the applicant meets the
requirements of this provision and the policy adopted by City Council resolution or deny the application. If the application is denied, the Police Chief,
or designee, shall state the reasons in writing.
5. The urban chicken permit shall be valid for three (3) years and may not be sold, transferred or assigned.
6. The Police Chief, or designee, may revoke an urban chicken permit as provided in the policy adopted by Council resolution.
7. Appeals of the decision to deny or revoke an urban chicken permit are to the City Manager, or designee, and must be filed within ten (10) days of the
decision.
8. Subsections A through D of this section and section 8-4-15 of this chapter do not apply to this subsection.
9. Additional requirements, including permit fees, shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
10. Violation of this subsection or the terms of the urban chicken permit are punishable by a Municipal infraction with a civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for first violation, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for second violation, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for third and
subsequent violations. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-13: FEES:
Animal fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-14: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the City Clerk, available at the animal shelter, and posted on the City website. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-15: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. The fine
amount for certain violations charged as a simple misdemeanor are scheduled and set forth in section 3-4-9 of this Code. (Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 116/715
Chapter 5
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
8-5-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be guilty of disorderly conduct:
1. Makes unreasonable noise in public so as to cause a breach of the peace.
2. Makes unreasonable noise in the vicinity of any residence which causes distress to the occupants thereof. For the purposes of this section, an
occupant shall not be considered distressed unless the occupant has first attempted to contact the individual responsible for such noise and
requested relief, and the noise continues or is resumed within forty eight (48) hours of said request. (1978 Code §24-47)
3. Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided, that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. (Ord. 09-4342, 6-16-2009)
4. Acts in a threatening or violent manner toward another whereby:
a. Any person is placed in fear of safety of the person's life, limb or health;
b. The property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; or
c. The lawful pursuits of another are substantially curtailed.
5. Uses inflammatory language in public which the person using the language knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke an imminent
violent reaction by another. (1978 Code §24-47; amd. Ord. 09-4342, 6-16-2009)
6. Places their own person in or on any public way so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear any public way
when ordered to do so. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 09-4342, 6-16-2009)
7. Commits a trespass upon public or private property with a malicious intent.
8. Wilfully and knowingly acts in such a way as to disrupt any lawful assemblage or gathering of people. (1978 Code §24-47; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 09-
4342, 6-16-2009)
9. No person shall request or solicit an exchange or transfer of anything from any person inside a sidewalk cafe without permission of an employee of
the business operating the cafe. No person shall be cited under this subsection unless the person engages in such prohibited conduct after having
been notified by a peace officer that the conduct violates the city ordinance. Any violation of this subsection shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00). (Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
B. This section shall not apply to any peace officer acting within the scope of the officer's duties. (1978 Code §24-47; amd. 1994 Code)
8-5-2: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
8-5-3: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC OFFICERS
A. Impersonating An Officer: It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly appointed and acting officer or representative of the city to wear or
display any insignia tending to designate the wearer as being an officer or representative of the city. (1978 Code §24-3)
B. Refusing To Assist Officers: Any peace officer making an arrest may summon as many persons as necessary to aid in making the arrest, and all
persons refusing to obey such summons shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1978 Code §29-1; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Obstructing Officers: No person shall rescue or take any person from the custody of any peace officer or prevent the arrest of any such person or resist,
oppose, obstruct or impede any member of the police force in the discharge of the officer's duties. (1978 Code §29-2; amd. 1994 Code)
8-5-4: DAMAGING, DEFACING PROPERTY:
No person shall damage or deface in any manner any property belonging to another, whether public or private, without the consent of the owner of such
property. (1978 Code §24-1)
8-5-5: KEEPING DISORDERLY HOUSE:
A. Simple Misdemeanor: No person shall permit or suffer to continue, without taking legal steps to prevent the same, any quarreling, fighting, disorderly
conduct, or any other conduct or condition that threatens injury to persons or damage to property, or loud, raucous, disagreeable noises to the
disturbance of the neighborhood, or to the disturbance of the general public, upon any premises owned by the person or in the person's possession.
For the purposes of this section, "to the disturbance of the general public" includes the disturbance of persons beyond the subject premises and/or to
the disturbance of persons upon public places, including peace officers. Any violation of this subsection shall be a simple misdemeanor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 117/715
B. Authority To Restore Order And Disperse; Failure To Disperse: Upon issuance of a criminal complaint for a violation of this section, any peace officer of
the city shall have authority to restore order upon the subject premises, up to and including ordering the dispersal of person(s) from the subject
premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an order shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Any violation of this
subsection shall be a simple misdemeanor.
C. Civil Sanction: Quarreling, fighting, disorderly conduct, or any other conduct or condition that threatens injury to persons or damage to property, or loud,
raucous, disagreeable noises to the disturbance of the neighborhood, or to the disturbance of the general public, upon any premises owned by the
person or in the person's possession is prohibited. For the purposes of this section, "to the disturbance of the general public" includes the disturbance
of persons beyond the subject premises and/or to the disturbance of persons upon public places, including peace officers. Any violation of this
subsection by a property owner or tenant is a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for first offense
and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for second and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 12-4496, 9-18-2012)
8-5-6: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to allow or permit the exposure of the genitals, buttocks, female breasts or pubes of such person to another not the
person's spouse or partner or to commit a sex act in the presence or view of another person except a spouse or partner, if:
1. The person does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desire of either of them; and
2. The person knows or reasonably should know that the act is offensive to the viewer.
B. "Sex act" means any act, actual or simulated, which involves contact with human or animal genitalia or the anus. This would include, but not be limited
to, such acts as masturbation or sexual intercourse. (Ord. 12-4468, 3-20-2012)
C. The penalty for violation of this section is punishable by a penalty as set in Iowa Code section 903.1(1)(a), as amended. (Ord. 15-4620, 5-19-2015)
8-5-7: FALSE ALARMS1:
No person except peace officers shall sound any police whistle or make any sound similar to such whistle, nor, without reasonable cause therefor, call for
the services of any peace officer. (1978 Code §29-4; amd. 1994 Code)
8-5-8: ENGINE BRAKING:
A. No person shall use an engine brake while operating a motor vehicle except in an emergency situation. "Engine brake" means the use or operation of
any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or deceleration of any motor vehicle which results in the unreasonably
loud, raucous, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle. "Emergency situation" means one in which there is imminent danger to property, persons
and/or animals.
B. Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in the schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter
4 of this code. (Ord. 06-4209, 4-18-2006)
8-5-9: AMATEUR FIGHTING AND BOXING:
A. No person, individual, association, corporation, partnership or club holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which authorizes on the
premises consumption, nor his or her agents or employees shall allow an amateur fighting or boxing match to occur on said premises.
B. No person shall participate in an amateur fighting or boxing match in an establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which
authorizes on the premises consumption.
C. No person shall promote, advertise, or organize an amateur fighting or boxing match in an establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer
permit, which authorizes on the premises consumption.
D. "Amateur fighting and boxing match" means a boxing, wrestling, mixed martial arts fighting, extreme fighting, ultimate fighting or shoot fighting match,
contest, event or exhibition for which the contestants are not paid or awarded a prize for their participation.
E. Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor punishable by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and imprisonment not in
excess of thirty (30) days or a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for first offense and one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for second and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 07-4270, 7-24-2007)
8-5-10: SITTING AND LYING ON SIDEWALKS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk in the downtown or in zone 1 of City Plaza or on a blanket, chair, stool, or any other
object placed on a public sidewalk in the downtown or in zone 1 of City Plaza. No person shall sit or lie on or in an elevated planter or public amenity
located on the public right of way in the downtown or on a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed on or in an elevated planter or public amenity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 118/715
For purposes of this section, "right of way in the downtown" includes Black Hawk Mini Park. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd. Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013;
Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
1. This prohibition shall not apply to: (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
a. A person attending, viewing, or participating in any of the following events: Friday night concert series, Arts Fest, Jazz Fest, University Of Iowa
homecoming parade, University Of Iowa River Run, Old Capitol Criterium Bicycle Race or any parade, public assembly, festival, performance or
similar event cosponsored or permitted by the city of Iowa City, where crowds of people gather. This exception shall not apply to the prohibition
against sitting or lying in an elevated planter. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd. Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
b. A person sitting or lying down due to a medical emergency.
c. A person with disabilities using a wheelchair or similar device designed for a person with disabilities.
d. A person sitting at a sidewalk cafe. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
e. A person sitting on a bench. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
f. A person who has a temporary use of sidewalk permit, a mobile vending permit, or other permit issued by the city. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
g. A person lying on a bench between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
h. A person sitting on the border of an elevated planter that is greater than twelve inches (12") in height. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
B. Citation: No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer that the conduct
violates the City ordinance. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
C. Definitions:
DOWNTOWN: The Central Business District, the near southside commercial area, and the northside marketplace area as illustrated on the map in
section 8-5-16 of this chapter. "Zone 1 of City Plaza" means "Zone 1" as that term is defined in section 10-5-2 of this Code.
PUBLIC AMENITY: Bench, table, trash receptacle, public art, bike rack, water spigot, kiosk, posting pillar, and pergola. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd.
Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013; Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
D. Violation: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00). (Ord. 08-4301, 4-
14-2008)
8-5-11: STANDING, LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS:
A. With the exception of persons authorized to use the public right-of-way pursuant to title 10, "Public Ways And Property", of this Code no person shall:
1. Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter upon any street, sidewalk, bridge, trail or crossing so as to obstruct the street, sidewalk, bridge, trail or crossing or
hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to pass thereon. A violation under this subsection can be proven regardless of whether a
person or vehicle is actually hindered or prevented from passing.
2. Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or in front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance of any public building, theater, hotel, eating house,
lodging house, office building, store, shop, office or factory or other like building so as to obstruct such place or hinder or prevent persons walking
along or into or out of such place or attempting or desiring to do so. A violation under this subsection can be proven regardless of whether a person
is actually hindered or prevented from passing.
B. A violation of this section shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 09-4356, 10-6-2009)
8-5-12: FIREWORKS:
A. Definition: The sale and use of fireworks is subject to the definitions enumerated in Iowa Code sections 100.19 and 727.2, as amended, which
definitions are incorporated herein by this reference.
B. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode any "consumer fireworks" or "display fireworks" within the corporate limits of the City
of Iowa City.
C. Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or for signal purposes in athletic
sports or by railroads or trucks, for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization, or for use in military funerals. Provided further, this section
does not apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
D. Permit: Subsection B of this section shall not apply to anyone who has applied in writing and has received written permission for the use of "consumer
fireworks" or "display fireworks" from the Fire Marshal of the City of Iowa City when the fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator, and
consistent with the issued permit.
E. Violation: A violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 17-4712, 6-
20-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 119/715
8-5-13: PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, alley, public place or in any place open to public view, provided this
subsection shall not apply to restrooms or public facilities designated for such purpose. (Ord. 12-4468, 3-20-2012)
8-5-14: STORAGE OF PROPERTY:
A. Definitions:
DOWNTOWN: The Central Business District, the near southside commercial area, and the northside marketplace area as illustrated on the map in
section 8-5-16 of this chapter. For purposes of this section, "right-of-way in the downtown" includes Black Hawk Mini Park.
PUBLIC AMENITY: Bench, table, trash receptacle, public art, bike rack, water spigot, kiosk, posting pillar, and pergola.
SHOPPING CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels, or a similar device, provided by the operator of a commercial establishment for the use of
customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. A shopping cart sold typically by a commercial establishment to a retail customer,
designed for that customer's personal use, and being used by that customer to transport goods temporarily is not a shopping cart for the purposes of
this section.
STORE OR STORED: To place, store, park, display, locate or set an item on the right-of-way in the downtown. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord.
13-4563, 12-3-2013; Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
B. Tree Rings/Planters/Public Amenity: No person shall store an item of personal property on a tree ring, on or in an elevated planter, or on or in a public
amenity in the downtown. This provision shall not apply to property on a bench that is stored for less than two (2) hours in any twenty four (24) hour
period and that does not have a footprint greater than four (4) square feet. Moving the unlawfully stored item to another location on public right-of-way
or onto another bench does not toll the two (2) hour limitation.
C. Right-Of-Way: No person shall store an item of personal property on the right-of-way in the downtown. This provision shall not apply to:
1. A person who has a permit issued by the City.
2. An item that is stored for less than two (2) hours in any twenty four (24) hour period, that does not have a footprint greater than four (4) square feet,
that does not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic, and that does not restrict access to a public amenity. Moving the unlawfully stored item to another
location on public right-of-way or onto a bench does not toll the two (2) hour limitation.
3. An item that is designed and being used to transport a child, such as a stroller or a bicycle trailer.
4. An item that is being used to transport a child, such as a wagon.
5. A wheelchair or similar device designed for a person with disabilities that is being used by a person who needs such a device.
6. A bicycle parked in a bicycle rack.
D. Shopping Carts: Shopping carts are prohibited on the right-of-way in the downtown unless the area of the bottom of the basket, or both baskets
combined if the cart has two (2) baskets, is less than three hundred (300) square inches.
E. Unattended Personal Property:
1. Unattended personal property located on the right-of-way in the downtown, including on a bench, may be seized. Personal property is unattended if
the property owner, or a person whom the owner has authorized to care for the property, is not within twenty feet (20') of the property.
2. This provision shall not apply to the property of persons who accompany children using the playground equipment located south of the public library
or to a bicycle parked in a bicycle rack.
3. Except as provided herein, if property is seized, a written notice shall be left at the location of the unattended property that will provide the owner the
opportunity to reclaim the property. The reclaim procedure shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. No property shall be destroyed until the
owner has been accorded notice that the property has been seized and the opportunity to reclaim the property pursuant to the reclaim procedure.
4. Property, whether attended or unattended, may be seized without notice provided to the owner if it presents an immediate threat to public health or
safety, is evidence of a crime, or is contraband. Such property may be destroyed without notice and opportunity for the owner to reclaim if the
property presents an immediate threat to public health or safety.
F. Verbal Notification: No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer that
the conduct violates the City ordinance.
G. Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00) or a Municipal
infraction. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
8-5-15: ELECTRICAL OUTLETS:
A. Except by written permission, no person shall use an electrical outlet located on the right-of-way in the downtown. "Downtown" means the Central
Business District, the near southside commercial area, and the northside marketplace area as illustrated on the map in section 8-5-16 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 120/715
For purposes of this section, "right-of-way in the downtown" includes Black Hawk Mini Park. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
B. No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer that the conduct violates
the City ordinance.
C. Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00) or a Municipal infraction.
(Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
8-5-16: DOWNTOWN MAP:
(Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
Chapter 6
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
8-6-1: SALE TO AND/OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND CIGARETTES; UNDERAGE PERSONS:
A. State Law Incorporated By Reference: Subject to the following additional subsections, this section shall incorporate by reference the definitions,
restrictions, requirements and limitations contained in chapter 453A, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as
amended, are hereby made a part of this section as if set forth herein. (1994 Code)
B. Employee Education; Cigarette Sales: (Rep. by Ord. 06-4218, 6-27-2006)
C. Enforcement Of Provisions1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 121/715
1. Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
2. Nothing in this subsection C shall be construed to preclude the city from complying with civil penalty, suspension and revocation procedures
specifically set forth in the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §24-8; amd. 1994 Code)
8-6-2: JUVENILE CURFEW:
A. Definitions: For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury or loss of life.
KNOWINGLY: Knowledge which a responsible adult should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible
adult's custody. This is an objective standard. It shall, therefore, be no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the
activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
MINOR: Any unemancipated person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
NONSECURED CUSTODY: Custody in an unlocked multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a peace officer or a person employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person's
parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6) hours without the oral or written order of a judge
or magistrate authorizing the detention.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such parts
of buildings and other premises whether publicly or privately owned which are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent, guardian or other adult specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or
control of a minor.
UNEMANCIPATED: Unmarried and/or still under the custody or control of a responsible adult. "Emancipated" is as defined in Iowa Code section
252.16(4), as amended.
B. Curfew Established: A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows:
1. Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor thirteen (13) years of age or younger shall be in any public place between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
2. Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor fourteen (14) years of age through fifteen (15) years of age shall be in any public place
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
3. Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor sixteen (16) years of age through seventeen (17) years of age shall be in any public place
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
C. Exceptions: The following are exceptions to the curfew:
1. The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
2. The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for
the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
3. The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the following:
a. Minor's place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one
hour before or one hour after the work shift;
b. Minor's place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one hour before or one hour after the religious activity;
c. Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one hour before or one hour after the activity;
d. School activity or, if traveling, within one hour before or one hour after the activity;
e. Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or
cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the first amendment of the U.S. constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom
of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour before or one hour after the activity.
4. The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult.
5. The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the city beginning, ending or passing through the city when such travel is by direct route.
6. The minor's business, trade or occupation, in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged, requires the presence of the minor in the public
place.
D. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by ineffective control to allow
the minor to be in violation of this section. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent or guardian up to a reasonable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 122/715
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent or guardian was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
E. Enforcement Procedures:
1. Determination Of Age: In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's license,
a peace officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
2. Grounds For Taking Into Custody; Conditions Of Custody: Grounds for taking a minor into custody for a curfew violation are that the person refuses
to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating this section; refuses to provide proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or
constitutes an immediate threat to the person's own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who takes a minor into custody for
a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not place bodily
restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into, or while in,
custody, or presents a risk of injury to the minor or others. A minor shall not be placed in detention for a curfew violation.
3. Notification Of Responsible Adult: After a minor is taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as
soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at
such time as the court may direct.
4. Minor Without Adult Supervision: If a peace officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the peace officer cannot locate
the minor's parent, guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the peace officer shall attempt to
place the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person who is known to the child. In the
event no such person can be promptly located, the peace officer shall place the minor in shelter care as specified in Iowa Code sections 232.20 and
232.21.
F. Violation: A violation of this section shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine not in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00).
G. Annual City Council Review: The city council shall be provided with and review enforcement data, including demographic, frequency and location data,
associated with all citations issued under this section on an annual basis. (Ord. 09-4376, 12-14-2009)
Chapter 7
WEAPONS
8-7-1: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS1:
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city limits. This prohibition shall not apply to emergency protection of persons and
property on any individual's own premises. Further, this section shall not apply nor be construed to prevent any United States, state, county or city peace
officer from discharging any firearm in the execution of the officer's duties. This section shall further not apply to individuals discharging firearms with the
written consent of the city for the purpose of killing deer pursuant to a city approved deer management plan. (1978 Code §24-64; amd. Ord. 98-3864, 12-
15-1998)
8-7-2: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
No person shall wear any pistol, revolver, slingshot, cross knuckles, knuckles of lead, brass or other metal or any bowie knife, razor, billy, dirk, dirk knife or
dagger or any knife resembling a dirk knife, bowie knife or other dangerous weapons under the person's clothes or concealed about or upon the person,
provided this section shall not be construed to prevent any United States, state, county or city officer or member of the city government from carrying any
such weapons as may be necessary in the proper discharge of said officer's or member's official duties. (1978 Code §24-66)
8-7-3: TOY GUNS AND SLINGSHOTS:
A. Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any air rifle, toy pistol, toy gun or other toy arms or
slingshot, loaded with leaden or other dangerous missiles, at any time or under any circumstances within the city limits. (1978 Code §24-65)
B. Carrying Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or carry any toy pistol, toy gun or other toy arms or slingshot out of or by which any
leaden or other dangerous missiles may be discharged.
C. Persons Under Eighteen Years Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to purchase for or give to any such person or knowingly to permit any such underaged person to have any toy pistol, toy gun
or other toy arms or slingshot out of which any leaden or other dangerous missiles may be discharged. (1978 Code §24-65; amd. 1994 Code)
8-7-4: BOWS, ARROWS AND CROSSBOWS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any bow or crossbow which propels an arrow or other dangerous missile
capable of inflicting serious bodily injury or death at any time or under any circumstances within the city limits. However, this section shall not apply to any
person discharging an arrow from a bow or crossbow at an inanimate target on public or private property provided the person has the permission of the
property owner and the person exercises due care and caution to avoid striking people or animals. (Ord. 97-3815, 12-9-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 123/715
Footnote 1: See subsection 10-7-7B of this code.
Chapter 8
COMMUNITY POLICE REVIEW BOARD
8-8-1: CREATION OF COMMUNITY POLICE REVIEW BOARD:
As permitted under Iowa's home rule authority and as required by the city's home rule charter, the city creates the community police review board
(hereinafter "board"), subject to the duties and limited powers set forth herein. (Ord. 15-4627, 6-16-2015)
8-8-2: INTENT, GOALS AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES:
A. Investigations into claims of inappropriate conduct by sworn police officers will be conducted in a manner which is fair, thorough, and accurate.
B. An annual reporting system regarding complaints against sworn police officers will be established to give the city council sufficient information to assess
the overall performance of the Iowa City police department in these matters. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
C. Persons may make a formal written complaint to either the board or the Iowa City police department. In accordance with this chapter the board shall
process only those complaints filed with the board but will receive reports from the police chief briefly describing the nature of the allegations made in
formal written complaints filed with the police department and the disposition of the same. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 15-4627, 6-16-2015)
D. The board will:
1. Oversee a monitoring system for tracking receipt of formal complaints lodged against sworn police officers with either the board or the Iowa City
police department.
2. Provide oversight of police investigations through review of such investigations.
3. Provide the opportunity for a hearing to the police officer if the board's findings on the complaint to the board are critical of the police officer, as
required by constitutional law, and give the police officer the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
4. Issue a final public report to the city council on each complaint to the board which sets forth factual findings and a written conclusion which explains
why and the extent to which the complaint is either "sustained" or "not sustained".
E. The board shall have no authority over police disciplinary matters because only the police chief or city manager may impose discipline under Iowa law.
F. No findings in the board's report shall be used in any other legal proceeding.
G. The board shall only review the conduct of sworn Iowa City police officers and shall only act in a civil, not criminal, capacity. The board is not intended
to be a court of law, a tort claim process or other litigation process. No action of the board shall be deemed to diminish or limit the right of any person to
file a claim or a lawsuit against the city.
H. A complaint to the board may be filed by any person with personal knowledge of an incident. "Personal knowledge" means the complainant was directly
involved in the incident or witnessed the incident. If the person with personal knowledge is underage or otherwise unable to complete a complaint form,
the complaint may be filed by such person's designated representative. The City Manager, the Police Chief, the City Council, or the board may file a
complaint to the board based upon a reasonable belief that police misconduct has occurred regardless of personal knowledge.
I. In order to assure that people feel confident in the complaint process, nonpolice City staff shall be available at a public location other than the Police
Department to receive complaints, although complaints may also be filed at the Police Department.
J. The board shall not interfere with or diminish the legal rights of sworn police officers, including those rights protected under the union contract, Civil
Service Commission, and State and Federal law. Similarly, the board shall respect the rights of privacy and freedom from defamation shared by
complainants and witnesses, as well as those same rights enjoyed by police officers under the law.
K. The City Council finds that internal accountability within the Police Department is a valid legislative purpose, and one method of accomplishing such
internal accountability is to have the police do their own investigations into claims of inappropriate police conduct. If a complaint is asserted against the
Police Chief, the City Manager will investigate the claim and report to the board and the City Council. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
L. Investigation of all formal complaints to the board is a mandatory duty of the Police Chief, and a report of each complaint investigation shall be given to
the board. Such reports to the board shall include the factual findings of the Police Chief as well as a written conclusion explaining why and the extent
to which a complaint is either "sustained" or "not sustained". However, such reports shall not include discipline or other personnel matters. If the Police
Chief and the City Manager find the police officer's actions constitute misconduct and discipline is imposed by the Police Chief or City Manager, the
internal affairs investigation may become a public record to be released by the City Attorney to the extent provided by law, in which case the City
Attorney shall forward a copy of such internal affairs investigation report to the board. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 19-4783, 3-12-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 124/715
M. In order to assure external accountability of the actions of the Police Department, the Police Chief shall provide the board with a report at least quarterly
of all formal complaints filed directly with the Police Department, which report shall state the date and location of the incident and a brief description of
the nature of the allegation and the disposition of the complaint. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
N. External accountability will further be provided by the board's maintenance of a central registry of all formal complaints. In addition to the central
registry, the board shall provide an annual report to the City Council, which report shall be public and shall set forth the general types and numbers of
complaints, how they were resolved, whether the board's decision differed from that of the Police Chief and/or City Manager, demographic information,
and recommendations as to how the Police Department may improve its community relations or be more responsive to community needs. (Ord. 13-
4555, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 19-4783, 3-12-2019)
O. The board shall hold at least one community forum each year for the purpose of hearing views on the policies, practices and procedures of the Iowa
City Police Department, review police practices, procedures, and written policies as those practices and procedures relate to the Police Department's
performance as a whole, and report their recommendations, if any, to the City Council, City Manager and Police Chief. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013; amd.
Ord. 15-4627, 6-16-2015)
8-8-3: DEFINITION OF COMPLAINT; COMPLAINT PROCESS IN GENERAL:
A. A "complaint to the board" is an allegation of misconduct lodged against a sworn police officer ("police officer" or "officer") employed by the Iowa City
Police Department, where the complained of activity occurred while the officer was acting in the capacity of a sworn police officer.
B. Any person with personal knowledge of the alleged police misconduct may file a complaint with the board. In order to have "personal knowledge", the
complainant must have been directly involved in the incident or witnessed the incident. If the person with personal knowledge is underage or otherwise
unable to complete a complaint form, the complaint may be filed by such person's designated representative. The City Manager, the Police Chief, the
City Council or the board itself may file a complaint based on a reasonable belief that police misconduct has occurred regardless of personal
knowledge. The person or official filing the complaint may hereafter be referred to as the "complainant".
C. All complaints to the board shall be in writing and on forms provided by the board. Complaint forms shall be available to the public in easily accessible
locations, and nonpolice staff shall be available to receive the complaint forms. Assistance may be available to complete the form as designated by the
board.
D. All complaints to the board must be filed with the City Clerk within ninety (90) days of the alleged misconduct.
E. Only those complaints to the board which do not involve the conduct of an Iowa City sworn police officer or are not filed within ninety (90) days of the
alleged misconduct may be subject to summary dismissal by the board. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-5: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE CHIEF INVESTIGATORY DUTIES; CITY MANAGER INVESTIGATORY DUTIES:
A. Reserved.
B. Investigation: It shall be the mandatory duty of the Police Chief to do the following:
1. Prior to investigation of any board complaint, the Police Chief shall first give Garrity and Gardner advice to all police officers implicated in the
complaint, as required by constitutional law. This means the officer cannot be required to waive the officer's constitutional right against selfincrimination.
However, the officer may be required to answer questions during the investigation as a condition of the officer's employment, but any
admissions made by the officer cannot be used against the officer in a criminal proceeding.
2. Reserved.
3. Assign the complaint to designated investigators within the Police Department for investigation into the factual allegations of the complaint.
4. The complainant shall be interviewed by the Police Department and shall be entitled to have a neutral City staff person or some other person chosen
by the complainant present during the interview. The police officer is entitled to have a union steward present during any interviews. The City
Manager will participate in the interview process with the officers involved in the complaint. A review of the City Manager's involvement under this
provision will be done in two (2) years to ensure the practice is producing its intended purpose.
5. Investigators will prepare and forward a report of their investigation to the Police Chief, and shall make detailed findings of fact as to the allegations
in the complaint, and shall also set forth a written conclusion which explains why and the extent to which the complaint is either "sustained" or "not
sustained". (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
6. In the event the board's decision differs from that of the Police Chief, the Chief shall meet with the board in closed session to discuss the
discrepancy of opinion. If the board requests the City Manager's presence at said meeting the City Manager will also attend. Such meeting shall take
place prior to the issuance of the board's public report to the City Council. (Ord. 19-4783, 3-12-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 125/715
C. Legal Advice: If litigation, including criminal charges, relating to the matter of the complaint is commenced or is being contemplated by or against any
party to the complaint, the Police Department, the Police Chief and/or the board shall consult with the City Attorney and/or the board's own attorney on
a case by case basis, to determine whether and how the investigation of the complaint should proceed.
D. Complaints Against Police Chief: If a board complaint is filed concerning the Police Chief's conduct, the City Manager shall investigate or cause an
investigation to be completed.
E. Disciplinary Action: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Police Chief or the City Manager from taking disciplinary action prior to the board's review
of the complaint. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-6: POLICE CHIEF'S REPORT TO BOARD; CITY MANAGER'S REPORT TO BOARD:
A. The Police Chief shall receive the designated investigator's report within the time frame indicated by the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall conduct a
review of the investigators' report, and may do any or all of the following: conduct interviews or request the police investigators to conduct additional
investigations; request additional information, or that additional questions be asked; interview or direct that other persons or witnesses be interviewed;
request that other documents be reviewed and/or retrieved; and any other investigative matters the Police Chief deems appropriate.
B. The Police Chief will consult with the City Personnel Administrator and the City Attorney prior to finalizing the Police Chief's report to the board, and
shall then forward this report to the board, which shall include the following:
1. Detailed written findings of fact concerning the allegations in the complaint;
2. A written conclusion which explains why and the extent to which the complaint is either "sustained" or "not sustained"; and
3. Recommended remedial actions, if any, including amending current policies or adopting new policies.
C. The Police Chief's report to the board shall not include discipline or personnel matters.
D. A copy of the Police Chief's report to the board shall be given to the police officer, the complainant, and the City Manager. If the complaint concerns the
Police Chief, copies of the City Manager's report to the board shall be given to the Police Chief, the complainant, and the City Council.
E. The Police Chief's report to the board shall be completed within ninety (90) calendar days after the complaint is filed. The board will grant extensions
from this deadline for good cause shown.
F. All investigations shall be performed in a manner designed to produce a minimum of inconvenience and embarrassment to all parties, including the
complainant, the police officer, and other witnesses.
G. If a complaint is filed concerning the Police Chief, the City Manager's report shall include the same findings of fact and conclusions as required for the
Police Chief's report to the board. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-7: DUTIES OF BOARD; COMPLAINT REVIEW AND GENERAL DUTIES:
A. Complaints: The board shall forward copies of all complaints received to the Police Chief for investigation; or where the complaint concerns the Police
Chief, forward a copy of the complaint to the City Manager for investigation. A copy of all complaints shall be forwarded to the Equity Director.
B. Review Of Police Chief's Report Or City Manager's Report:
1. The board shall review all Police Chief's reports and City Manager's reports concerning complaints. The board shall decide, on a simple majority
vote, the level of review to give each Police Chief's or City Manager's report, and the board may select any or all of the following levels of review:
a. On the record with no additional investigation.
b. Interview/meet with complainant.
c. Interview/meet with named officer(s) and other officers.
d. Request additional investigation by the Police Chief or City Manager, or request police assistance in the board's own investigation.
e. Perform its own investigation with the authority to subpoena witnesses.
f. Hire independent investigators.
2. The board shall apply a "reasonable basis" standard of review when reviewing the Police Chief's or City Manager's report. This requires the board to
give deference to the Police Chief's or City Manager's report because of the Police Chief's and City Manager's respective professional expertise. The
board may recommend that the Police Chief or City Manager reverse or modify their findings only if:
a. The findings are not supported by substantial evidence;
b. The findings are unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious; or
c. The findings are contrary to a Police Department policy or practice, or any Federal, State, or local law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 126/715
3. If, in accordance with said standard, the board affirms the decision of the Police Chief or City Manager with respect to the allegations of misconduct
but nonetheless has concern about the officer's conduct or police practices, policies, or procedures, it may so comment in its report to the City
Council. If such comments are critical of the officer's conduct the board shall provide the officer a name clearing hearing pursuant to subsection B6 of
this section. When collecting and reviewing additional evidence, the board shall rely on evidence which reasonably prudent persons are accustomed
to rely upon in the conduct of their serious affairs.
4. If the board disagrees with the decision of the Police Chief or City Manager with respect to the allegations of misconduct, the board and the Police
Chief and/or City Manager shall meet in closed session to discuss their disagreement about the complaint. If the board requests the City Manager's
presence at its meeting with the Police Chief, the City Manager will also attend. Such meeting shall take place prior to the issuance of the board's
public report to the City Council.
5. At the conclusion of the board's review, the board shall issue a public report to the City Council concerning the complaint investigation. Such public
report shall include detailed findings of fact concerning the complaint, together with a clearly articulated conclusion which explains why and the
extent to which the complaint is "sustained" or "not sustained". If the complaint is "not sustained", the public report shall not include the names of the
complainant(s) or the police officer(s). If the complaint is "sustained" the board may include the names of the complainant(s) and/or the police
officer(s) if it determines that the public interest in such disclosure outweighs the public harm and privacy interests of the complainant(s) and/or
police officer(s). Said determination shall be made in writing and shall state, in detail, the board's reasons for such determination. The board shall
notify the person(s) whose name(s) it intends to disclose, the City Attorney and the Police Chief (or City Manager if the Police Chief is the subject of
the complaint), of its intent to make such disclosure by confidential written communication sent by regular mail or hand delivery at least ten (10)
working days prior to such disclosure. In addition, the board's public report shall not include any discipline or personnel matters, although the board
may comment generally as to whether the board believes discipline is appropriate without commenting on the extent or form of the discipline. A copy
of this public report to the City Council shall be given to the complainant(s), the police officer(s), the Police Chief, Equity Director, and the City
Manager. The public report shall indicate whether the board affirmed or rejected the decision set forth in the report of the Police Chief and/or City
Manager.
6. The board shall not issue a report which is critical of the sworn police officer's conduct until after a "name clearing hearing" has been held, consistent
with constitutional due process law. The board shall give notice of such hearing to the police officer so that the officer may testify before the board
and present additional relevant evidence. The board shall be responsible for protection of all State and Federal rights enjoyed by the officer. The
officer may waive the right to this hearing upon written waiver submitted to the board.
7. If the board's report is not critical of the officer's conduct, the board is not required by law to offer a hearing to the officer, but the board may hold
hearings as deemed appropriate by the board.
8. The board's report to the City Council shall be completed within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of the Chief's or City Manager's report. The City
Council may grant requests for extensions to this deadline upon good cause shown.
9. Nothing in this chapter shall in any way impede or interfere with the Police Chief's and the City Manager's lawful ability to perform their personnel
supervisory duties over sworn police officers, including the ability to impose discipline as deemed appropriate by the Police Chief or City Manager.
10. No findings or report submitted to the board or prepared by the board shall be used in any other proceedings. (Ord. 19-4783, 3-12-2019)
C. General Powers And Duties: The board shall also carry out the following duties:
1. Maintain a central registry of written complaints filed with the board or with the Iowa City Police Department.
2. Collect data and do an annual report to the City Council which shall be public and shall set forth the general types and numbers of complaints,
disposition of the complaints, the discipline which was imposed, if any, and demographic information. This annual report shall not include the names
of the complainants or officers involved in complaints which were not sustained, and shall otherwise be in a form which protects the confidentiality of
the parties while providing the public with information on the overall performance of the Police Department. The board's annual report may also
include recommended changes in police practices, policies or procedures. The annual report will also include data derived from the exit survey tool
developed for the complainant to provide staff and the public with perceptions of the process. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
3. In addition to the annual report, the board shall report to the City Council, from time to time, on police practices, procedures and policies, including
recommended changes, if appropriate, and hold at least one community forum each year for the purpose of hearing views on the policies, practices
and procedures of the Iowa City Police Department. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 15-4627, 6-16-2015)
4. The board shall adopt procedural rules and bylaws governing the board's activities, including the receipt and processing of complaints, and such
procedural rules and bylaws shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-8: BOARD COMPOSITION; LIMITED POWERS OF BOARD:
A. Board Composition:
1. The board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the City Council, who shall be Iowa City eligible electors and shall serve without
compensation. The City Council shall strive to appoint members who represent the diversity of the community. Appointments to the board shall
include one current or former "peace officer" as that term is defined by State law, except that a peace officer employed as such by the City of Iowa
City within five (5) years of the appointment date shall not be appointed to the board. The City Council reserves the right to waive the residency
requirement for good cause shown. The City Council also reserves the right, for good cause shown, to waive the requirement that the board include
one current or former peace officer.
2. Following final adoption and publication of the ordinance codified herein, the City Council shall appoint members to the board for staggered terms.
All appointments shall be for a four (4) year term, except for the initial appointments which shall be as follows:
a. One person appointed for a two (2) year term.
b. Two (2) persons appointed for three (3) year terms.
c. Two (2) persons appointed for four (4) year terms.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 127/715
3. Training shall be available to all board members to enable them to perform the duties imposed herein, including training on Iowa's Public Records
and Open Meetings Laws.
B. Limited Powers: The board shall have the following limited powers:
1. On its own motion, by a simple majority vote of all members of the board, the board may file a complaint.
2. The board shall decide the level of review to give the Police Chief's or City Manager's report by a simple majority vote of all members of the board.
3. The board has no power to review police officer personnel records or disciplinary matters except to the extent such matters are made public by the
City Attorney or are the subject of an enforceable subpoena.
4. The board has only limited civil, administrative review powers, and has no power or authority over criminal matters. The board is not a court of law,
and is not intended to substitute as a tort claims procedure or as litigation against the City.
5. If criminal charges are brought or are being considered against a particular police officer(s), the board's review or investigation may proceed with
interviewing other officers or witnesses, or collecting documents, as appropriate. Any statements given by an officer who is subject to criminal
investigation cannot later be used against the officer in a criminal proceeding, as provided under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
unless such constitutional right is waived.
6. The board may obtain outside counsel and independent investigators in order to carry out the board's duties.
7. The board may request that the City Council hold general public informational hearings concerning Police Department practices, procedures or
written policies. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-9: POLICE OFFICER'S AND COMPLAINANT'S RIGHTS PRESERVED:
A. All rights enjoyed by sworn police officers employed by the City are preserved in this chapter, and nothing herein is intended to waive, diminish or
interfere with any such rights protected by the union contract, Iowa's Civil Service Commission laws and other applicable State and Federal laws.
B. All common law rights enjoyed by complainants and police officers, such as privacy and freedom from defamation, shall be protected during the process
set out in this chapter, and it shall be the board's duty to protect said rights.
C. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no board member shall be liable to any person for damages or equitable relief by reason of any investigation or
recommendation or report made by either a board member or by the board itself. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
8-8-10: COUNCIL REVIEW:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-4291, 10-16-2007)
8-8-11: TIME COMPUTATION:
In computing time under this chapter, the first day shall be excluded and the last included, unless the last falls on a Sunday, in which case the time
prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following Monday. However, when the last day for the filing of a complaint or the completion
of a report falls on a Saturday or Sunday, or a day on which the Office of the City Clerk is closed due to a City holiday, the time shall be extended to
include the next day on which the Office of the Clerk is open to receive the filing of a complaint or the report. (Ord. 13-4555, 9-17-2013)
Title 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4786 - ELECTRIC ASSIST BICYCLES. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED BICYCLE: A bicycle is abandoned if it is left unattended at the same location on public property or attached to public property for more than
seven (7) consecutive days, whether parked legally or illegally.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A vehicle that has been parked:
A. Unlawfully on public property for more than seventy two (72) hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 128/715
B. Unlawfully on private property for more than twenty four (24) hours.
ALLEY: A public way intended to provide secondary access to abutting properties.
ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed to carry a large volume of traffic and whose principal function is to provide through traffic.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles owned by the United
States, the state or any subdivision of the state or any municipality of this state and privately owned ambulances and fire rescue or disaster vehicles as are
designated or authorized by the director of transportation under authority of the code of Iowa, as amended.
AUTOMOBILE OR CAR: A motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying nine (9) passengers or less, excluding motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled solely by hand or foot pedals, having at least one saddle or seat for use of a rider, and having two (2) or three (3)
wheels.
CAR: See definition of Automobile Or Car.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Iowa City.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city or designee.
COMBINATION OF VEHICLES: A group consisting of two (2) or more motor vehicles or a group consisting of a motor vehicle and one or more trailers,
semitrailers or vehicles which are coupled or fastened together for the purpose of being moved on the highways as a unit.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT(S) OR BUSINESS DISTRICT(S): The mixed use zone (MU), the commercial office zone (CO-1), the neighborhood commercial
zone (CN-1), the highway commercial zone (CH-1), the intensive commercial zone (CI-1), the community commercial zone (CC-2), the central business
service zone (CB-2), the central business support zone (CB-5), and the central business zone (CB-10), as defined in title 14 of this code and as shown on
the city's zoning map.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle designated, maintained or used primarily for the commercial transportation of property. The vehicle shall display signs
of at least seventy two (72) square inches on both the left and right sides of the vehicle. The signs shall identify the name of the commercial entity in letters
at least two inches (2") in height and clearly legible from a distance of ten feet (10'). Vehicles so marked may park in zones identified for commercial
loading and unloading for the purpose of loading or unloading commercial goods and property or for the purpose of providing required services to
commercial enterprises.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a street or highway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections
or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB EXTENSION: Sidewalk segments that extend into the roadway at an intersection or mid block crossing. A traffic calming measure also known as
bump outs, bulb outs or neckdowns.
DENVER BOOT: A mechanical device consisting of metal clamps or jaws and screws and a padlocking device which, when attached to the wheel of a
motor vehicle, prevents the vehicle from being driven. This includes devices other than the patented "denver boot" which can be used by attachment to the
wheel of a motor vehicle to prevent the vehicle from being moved.
DEPARTMENT: The police department, public works department, transportation services department or finance department of the city of Iowa City.
DRIVER: Every person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a street or highway.
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE: A self-balancing, nontandem two (2) wheeled device powered by an electric propulsion system
that averages seven hundred fifty (750) watts and is designed to transport one person, with a maximum speed on a paved level surface of less than twenty
(20) miles per hour. The maximum speed shall be calculated based on operation of the device by a person who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds
when the device is powered solely by the electric propulsion system. For purposes of this chapter, "electric personal assistive mobility device" does not
include an "assistive device" as defined in section 216E.1 of the Iowa Code.
FARM TRACTORS: Every motor vehicle designated and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, moving machines and other implements of
husbandry.
FIRE LANES: Any public or private street, alley, driveway, roadway, or easement of access that is to be maintained free from obstruction so as to provide
ready access for city firefighting vehicles, personnel, and/or equipment.
FRONTAGE: The frontage upon which a building is located abutting a street or highway shall be deemed "frontage occupied by the building", and use of
the phrase "frontage on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more" shall mean the total frontage on both sides of the highway for
such distance.
IMPOUND OR IMPOUNDMENT: The act of taking physical and/or legal custody of a vehicle by authorizing the vehicle to be held at a storage lot
designated by the city until the city authorizes release of the vehicle or by authorizing that the vehicle be immobilized by attachment of a "denver boot".
INOPERABLE BICYCLE: A bicycle is inoperable if it is left on public property and has a missing, broken, or disassembled component necessary for
operation, whether parked legally or illegally. A bicycle that is missing only a seat is not inoperable.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
LOADING ZONE: A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials and designated as such
by an official traffic sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 129/715
MEDIAN OR MEDIAN STRIP: That portion of the street right of way between traffic lanes and not part of the improved roadway or set aside for vehicular
traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle mechanically self-propelled excluding electric personal assistive mobility devices.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, including a motor scooter but excluding a tractor and a motorized bicycle.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOTOR BICYCLE OR MOPED: A two (2) wheeled vehicle having a saddle or seat for use of a rider, with an engine having a
displacement no greater than fifty (50) cubic centimeters and not capable of operating at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour on level
ground unassisted by human power.
NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES: Roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, coasters, and other such similar wheeled or coasting devices, including
unicycles, but excluding bicycles, wheelchairs, baby strollers, baby carriages, and small wagons.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or if a vehicle is the subject of a security agreement or lease with an immediate right of
possession vested in the debtor or lessee, then the debtor or lessee shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
PARK: To stop a vehicle or bicycle and leave it standing for a time, whether occupied or not.
PARKING: That portion of a right of way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk, the
area within six feet (6') of the lateral line of the roadway.
PARKING LOT: A facility owned or leased by the city and open to the general public for off street parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING TICKET: A notice of fine for a parking violation as authorized by the code of Iowa, as amended.
PARKING ZONE: That portion of the street between the curb lines or lateral lines of a roadway ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and the adjacent
property lines, which portion is designated for parking; also including areas in which parking is not otherwise prohibited in this title.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: Either of the following: a) a space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of
passengers and designated as such by an official traffic sign, or b) a section of a traveled lane of a roadway immediately adjacent to an official traffic sign
designating it as such. Valet parking zones shall be treated as passenger loading zones.
PEACE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations, including those designated as
peace officers in the code of Iowa, as amended.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on public property on foot.
PERSON: Every natural person, company, firm, partnership, association, entity or corporation. Where the term "person" is used in connection with the
registration of a motor vehicle, it shall include any corporation, association, partnership, company, firm, entity or other aggregation of individual persons
which owns or controls such motor vehicle as actual owner or for the purpose of sale or lease, as agent, salesperson or otherwise.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and available for vehicular travel by the owner and by those having express or
implied permission from the owner.
RAILROAD SIGN OR RAILROAD SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or public official or by a railroad and intended
to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAMP CHARGES: Unpaid fees charged for parking in a parking lot owned or operated by the city.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The territory within a city contiguous to and including a highway, not comprising a commercial, suburban or school district,
where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage of such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by dwellings or by
dwellings and buildings not in use for business.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: A street used primarily for access to residences and residential properties.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or so marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times as set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from property
occupied by a school.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motorized power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. A "semitrailer" shall be considered in this title
separately from its power unit.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines and intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT: Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and incidentally operated or
moved over the highway, including, but not limited to, road construction or maintenance machinery and ditch digging apparatus. The foregoing
enumeration shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other vehicles which are within the general terms of this definition. However, nothing
in this section shall be construed to include portable mills or cornshellers mounted upon a motor vehicle or semitrailer.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: Any complete cessation of movement or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 130/715
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All parts of the city not included in the commercial, school or residential districts.
TOW: The act of removing a vehicle by means of a wrecker or flatbed truck from the location in which the vehicle is parked.
TOW AWAY ZONE: An area designated by signage within which illegally parked vehicles are subject to tow without further notice.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE, TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN, OFFICIAL: All signs or signals, not inconsistent with this section, placed or installed by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: A traffic control device which may be manually, electrically or mechanically operated and by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop, to proceed and to proceed with caution.
TRAILER: Nonmotorized vehicles designed to carry persons or property and designed to be drawn by another vehicle. "Trailer" shall be construed to also
include "semitrailer".
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. "Vehicle" does not include: a)
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; or b) any device moved by human power.
VEHICLE UNLOCK FEE: Fee charged by the city for assistance in unlocking a vehicle. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-
1997; Ord. 98-3846, 8-25-1998; Ord. 01-3992, 12-11-2001; Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006; Ord. 08-4317, 9-23-2008; Ord. 09-4344, 6-16-2009; Ord. 11-4459,
11-22-2011; Ord. 12-4464, 2-21-2012; Ord. 12-4466, 2-21-2012; Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013; Ord. 15-4635, 8-18-2015)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all of the state vehicle laws.
B. Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with traffic laws. During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department
may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (1978 Code §23-18)
C. Officers of the fire department at an emergency scene may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. (1978 Code §23-18;
amd. 1994 Code)
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a peace officer. (1978 Code §23-19)
9-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or designee, to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan
the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve
traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. In order to carry out the powers and duties of the
office, the city manager, or designee, is authorized to:
1. Place and maintain such traffic control devices as the city manager, or designee, may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the
traffic ordinances of this city or the state vehicle code, as amended.
2. Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
3. Designate crosswalks and safety zones as may be necessary for the protection of pedestrians and maintain the same by appropriate devices, marks
or lines upon the roadway.
4. Determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and place and maintain official traffic control devices, giving notice thereof.
5. Establish and maintain stop signs, yield signs and other official traffic control devices to designate through streets, intersections or other roadway
junctions at which vehicle traffic on one or more of the roadways must yield or must stop and yield before entering the intersection or junction.
6. Establish gross weight limits on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation and establish and maintain official traffic control devices on any
street or portion thereof to impose those gross weight limits.
7. Establish vehicle size restrictions on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation and establish and maintain official traffic control devices on
any street or portion thereof to impose those vehicle size restrictions.
8. Establish and maintain official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
9. Determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and indicate the same by establishing and maintaining
traffic control devices at those intersections.
10. Prohibit, regulate or limit, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times or during
specified hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 131/715
11. Prohibit parking on either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the opinion of the city manager, or
designee, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
12. Prohibit parking upon any street if the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of a street if the width of the
roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
13. Prohibit parking within zones of up to one hundred feet (100') in length if vehicle parking within such zone would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
14. Establish and designate parking spaces for disabled persons in on street parking areas and off street public parking facilities, as provided by the
code of Iowa, as amended.
15. Determine and designate streets upon which angle parking may be permitted.
16. Issue special permits authorizing the backing of a vehicle to the curb for loading or unloading property.
17. Establish or remove parking meter zones upon those streets or parts of streets where it is determined from an engineering and traffic investigation
that the installation or removal of parking meters is necessary. The city manager, or designee, may also establish the hours during which parking
shall be regulated by parking meter.
18. Establish and designate by signs the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and state the hours during which regulation of such
zones is applicable. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
19. Establish and designate by signs bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other common carrier vehicles. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-
1997; Ord. 06-4243, 11-14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007)
B. Prior to the installation or removal of any traffic control device or marking as specified herein, the city manager, or designee, shall give written notice of
such proposal to the city council. The notice, addressed to the city clerk, shall be given no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the proposed
action. Such proposal shall become final if the city council does not modify or rescind the proposed action within fourteen (14) calendar days after
receipt by the city clerk.
C. In addition to any responsibilities or duties given to the city manager, or designee, by this title, the city council may, upon its own motion, authorize the
installation or removal of any traffic control device or marking. Notice of a decision to take such action shall be provided, in writing, from the city council
to the city manager, or designee, no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the intended action. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-1-4: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. The city manager, or designee, may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
B. The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic control devices when required by an emergency. The chief of police shall notify
the city manager, or designee, of such action as soon as practicable. (1978 Code §23-17; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
C. The city manager or designee may install or modify traffic control devices in a temporary fashion to accommodate temporary traffic changes. (Ord. 99-
3910, 12-7-1999)
9-1-5: OWNER PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS:
If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in violation of the provisions of this title and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be deemed prima facie responsible for such violation. (1978 Code §23-
20)
9-1-6: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, town, district or any
other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this title or in the state vehicle code, as amended.
B. Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application. (1978
Code §23-3)
C. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this title, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 94-3659, 12-13-1994)
9-1-7: NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES:
A. 1. No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on any street within the central downtown business district or on any arterial street
within the city. The central downtown business district is the area bounded by and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south,
Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to the north. The following streets are hereby designated as arterial streets for the purposes of this
chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 132/715
Name Of Street
Portion Designated
An Arterial Street
Benton Street From Mormon Trek Boulevard to N. Madison Street
Bowery Street From Gilbert Street to Summit Street
Burlington Street From U.S. Highway 6 to Muscatine Avenue
Church Street From Dubuque Street to Governor Street
Court Street From Muscatine Avenue to Scott Boulevard
Dodge Street From Iowa Highway 1 to Kirkwood Avenue
Dubuque Street From U.S. Interstate 80 to Jefferson Street
Gilbert Street From Church Street to Kirkwood Avenue
Governor Street From Iowa Highway 1 to Bowery Street
Grand Avenue From Riverside Drive to S. Grand Avenue
Iowa Avenue From U.S. Highway 6 to Madison Street
Iowa Highway 1 All portions within the city limits
Jefferson Street From Madison Street to Muscatine Avenue
Keokuk Street From Kirkwood Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Kimball Road From Dubuque Street to
Kirkwood Avenue From Gilbert Street to Lower Muscatine Road
Lower Muscatine Road From Kirkwood Avenue to First Avenue
Madison Street From Market Street to Burlington Street
Market Street From Madison Street to Muscatine Avenue
Melrose Avenue From S. Grand Avenue to the city limits
Mormon Trek Boulevard From Iowa Highway 1 to U.S. Highway 6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 133/715
Muscatine Avenue From Rochester Avenue to the city limits
Park Road From Rocky Shore Drive to Dubuque Street
Prairie du Chien From U.S. Interstate 80 to Iowa Highway 1
Riverside Drive From Park Road to U.S. Highway 6
Rochester Avenue From Market Street to the city limits
Rocky Shore Drive From U.S. Highway 6 to Park Road
Rohret Road From Mormon Trek Boulevard to the city limits
Scott Boulevard From Rochester Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Sheridan Avenue From Summit Street to Seventh Avenue
Sunset Street From Iowa Highway 1 to Melrose Avenue
Sycamore Street From Lower Muscatine Road to the city limits
U.S. Highway 6 All portions within the city limits
First Avenue From Rochester Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Seventh Avenue From Rochester Avenue to Sheridan Avenue
2. All persons who travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on any road, street, or alley shall:
a. Stay as far to the right of the road, street, or alley as possible, except when necessary to make a left hand turn;
b. Operate the nonmotorized vehicle with the flow of traffic;
c. Operate the nonmotorized vehicle in a careful and prudent manner;
d. Obey all traffic laws which are applicable to drivers of motor vehicles; and
e. Wear a reflective device or reflective clothing after dusk.
B. No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle within any public parking ramp or parking lot except where posted as a permitted activity.
C. Except in the central downtown business district, persons may travel upon or operate nonmotorized vehicles on public sidewalks but must yield the right
of way to pedestrians and must travel upon or operate said nonmotorized vehicles in a careful and prudent manner.
D. No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on a sidewalk in the central downtown business district. The central downtown business
district is the area bounded by and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south, Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to
the north. (Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-1-8: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
No person traveling upon or operating any bicycle, motorcycle, or nonmotorized vehicle shall cling to or attach to any other vehicle while the vehicle is
moving upon any roadway or bikeway. (Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-1-9: ACCIDENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 134/715
A. Report Of Accident Required; Inability To Report: (Rep. by Ord. 97-3810, 10-7-1997)
B. Duty Of Driver Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which collides with any unattended vehicle shall immediately stop and shall
then and there either locate and notify the driver or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the struck vehicle a written notice giving the name and address of both the driver and the owner of the vehicle and a
statement of the circumstances thereof. (1978 Code §23-50)
C. Clearing Up Wrecks: Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other substance left on the
highway after such vehicle has been removed. (1978 Code §23-140)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
9-2-1: MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the Iowa department of transportation or its successor. All devices
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title shall be official traffic control devices. (1994 Code)
9-2-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, whether successively one at a time or in
combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals as defined in section 9-6-3 of this title. Such colored
lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and, where no other pedestrian signals are present, to pedestrians as follows: (Ord. 07-4266, 6-19-
2007)
A. Green Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a circular steady green illuminated signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is displayed.
2. Vehicular traffic facing a steady green illuminated arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
3. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Circular Yellow Or Yellow Arrow: When shown following the steady green signal or green arrow, vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the
intersection. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
C. Circular Red:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if no stop line is present, said vehicle traffic shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an
indication to proceed is shown. A right turn shall be permitted at an intersection by vehicular traffic which has come to a complete stop unless a sign
is in place prohibiting such a turn. Any right turn made pursuant to this subsection shall be made in such a manner that it does not interfere with other
vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection.
2. Vehicular traffic on a one-way highway facing a steady red circular signal may, after making a stop pursuant to this subsection, cautiously enter the
intersection and make a left turn onto an intersecting one-way highway on which traffic travels to the left unless a sign is in place prohibiting such
turn. Any left turn made pursuant to this subsection shall be made in such a manner that it does not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
3. No pedestrian facing a steady red circular signal shall enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic, but a vehicle turning right at such intersection shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian lawfully entering such intersection.
D. Red With Green Arrow: Vehicular traffic facing a steady red circular with green arrow signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. No pedestrian facing
such signal shall enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
E. Flashing Signals: Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 135/715
2. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or past such signals only with caution. (1978 Code §23-34; amd. 1994 Code)
9-2-3: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of
this title unless otherwise directed by a peace officer. (1978 Code §23-29)
9-2-4: PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY:
Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such
devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this title unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. (1978 Code §23-
33; amd. 1994 Code)
9-2-5: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or other device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official parking sign, curb, marking or traffic control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
No person shall place or maintain upon any highway or street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This section
shall not be deemed to prohibit the placement upon private property adjacent to highways any signs giving useful directional information of a type that
cannot be mistaken for official signs and subject to the zoning laws as provided in the ordinances of the city. (1978 Code §23-35; amd. 1994 Code)
9-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE:
No person, without lawful authority, shall attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal or any inscription shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. (1978 Code §23-36)
Chapter 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
9-3-1: DRIVER'S LICENSE AND VEHICLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
A. Driver's License Required: No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless the person has a valid driver's license, restricted license or instruction permit
as authorized by the laws of this state. (1978 Code §23-120)
B. Registration Required: No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated upon any street, any vehicle required to be
registered and titled by state law unless there shall be attached thereto and displayed thereon, when and as required by state law, a valid registration
tag and registration plate or plates issued for the current registration year and unless a certificate of title has been issued for such vehicle, except as
otherwise expressly permitted by state law. (1978 Code §23-99; amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-2: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Privileges Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
1. When responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of a felony or when in response to an incident
dangerous to the public or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may exercise
the privileges set forth in this section.
2. The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of the provisions of this code.
b. Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for the minimum distance necessary before an alternative otherwise lawful route is
available.
3. The driver of a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance may:
a. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
b. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or property.
4. The exceptions authorized emergency vehicles granted under subsections A2 and A3 of this section shall apply only when such vehicle is making
use of an audible signaling device meeting the requirements of the code of Iowa, as amended, or a visual signaling device approved by the
department of transportation or its successor, except use of an audible or visual signaling device shall not be required when exercising the exemption
granted under subsection A3b of this section when the vehicle is operated by a peace officer pursuing a suspected violator of the speed restrictions
imposed by or pursuant to this code for the purpose of determining the speed of travel of such suspected violator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 136/715
5. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1978 Code
§23-123; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle:
1. Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle with any lamp or device displaying a red light or upon the approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle of a fire department displaying a blue light or when a driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the drivers of
other vehicles shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb
of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a peace officer. For the purposes of this subsection, "red light" or "blue light" means a light or lighting device that, when
illuminated, will exhibit a solid flashing or strobing red or blue light.
2. This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using
the street, nor shall this provision protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of an arbitrary exercise of such right of way. (1978
Code §23-169; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Following Fire Apparatus; Parking Near Fires: No driver of any vehicle, other than a driver on official business, shall follow closer than three hundred
feet (300') of any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor shall any driver of any vehicle drive into or stop any vehicle within the block
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm1. (1978 Code §23-133; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway
without the consent of the fire department. (1978 Code §23-134; amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-3: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Stop And Yield At Stop Intersection: The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at
either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield
the right of way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or is approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. (1978 Code §23-161)
B. Yield At Yield Signs: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which the driver is driving and
shall also yield to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute a hazard. Said driver, having so yielded,
may proceed with caution. (1978 Code §23-162)
C. Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle attempting to turn left across the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction shall yield the right of
way to the vehicle or vehicles approaching from the opposite direction going straight ahead. Such driver attempting to turn left shall then turn left only
after giving a signal as required by law and only after affording a reasonable opportunity for the driver of the other vehicle to avoid a collision. (1978
Code §23-166; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Entering Arterial Highway: Every driver of a vehicle or other conveyance traveling upon any street intersecting any arterial highway shall bring such
vehicle or conveyance to a full stop at the place where such street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of such arterial highway, subject,
however, to the direction of any traffic control sign or signal or any peace officer at such intersection. Said driver shall not proceed until the driver can
do so without danger of collision, and in such instances, the driver of a vehicle on any arterial highway shall have the right of way. (1978 Code §23-163;
amd. 1994 Code)
E. Entering Marked Highways: All vehicles must stop before entering any marked highway within the corporate limits of the city, as established by the state
department of transportation or its successor, which signs are posted as provided by law. (1978 Code §23-164)
F. Approaching Or Entering Intersections: When two (2) vehicles are approaching on any public street or highway so that their paths will intersect and
there is danger of collision, the driver of the vehicle to the right shall have the right of way. (1978 Code §23-165)
G. Entering Street From Private Roadway: The driver of a vehicle entering a public street from a private road or drive shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching along such public highway. (1978 Code §23-167)
H. Emerging From Alley Or Private Driveway: The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway and shall yield the right of way to all vehicles and pedestrians
approaching on the highway or crosswalk. (1978 Code §23-168; amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-4: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Turning At Intersections:
1. Right Turns: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an intersection or turn into an alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning
in the lane of traffic nearest the right hand edge or curb of the street and, in turning, shall keep as closely as practicable to the right hand curb or
edge of the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 137/715
2. Left Turns:
a. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection or into a driveway shall approach the point of turning in the extreme left hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection as soon as practicable to complete the turn into a lane of traffic lawfully available to the street or lane being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the right of the center of the intersection.
b. The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection.
c. A left turn from a one-way street into two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving
the intersection. (1978 Code §23-200; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Turning At Restricted Turn Intersections: The driver of a motor vehicle shall make no turn prohibited by traffic control devices at the intersection. (1994
Code)
9-3-5: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
A. Overtaking: The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. (1978 Code §23-151)
B. Duty Of Overtaken Driver: Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of the overtaken vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1978 Code
§23-151; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Passing On Right: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle making or about to make a left turn or when the
roadway is lined for at least two (2) lanes of traffic in that direction, and such movement can be made in safety.
D. Duty To Yield: When any vehicle is traveling at less than the maximum permissible speed in an area for reasons other than traffic conditions, upon
audible signal from following vehicles, such vehicle shall move to the right and allow such following vehicles to overtake. (1978 Code §23-151)
E. Crossing Yellow Lines: No vehicle shall cross a yellow lane marker line at any time when such line appears on the right side of the centerline or when
the centerline is composed of a double yellow line. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the crossing of the centerline when making a left
turn into or from a street, alley, private road or driveway. (1978 Code §23-152)
9-3-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. General Speed Limit Provisions:
1. Any person driving a motor vehicle on a highway shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable
and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway and of any other condition then existing. No person shall drive any
vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit the person to bring the motor vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead,
such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using such highway will observe the law.
2. The following shall be the maximum allowable speed for any vehicles, except as otherwise modified in this title:
a. Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district. (1978 Code §23-188)
b. Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any school district.
c. Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any residence district.
d. Forty five (45) miles per hour in any suburban area.
e. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park2.
f. Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley or other public place not specifically mentioned in this subsection.
3. Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation conducted by the City Manager, or designee, the City may reduce or increase speed
restrictions set forth in this subsection where such greater or lesser speed is reasonable and safe under the conditions presented. (1978 Code §23-
188; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
B. Exceptions: Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the following maximum speed limits are hereby determined and declared
reasonable on the following streets or portions of streets, when signs are posted giving notice thereof:
American Legion
Road
35 Between the intersection of Scott Boulevard and the intersection of Taft Avenue, except as set forth in
subsection C of this section
Name Of Street
Maximum Speed
Limit (mph) Where Limit Applies
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 138/715
Camp Cardinal
Boulevard
35 From Melrose Avenue to a point 550 feet south of the City limits
Camp Cardinal
Boulevard
25 From the City limits to a point 550 feet south
Court Street 35 From the intersection with Lindemann Drive east to the City limits
Dubuque Street 35 From a point just north of the intersection with Kimball Road north to the City limits
Gilbert Street 30 From the intersection of Burlington to a point 1,800 feet south of the intersection of Highway 6
Gilbert Street 35 From a point 1,800 feet south of the intersection with Highway 6 south to the City limits
Iowa Highway 1 50 From a point 300 feet southwest of the intersection of Naples Road to a point 200 feet southwest of
Sunset Street
Iowa Highway 1 45 From a point 200 feet southwest of Sunset Street to a point 250 feet west of Miller Avenue
Iowa Highway 1 35 From a point 250 feet west of Miller Avenue to a point 200 feet west of Orchard Street
Iowa Highway 1 30 From a point 200 feet west of Orchard Street to the intersection of U.S. Highways 6 and 218 and Iowa
Highway 1
Iowa Highway 1 45 From a point 315 feet north of the intersection of Conklin Lane to a point 670 feet north of the
intersection of Northgate Drive
Iowa Highway 1 35 From a point 300 feet north of the intersection of Prairie du Chien Road to a point 315 feet north of the
intersection of Conklin Lane
Iowa Highway 1 55 From a point 600 feet south of the City limits to the City limits
Iowa Highway 1
(Burlington Street)
25 From its intersection with U.S. Highways 218 and 6 to a point 150 feet east of Van Buren Street
Lower West Branch
35 From a point 260 feet east of the Hummingbird Lane to 150 feet west of Brentwood Drive, and from a
point 200 feet east of Broadmoor Lane to the centerline of Taft Avenue
Melrose Avenue 35 From the intersection with Emerald Street west to the west City limits
Mormon Trek
Boulevard
35 From the north City limits to a point 620 feet southeast of Iowa Highway 1
Mormon Trek
Boulevard
45 From a point 620 feet southeast of Iowa Highway 1 to the intersection with Old Highway 218
Muscatine Avenue 35 From a point 100 feet east of the intersection with Juniper Drive to the City limits
Naples Avenue 30 From the intersection with Iowa Highway 1 north to the end of Naples Avenue
Naples Avenue 35 From the City limits to the intersection with Iowa Highway 1
Old U.S. Highway
218
45 From the south City limits to the northern terminus of Old U.S. Highway 218
Park Road 25 From the intersection with Rocky Shore Drive east to the intersection with North Dubuque Street
Rochester Avenue 35 From the intersection with First Avenue east to the City limits
Rohret Road 35 From the intersection with Mormon Trek Boulevard west to the City limits
Scott Boulevard 35 From the intersection with Iowa Highway 1 south to U.S. Highway 6
Soccer Park Road 30 From the intersection with Lehman Avenue to the entrance of the soccer park
South Riverside
Drive
30 From a point 800 feet south of the intersection with U.S. Highway 6 and Iowa Highway 1 north to the
intersection with U.S. Highway 6 and Iowa Highway 1
South Riverside
Drive
45 From the northern terminus of Old U.S. Highway 218 to a point 800 feet south of the intersection with
U.S. Highway 6 and Iowa Highway 1
Sycamore Street 30 From the intersection with U.S. Highway 6 south to the City limits
Taft Avenue 35 Between Lower West Branch Road and American Legion Road
U.S. Highway 6 45 From the east City limits to a point 500 feet west of Fairmeadows Boulevard
U.S. Highway 6 40 From a point 500 feet west of Fairmeadows Boulevard west to a point 450 feet east of Keokuk Street
U.S. Highway 6 35 From a point 450 feet east of Keokuk Street west to a point 700 feet east of the intersection of U.S.
Highways 6 and 218 and Iowa Highway 1
U.S. Highway 6 30 From a point 700 feet east of the intersection of U.S. Highways 6 and 218 and Iowa Highway 1 west and
north to a point 1,150 feet west of the intersection with Riverside Drive
Name Of Street
Maximum Speed
Limit (mph) Where Limit Applies
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 139/715
U.S. Highway 6 35 From a point 1,150 feet west of the intersection with Riverside Drive, west to the City limits
First Avenue 25 From the intersection of Bradford Drive south to the intersection of U.S. Highway 6
(1978 Code §23-189; amd. Ord. 96-3748, 9-10-1996; Ord. 97-3771, 1-28-1997; Ord. 97-3772, 1-28-1997; Ord. 98-3866, 12-15-1998; Ord. 99-3876, 2-23-
1999; Ord. 05-4157, 4-19-2005; Ord. 05-4177, 9-6-2005; Ord. 05-4179, 9-6-2005; Ord. 06-4231, 9-5-2006; Ord. 08-4302, 4-14-2008; Ord. 10-4379, 1-25-
2010; Ord. 10-4389, 5-10-2010; Ord. 11-4453, 10-18-2011; Ord. 14-4581, 5-6-2014; Ord. 17-4716, 8-1-2017; Ord. 18-4764, 8-21-2018)
C. School Speed Zones: Upon the basis of a traffic investigation, school speed zones on the following streets are established in which the maximum
speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on Monday through Friday of each week,
unless otherwise specifically noted herein, after the City Manager, or designee, has established signs to designate the zones: (Ord. 17-4719, 8-15-
2017)
American
Legion
Road
From 150 feet east of Arlington Drive to a point 400 feet east of Barrington Road
Barrington
Road
From American Legion Road to a point 800 feet south
Benton
Street
From Estron Street to Sunset Street
Church
Street
From North Van Buren Street to North Dodge Street
Court
Street
From Third Avenue to Upland Avenue
DeForest
Street
From Ridge Street to Spruce Street
Dodge
Street
From 350 feet north of Church Street to a point 250 feet south of Church Street effect during the following periods: 7:25 A.M. to 8:10
A.M. and 2:40 P.M. to 3:25 P.M. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday and 7:25 A.M. to 8:10 A.M. and 1:40 P.M. to 2:25 P.M. on
Thursday when school is in session
Eastwood
Drive
From Brookside Drive to Willow Street
Kennedy
Parkway
From Camp Cardinal Boulevard to Camp Cardinal Place
Lakeside
Drive
From Lombard Street to Miami Drive
Rider
Street
From Black Spring Circle to Woolf Avenue
River
Street
From Blackhawk Street to Woolf Avenue
Rochester
Avenue
From Ashwood Drive to First Avenue
Rohret
Road
From Wild Prairie Drive to Goldenrod Drive
Seymour
Avenue
From Clark Street to Oakland Avenue
Southlawn
Drive
From Muscatine Avenue to Eastwood Drive
Sycamore
Street
From California Avenue to a point 300 feet south of Lakeside Drive
From Lehman Avenue to a point 600 feet north of Daniel Place
Washington
Street
From 400 feet east of Westminster Street to Ravencrest Drive
Whiting
Avenue
From Ridge Drive to Kimball Road
First
Avenue
From A Street to Mayfield Drive
Name Of Street
Maximum Speed
Limit (mph) Where Limit Applies
Name Of
Street Where Limit Applies
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 140/715
(1978 Code §23-189.1; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3780, 4-22-1997; Ord. 04-4134, 8-3-2004; Ord. 06-4231, 9-5-2006; Ord. 12-4487, 7-
31-2012; Ord. 13-4561, 10-15-2013; Ord. 16-4666, 6-21-2016; Ord. 17-4716, 8-1-2017; Ord. 17-4719, 8-15-2017)
D. Control Of Vehicle; Reduced Speed: A person operating a motor vehicle shall have the vehicle under control at all times and shall reduce the speed to a
reasonable and proper rate:
1. When approaching and passing a person walking in the traveled portion of the public highway.
2. When approaching and passing an animal being led, ridden or driven upon a public highway.
3. When approaching and traversing a crossing or intersection of public highways or a bridge, sharp turn, curve or steep descent in a public highway.
4. When approaching and passing an emergency warning device displayed in accordance with rules adopted under the Code of Iowa, as amended, or
an emergency vehicle displaying a revolving or flashing light.
5. When approaching and passing a slow moving vehicle displaying a reflective device as provided by the Code of Iowa, as amended.
6. When approaching and passing through a signposted construction or maintenance zone upon the public highway. (1978 Code §23-190; amd. 1994
Code)
9-3-7: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
A. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in
the manner provided herein where other vehicles may be affected by such movement.
B. The signals required under the provisions of this title may be given either by means of the hand and arm as provided in subsection C of this section or
by a mechanical or electrical directional signal device or light of a type approved by the State Department of Transportation or its successor and
conforming to the provisions of this title.
C. All signals herein required which may be given by hand and arm shall, when so given, be given from the left side of the vehicle, and the following
manner of interpretation thereof is suggested:
1. Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1994 Code)
D. A signal of intention to turn right, left or stop shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle
before turning or stopping. (1978 Code §23-132)
9-3-8: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The designation of one-way streets or alleys by the City Manager, or designee, shall not be effective until traffic control devices marking the designation
are in place, whether such designation is temporary or permanent. The designation may include one or more lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-3-9: GENERAL DRIVING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Driving On Right Hand Side Of Roadway; Exception: Upon all streets, except one-way streets, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right side of
the street, and the driver of a slow moving vehicle shall drive as closely as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the street. (1978 Code §23-124;
amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
B. Driving On Laned Roadways: A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until
the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety. (1978 Code §23-125; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
C. Responsibility For Unattended Motor Vehicles: A person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit the vehicle to stand unattended upon
any perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 17-4725, 9-19-2017)
D. Moving Vehicle Backward On Highway: A person shall not cause a vehicle to be moved in a backward direction on a highway unless and until the
vehicle can be backed with reasonable safety and shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching vehicle on the highway or intersecting highway which
is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. (1978 Code §23-127; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
E. Driving On Sidewalk: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. This
subsection shall not apply to any vehicle performing maintenance or construction in a sidewalk area. (1978 Code §23-128; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-
1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 141/715
9-3-10: DUTY OF DRIVER AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
A. When a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates, flagperson or
otherwise of the immediate approach of a train, the vehicle driver shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest track
of railroad and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
B. The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain stopped when a crossing gate is lowered or a flagperson gives a signal of the approach or passage of a
train. (1978 Code §23-131; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-3-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Unlawful Riding: Passengers shall not ride on any part of any vehicle unless it is expressly designed either for passenger use or designed for carrying
livestock, merchandise or freight. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
B. Following Too Closely: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for
the speed of such vehicles, the condition of the street or highway and the vehicles thereon. (1978 Code §23-138; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
C. Coasting: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive with the source of motive power disengaged from the driving wheels except when disengagement
is necessary to stop or to shift gears. (1978 Code §23-122; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
D. Vehicles In Bicycle Lane: No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a designated bicycle path or lane, nor shall a person park any motor vehicle in a
designated bicycle path or lane. (1978 Code §23-126; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
E. Driving On Closed Street: No vehicle shall be driven over any street or portion thereof which has been lawfully closed to traffic. (1978 Code §23-129;
amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
F. Driving Through Processions: No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while the
procession is in motion, provided such procession vehicles are conspicuously so designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals or peace officers. (1978 Code §23-130; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
G. Squealing Tires:
1. No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to cause the motor vehicle tires to make any loud, raucous, squealing, screeching noise or other
sounds caused by excessive acceleration from a stopped position or while a vehicle is in motion. This subsection shall not apply to any noises or
sounds caused by the tires of motor vehicles when the vehicle is engaged in an emergency situation where it is necessary to accelerate or stop the
vehicle immediately or suddenly in order to avoid contact with another motor vehicle or with a pedestrian as long as the emergency situation is not
that of the driver's own making.
2. This subsection shall not apply to authorized police, fire and emergency vehicles. (1978 Code §23-137; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
H. Reckless Driving: Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is
guilty of reckless driving. (1978 Code §23-139; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-3-12: LANE USAGE:
Melrose Avenue from University Heights to Melrose Court shall consist of two (2) 11-foot travel lanes, one (1) 11-foot center left turn lane, and one (1) 7-
foot shoulder on each side of the traveled way, including pavement markings identifying such lane usage, except east of the intersection with Hawkins
Drive where one right turn lane for westbound traffic will be included, Melrose Avenue from Melrose Court to South Grand Avenue shall consist of two (2)
11-foot travel lanes, two (2) dedicated left turn lanes for eastbound traffic turning north onto South Grand Avenue and westbound traffic turning south onto
Melrose Court, and one (1) 7-foot shoulder on each side of the traveled way, including pavement markings identifying such lane usage, and Melrose
Avenue from South Grand Avenue to Byington Road shall consist of two (2) one-way, eastbound, eleven foot (11') travel lanes and one (1) 5-foot shoulder
on each side of the traveled way, including pavement markings identifying such lane usage. (Ord. 05-4174, 8-16-2005)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
9-4-1: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A. No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in any of the following places except to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal:
1. Within an intersection.
2. On a crosswalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 142/715
3. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet (10') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless
otherwise indicated by signs.
4. Within fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within fifteen feet (15') of the intersection of property lines at the
intersection except at alleys.
5. Within ten feet (10') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway. (1994 Code)
6. Adjacent to the five (5) linear feet of curb closest to a fire hydrant. Where the street has no curb, this prohibition applies to the five (5) linear feet of
road surface closest to the fire hydrant. (Ord. 09-4346, 6-16-2009)
7. In front of a public or private driveway.
8. On a sidewalk.
9. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction if standing, stopping or parking would obstruct traffic.
10. On a bridge, except when authorized.
11. No commercial vehicles used for pick up or delivery of merchandise or goods or passengers shall be stopped or parked in a lane of traffic when a
parking space, loading zone or any other space is available at the curb or in an alley within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any building where pick up
or delivery is to be made.
12. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
13. Within one block of any fire1.
14. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station or along the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signed.
15. Upon the median strip within the corporate limits of the city.
16. During a snow emergency, upon a street on which parking is prohibited by a snow emergency declaration.
17. On the "parking", as defined in section 9-1-1 of this title.
18. In front of a curb cut or ramp located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
19. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. (1994 Code)
20. In a bike rack, unless specifically authorized by the city manager pursuant to subsection 9-8-4B of this title. (Ord. 11-4440, 8-2-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
21. Adjacent to a curb extension even if it is a commercial vehicle and there is no parking space, loading zone or other space available within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of any building where pick up or delivery is to be made. (Ord. 12-4464, 2-21-2012)
B. Vehicles so located are subject to being towed pursuant to chapter 9 of this title. (1994 Code)
9-4-2: METHOD OF PARKING:
A. Parallel Parking: No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway except when parallel with the edge of the roadway, with the
right wheels to the curb and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or property line, except as provided in this
title when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations. (1978 Code §23-246)
B. Angle Parking:
1. No angle parking shall be permitted upon any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the Iowa department of transportation or its
successor has determined that the roadway is sufficiently wide to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
2. No angle parking shall be permitted in the city at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused to drive upon the left side of the street.
(1994 Code)
3. On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city manager, or designee, for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (1978 Code §23-265; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
4. On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city manager, or designee, for angle parking, no vehicle shall be backed into an angle
parking stall except as provided by the provisions of this title. (1978 Code §23-264; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-3: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
A. All Noncommercial Districts: In any noncommercial district, no vehicle shall stand, stop or park upon any traveled lane of a roadway in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1978 Code §23-
236)
B. Commercial Districts:
1. Noncommercial Vehicles: In commercial districts, standing, stopping or parking in any traveled lane of a roadway by noncommercial vehicles is
prohibited, except as allowed under subsection 9-4-10B of this chapter. (Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 143/715
2. Commercial Vehicles:
a. On two-way streets in commercial districts, commercial vehicles may stop, stand or park in a traveled lane while engaging in the loading or
unloading of property, provided ten feet (10') of width of roadway exists to the right of the centerline for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
b. On one-way streets in commercial districts, commercial vehicles may stop, stand or park in a traveled lane while engaging in the loading or
unloading of property, provided ten feet (10') of width of the roadway is open for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
3. Compliance Required; Time Limit: Vehicles stopped, standing or parked in the traveled lane of a roadway shall do so in accordance with the above
provisions, but in no event shall any vehicle be parked longer than fifteen (15) minutes. (1978 Code §23-236)
9-4-4: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Public Or Private Property: No person shall park a vehicle upon public or private property without the consent of the owner or person in possession of
such property or the agents thereof. Any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection may be ticketed and/or towed pursuant to the following
procedure: The police department is hereby authorized to act as an agent of any owner or other lawful possessor of real property and to tow or cause
to be towed, pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, any motor vehicle that has been parked or placed upon real property without the consent of
the owner or person in lawful possession of such property or the agents thereof. However, prior to the towing of any motor vehicle, the owner, lawful
possessor or the agents thereof shall, in writing, authorize the police to act as agent therefor and shall further agree to notify the county sheriff as
required by the code of Iowa, as amended, and shall also agree to release, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and
agents from any damages, claim of damages or liability resulting from such towing. The owner or lawful possessor of such motor vehicle may reclaim
such vehicle pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended.
B. One-Way Streets And Roadways:
1. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left side of a one-way street when such parking is prohibited by official signs.
2. If a street or highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon the roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle on the left side of the one-way roadway unless such parking is permitted by official signs. (1994 Code)
C. Residential Districts:
1. Trailers, semitrailers and other nonmotorized vehicles of any type and size shall not be parked on any street in a residential district, except as herein
provided and excepting bicycles. Such vehicles may park for the purpose of loading or unloading or making local deliveries, but in no instance shall
such activity exceed a period of forty eight (48) hours. (1978 Code §23-252; amd. 1994 Code)
2. Motor vehicles of any type that exceed seven feet (7') in height or eight feet (8') in width or twenty feet (20') in length shall not be parked on any
street in a residential district, except as herein provided. Such vehicles may park for the purpose of loading or unloading or making local deliveries,
but in no event shall said activity exceed a period of forty eight (48) hours.
3. Commercial vehicles which transport detonable materials or flammable solids, liquids and gases shall not be parked on any street in a residential
district, except for the purpose of making local deliveries. (1978 Code §23-252)
D. Adjacent To Schools: No person shall park a motor vehicle in a place which has been designated and signed by the city manager, or designee, to
prohibit parking adjacent to a school.
E. Narrow Streets: No person shall park a motor vehicle on any street when the width of the roadway is less than twenty feet (20') and when the city
manager, or designee, has posted official signs to prohibit parking on the street. When a street does not exceed thirty feet (30') in width, parking along
one side of the street may be prohibited when the city manager, or designee, has posted official signs to prohibit such parking.
F. Near Hazardous Or Congested Places: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a hazardous or congested place which has been designated and
signed by the city manager, or designee, to prohibit stopping, standing or parking. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
G. Sale Or Repairs Of Vehicles: No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (1978 Code §23-239)
H. In Excess Of Forty Eight Hours: No vehicle shall be parked or remain at the same location upon any street, alley or public ground at any time for a
period longer than forty eight (48) hours. Vehicles must be moved at least twenty feet (20') in distance during each forty eight (48) hour time period in
order to avoid penalty under this subsection. (Ord. 99-3875, 2-23-1999)
I. Parking Limited To Intended Use: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for more than
ten (10) minutes for the principal purpose of conducting commercial activity from said vehicle, including, but not limited to, selling merchandise and
food. (Ord. 06-4222, 7-18-2006)
9-4-5: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. The department is authorized to post temporary traffic signs prohibiting parking along the route of a parade or other approved special event and along
streets or portions thereof which are scheduled for service or repair work, including, but not limited to, resurfacing, maintenance, repair, cleaning, oiling
or snow removal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 144/715
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the street along such posted route within the area where parking is prohibited by such signs.
Vehicles parked in violation of this provision may be towed if the signs posted indicate "Towaway Zone".
C. Temporary traffic signs constructed in accordance with standards established by the city manager, or designee, shall be placed within ten feet (10') of
the traveled portion of the roadway or curb along that side of the street on which the parking prohibition is to be in effect. The signs may be mounted on
temporary supports, on existing street signposts, on parking meters or in accordance with standards established by the city manager, or designee.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle so as to block an alley, whether attended or unattended.
B. Alleys In Commercial Districts:
1. In commercial districts, the city manager, or designee, is authorized to designate certain alleys as "No Parking Anytime" on one side of the alley and
on the other side of the same alley, "Loading Zone". When such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the middle
of the alley or on the side of the alley designated "No Parking Anytime", and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the side of the
alley designated "Loading Zone" for a period in excess of the time limit stated on the sign. Vehicles found parked in violation of this provision may be
towed if the signs posted indicate "Towaway Zone". (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
2. In alleys in the commercial district which are not so marked, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period exceeding ten (10)
minutes. (Ord. 09-4345, 6-16-2009)
C. Alleys In Noncommercial Districts: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon or in alleys in noncommercial districts.
D. Emergency Access To Alleys:
1. If access to an alley is required to provide emergency police, fire, medical, utility or other services, the owner or driver of a vehicle parked therein
shall immediately move the vehicle from the alley.
2. To assure access of emergency vehicles to alleys in the commercial district, the driver of a vehicle standing in an alley to load or unload pursuant to
subsection B of this section shall not leave the vehicle unattended for more than ten (10) minutes.
3. If a vehicle must be moved to provide emergency access and the owner, driver or other authorized person cannot be located, the department may
cause the vehicle to be towed from the alley and impounded as provided in chapter 9 of this title.
4. All vehicles which are parked in alleys pursuant to subsections A and B of this section are subject to the provisions of this subsection. (1994 Code;
amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-7: VEHICLES ON PARKING AREA:
A. Generally: The parking of motor vehicles upon parking areas shall not be allowed unless the city manager, or designee, on the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation, establishes parking on the area in a designated commercial zone by installing and maintaining traffic controls.
B. Standards: If the city manager, or designee, establishes parking of motor vehicles upon the parking area within a designated area, parking shall be for
the use of the general public. The following standards shall apply:
1. The curb adjacent to the roadway shall be cut to provide ingress and egress for the area specified.
2. The parking area designated shall be paved with equivalent material used in paving the adjacent roadway, and adequate drainage shall be provided.
3. In parking areas, no vehicle shall park:
a. Within ten feet (10') of a crosswalk.
b. Within five feet (5') of a driveway other than the ingress and egress drive of the designated area.
c. Adjacent to the five (5) linear feet of curb closest to a fire hydrant. Where the street has no curb, this prohibition applies to the five (5) linear feet of
road surface closest to the fire hydrant.
4. No vehicle shall park in such designated area so as to leave less than five feet (5') of the sidewalk for the use of pedestrians. (1978 Code §23-245;
amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 09-4346, 6-16-2009)
9-4-8: RESERVED PARKING SPACES:
A. Reserved Space For Funerals: Where it is necessary to hold a funeral service in a metered zone, the funeral director may be authorized by the city
manager, or designee, to post an approved "No Parking" sign. Such signs shall be posted by the funeral director before the service at a time equal to
the maximum allowed in the parking zone plus one-half (1/2) hour. All such signs must be removed by the funeral director within one-half (1/2) hour after
the close of the funeral. All funeral "No Parking" signs shall be furnished by the funeral directors and be of a design approved by the city manager, or
designee. (1978 Code §23-248; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 145/715
B. Reserved Space For Construction:
1. Permit Required; Fee:
a. Contractors doing construction or excavation in, by or near a metered parking space may reserve one or more such metered spaces upon
showing that the reservation of the space is necessary to accomplish the work. The fee for reservation of a metered parking space for each
enforcement day or fraction thereof shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
b. All payments shall be made in advance of the issuance of such permits. Hoods shall be placed on such reserved meter spaces. Meter hoods shall
bear the following message: "No Parking, Reserved Stall, Commercial Vehicles Only. Violators Will Be Towed". When it is necessary to remove
meters and posts for construction, the contractor shall place a sign bearing the same message adjacent to each reserved space. The contractor
will be charged any costs incurred to remove and replace such meters.
2. Contractor's Guarantee: A contractor who desires to reserve a meter space agrees to maintain the meter hoods or required signage and to
indemnify and defend the city for any claims, costs or damages which result from the reservation of such space.
3. Unauthorized Use Of Reserved Space:
a. No person shall park a vehicle in a reserved meter space without authorization of the contractor reserving same.
b. Vehicles parked in a reserved space may be towed as provided by chapter 9 of this title. (1978 Code §23-249; amd. 1994 Code)
9-4-9: PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES2:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a system to declare and notify persons of snow emergencies and enforce the provisions for same.
Without such provisions, cars remain parked on city streets, impairing effective plowing and snow removal. Consequently, potential hazards are
created by unplowed snow and cars parking too far from the curb.
B. Parking Regulations During Snow Emergencies And Exemptions: The city manager or designee shall declare a snow emergency when the city
manager or designee finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States weather bureau or on the
basis of any other weather service, that weather conditions will make it necessary for motor vehicle traffic to be expedited and for parking on certain
city streets to be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing or other purposes. The following parking regulations shall be in effect during snow
emergencies:
1. On all streets where parking is allowed on both sides, vehicles shall be parked on only the even street numbered side of the street on even days of
the month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
2. On all streets where parking is allowed on both sides, vehicles shall be parked on only the odd street numbered side of the street on odd days of the
month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
3. On all streets where parking is allowed on only one side, vehicles shall be parked on only the even street numbered side of the street on even days
of the month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall be parked on only the odd street numbered side of the street on odd days of the month after
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. No parking shall be permitted on the side of the street where parking is prohibited.
4. All other posted parking regulations and prohibitions shall remain in effect. For example, on all streets where odd-even calendar parking or other
restrictions are posted, those restrictions shall continue in force and effect notwithstanding subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
5. These regulations shall not apply to metered parking spaces, designated loading zones, and those streets located within the central business district,
which, starting at the intersection of Burlington and Gilbert Streets, is bounded by Iowa Avenue to the north, Capitol Street to the west, Burlington
Street to the south and Gilbert Street to the east, with the entirety of the right of way of said central business district included within this exemption.
C. Effective Time Of Snow Emergency: A snow emergency shall take effect not earlier than four (4) hours after it is declared, except if a snow emergency
is declared after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., it shall not take effect until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, unless otherwise indicated in the
declaration. A snow emergency shall be in force for a minimum of forty eight (48) hours after taking effect unless canceled or changed under
subsection D of this section.
D. Declaration And Notice:
1. The city manager or designee shall declare a snow emergency by written signed notice, filed with the city clerk, stating the beginning and ending
time for the period of snow emergency, which ending time shall be a minimum of forty eight (48) hours after taking effect. If the office of the city clerk
is closed, the city manager or designee shall file such notice promptly when the office next is open during normal business hours.
2. The city manager or designee may cancel such declaration or change the beginning or ending time. Notice as provided in subsection D1 of this
section shall be given for such cancellations or changes.
3. The city manager or designee shall inform the Iowa City/Cedar Rapids area radio and television stations and the Iowa City newspapers of the snow
emergency declaration and when the snow emergency parking regulations for Iowa City will be in effect and ask that public service announcements
be made.
4. The public works director or designee shall post information concerning the snow emergency declaration, when the snow emergency parking
regulations for Iowa City will be in effect and summarizing the regulations on the city website and shall post signs on all major highways and streets
entering the city at or reasonably near the city limits, informing motorists that a snow emergency has been declared and alternate side parking is
required.
5. The city manager or designee may take such other actions to inform the public of the snow emergency as appropriate.
E. Towing Of Improperly Parked Vehicles: Any vehicle found to be parked where not permitted during a snow emergency will be issued a notice of parking
violation pursuant to section 9-4-14 of this chapter and towed to a place designated for the storage of impounded vehicles pursuant to this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 146/715
(Ord. 08-4321, 11-18-2008)
9-4-10: PARKING FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING:
A. Loading Zones Designated: Loading zones and passenger loading zones shall be established and marked by signs. (1994 Code)
B. Parking In Passenger Loading Zones: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the loading or
unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are
effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. Any vehicle in a passenger loading zone shall be attended by either a driver or
valet at all times. (1978 Code §23-288; amd. Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006)
C. Standing In Loading Zones Designated For Loading And Unloading Property:
1. Generally:
a. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a place marked as a loading zone, except to load or unload property, during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. A stop for loading or unloading property shall not exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
b. A vehicle driver may stop temporarily at a loading zone to load or unload passengers when stopping will not interfere with any vehicle waiting to
enter or about to enter the zone to load or unload property.
2. Commercial Vehicle Loading Zone: Only commercial vehicles which are properly designated as such may stop, stand or park in a loading zone
designated "Commercial Vehicle Loading Zone". No person shall stop, stand or park a commercial vehicle in any place marked as a commercial
vehicle loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect except to load and unload commercial property. No stop
shall exceed thirty (30) minutes. (1978 Code §23-289; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Public Carrier Stops And Stands:
1. Established: Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger and common carrier motor vehicles shall be established by the city
manager, or designee, and marked by official signs. No persons shall stop, stand, or park within sixty feet (60') in advance of a public carrier stop
denoting a "No Parking" sign or symbol. (Ord. 99-3911, 12-7-1999; amd. Ord. 06-4243, 11-14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007)
2. Stopping, Standing And Parking Of Buses And Taxicabs Regulated:
a. Buses:
(1) The driver of a bus shall not stand or park a bus on a street any place except a designated bus stand.
(2) When the driver of a bus enters a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone to load or unload passengers or baggage, the right front
wheel of the bus shall be no more than eighteen inches (18") from the curb, and the bus shall parallel the curb so as not to unduly impede other
vehicular traffic. (1978 Code §23-291)
b. Taxicabs: The driver of a taxicab may temporarily stop in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 14-4573, 3-4-2014, eff. 5-31-2014)
3. Restricted Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a
taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop to load or unload passengers if the vehicle does not interfere with any bus or taxicab entering such zone. (1978 Code §23-291; amd.
1994 Code; Ord. 06-4243, 11-14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007)
E. Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To Curb: Loading or unloading from a vehicle backed to park at an angle to the curb shall be lawful only pursuant to
special permit issued for that purpose by the city manager, or designee. The permit shall contain special terms or conditions and may be issued to the
owner of the vehicle or to the owner or lessee of the real property to which the vehicle backs and parks. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
F. Enforcement: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation of this
section. Every thirty (30) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In
the case of passenger loading zones every ten (10) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be provided in the schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006)
9-4-11: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES:
A. In addition to the parking spaces designated by the city manager, or designee, for use by persons with physical disabilities, the owner of private
property parking may also designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of persons with physical disabilities. The private property parking owner shall
clearly and prominently mark parking spaces so designated.
B. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any parking space designated and signed as reserved for the use of persons with physical disabilities
unless the vehicle displays an identification device issued pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-12: REMOVAL OF PARKING TAGS OR MARKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall remove, alter or destroy any tag or mark placed upon any vehicle by a peace officer, but once the tag or mark has been placed, the driver
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 147/715
of such vehicle may remove the tag prior to driving the vehicle. (1978 Code §23-247; amd. 1994 Code)
9-4-13: FIRE LANES:
A. Designation: The fire chief or authorized representative shall approve, require, and designate public and/or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for
the efficient and effective operation of fire vehicles, personnel, and apparatus. Only those fire lanes approved by the fire chief or authorized
representative will be enforced. A fire lane shall be posted with signs at least every forty (40) linear feet. Said fire lane shall be deemed to encompass
that area within a twenty foot (20') radius of any fire lane sign or markings posted pursuant to this section. Posted signs will comply with the "Manual Of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and at a minimum contain the following language: "FIRE LANE NO PARKING". Markings may include a painted yellow
striped area measuring eight feet (8') from the curb/pavement edge and extending twenty feet (20') either side of a posted sign. Upon application to and
approval by the fire chief or authorized representative, a private property owner may be granted a fire lane designation for such property. Installation of
approved signage on private property will be the responsibility of the permit applicant/property owner. If an applicant/property owner is required by the
city to post a fire lane, upon request, the signs will be provided by the city at cost or the applicant/property owner can obtain an approved sign from a
vendor. When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided herein, it shall be presumed that said area is designated as a fire lane by or with the
authority of the fire chief.
B. Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to have an unattended vehicle standing, stopped, or parked in or otherwise blocking or obstructing any portion of
a designated fire lane at any time. Signs and markings shall be posted and placed to identify such fire lanes and to serve notice that standing, stopping,
and/or parking is prohibited therein. Such illegally parked vehicles will be subject to fines and/or towing at the expense of the owner. All designated fire
lane signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced when necessary to ensure adequate visibility. This
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant/property owner.
C. Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
D. Enforcement: It will be the responsibility of the police department to enforce the provisions of this section as they apply to both public and private
properties. The Iowa City police department is hereby authorized to ticket, tow, or cause to be towed, pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, any
vehicle that has been parked or placed upon the public or private street in violation of the parking laws of this city and/or state. This shall serve as
appropriate notice of such authorization to the Iowa City police department under the code of Iowa, as amended. By applying for a fire lane
designation, any applicant/private property owner and its employees and assigns hereby agree to release, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its
officers, employees, and agents from any damages or liability resulting from any ticketing or towing authorized under this section.
E. Presumption Of Liability: The fact that a vehicle that is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person will be considered prima facie proof that
such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of such parking. (Ord. 98-3846, 8-25-1998)
9-4-14: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation of this chapter. With the
exception of sections 9-4-10 and 9-4-15 of this chapter, every two (2) hours that a vehicle remains in violation after the vehicle is initially cited shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be as provided in the schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of
this code. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005)
9-4-15: LIBRARY PARKING:
A. Designation: The six (6) northernmost angled parking spaces on the west side of Linn Street directly adjacent to the front of the Iowa City public library
are designated as "library parking" spaces.
B. Spaces: The "library parking" space to the far north is further designated as a "library outside book drop off" space. The five (5) spaces directly to the
south of the "library outside book drop off" space are further designated as "library patron parking" spaces. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005)
C. Signage: Each space shall contain signage that includes said designation of "library patron parking" and "library outside book drop off". The "library
patron parking" signage shall include notification that the Iowa City public library hours are posted on the library entrance door. (Ord. 06-4217, 6-27-
2006)
D. Parking: During the time the Iowa City public library is open, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a "library patron parking" space except for
the sole purpose of allowing a passenger to go directly to and from the Iowa City public library, and said stop shall not exceed twenty (20) minutes. At
no time shall a person stop, stand or park a vehicle in the "library outside book drop off" space except for the sole purpose of allowing a passenger to
deposit a book or other item in one of the drop off boxes located on the outside east wall of the Iowa City public library and to return directly to said
vehicle, and said stop shall not exceed five (5) minutes. For purposes of this section, "passenger" includes the driver of the vehicle.
E. Violations: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation of the
"library patron parking" or "library outside book drop off" provision. Every ten (10) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation of said provisions after the
vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be as provided in the schedule of
fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Additionally, any vehicle in violation of the "library outside book drop off" provision is subject to being towed
consistent with the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005)
9-4-16: FOOD TRUCKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 148/715
A. Definitions:
DOWNTOWN ZONE: The areas illustrated on the map in subsection H of this section.
FOOD TRUCK: A motorized vehicle specially equipped to prepare and sell food items to the general public.
OPERATE: To offer for sale food and beverage items to the general public; it does not mean either loading or unloading food or beverage items in bulk
or other materials.
RESTAURANT: As that term is defined in section 10-3-1 of this code.
TRUCK PERMIT: Written authorization by the city to operate a food truck on public right of way as provided in this section.
B. Prohibited: No person may operate a food truck on public right of way without a food truck permit as provided herein.
C. Permit:
1. An application for a food truck permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee on a form provided by the city.
2. The permit shall require the permittee to pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed
upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any person or persons,
caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of
public property and the public right of way.
3. The permit shall require the permittee to obtain insurance in an amount determined by the city's risk manager.
4. The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for a permit in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the application being
filed. The city manager or designee shall grant the application and issue a permit if the requirements set forth in the administrative rules have been
met.
5. The applicant may appeal the denial in the same manner as mobile vending permits in title 10 of this code.
6. The city manager or designee, or city council if issued following an appeal, may revoke a food truck permit as provided in the administrative rules. A
permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuance or denial of a permit.
7. The administrative rules may limit the number of permits granted.
8. Permits shall be issued for one year.
9. The permittee shall not offer tobacco or alcoholic beverages for sale.
10. The sale, transfer, or assignment of a permit is expressly prohibited.
D. Location: No person shall operate, and no permittee shall allow a food truck to be operated, on public right of way in the following locations:
1. Inside the downtown zone;
2. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an entrance to a restaurant;
3. In a residential zone, as defined in the zoning code; or
4. In a loading zone.
The administrative rules may expand the areas where a food truck is prohibited from operating.
E. Allowed Operation: Notwithstanding any other provision in the code, a person may:
1. Operate a food truck in two (2) metered spaces if the parking meters for both spaces are operational.
2. Operate for up to three (3) hours in a metered space with an established time period of two (2) hours or less if the meter is operational.
3. Back a food truck into and park and operate it in an angled stall.
F. Fees: Fees for food truck permits shall be set by resolution of the city council.
G. Rules: The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this section. A
copy of said rules shall be on file with the city clerk and available on the city's website.
H. Downtown Zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 149/715
"Downtown Zone"
Food Truck Restricted Areas
(Ord. 15-4618, 4-21-2015)
I. Pilot Program: Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, the city manager is authorized to establish a pilot program for food trucks to operate
with a permit during the late evening and early morning hours in the downtown zone. (Ord. 17-4691, 2-7-2017)
Chapter 5
PARKING METER ZONES AND PARKING LOTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 150/715
9-5-1: PARKING METER ZONES; PARKING METER FEES:
Parking in parking meter zones shall be regulated by parking meters for the hours designated by the city manager, or designee, and for every day, except
Sundays and except legal holidays, designated by the city council. The fees for such parking shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4
of this code. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-5-2: PURCHASE, INSTALLATION AND REGULATION OF METERS:
A. The city is hereby authorized to provide for the purchase, acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance, regulation and use of the parking meters
provided for in this chapter and to maintain the meters in good working condition.
B. Parking meters installed in the various meter zones, which zones are established in this chapter, shall be placed upon the curb adjacent to the individual
parking places herein described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space
adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use.
C. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the city manager, or designee, and, when operating,
shall indicate whether the meter is being used for legal parking, and on expiration of the time for legal parking, such meter shall indicate illegal or over
parking. (1978 Code §23-275; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-5-3: PARKING IN METERED ZONES:
A. When a vehicle is parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter, or in a space utilizing multispace parking meters or a pay station as provided for in
this chapter, the driver of the vehicle shall immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the proper coin in the parking meter or at the parking pay
station for the time the parking space is to be occupied by the vehicle and put the meter or pay station device governing the parking space in operation.
Failure to deposit the coin(s) and put the meter in operation or to deposit such coin(s) in the pay station device governing such parking space shall
constitute a breach of this title and shall subject the driver or owner to the penalty prescribed. Upon the deposit of such coin and placing the meter or
pay station parking device in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of the parking time which has been
prescribed for the part of the street or parking lot in which the parking space is located and as designated on the parking meter or pay station. If the
vehicle shall remain parked in the parking space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and point, indicate such illegal parking, or if such parking space is
governed by a pay station and time has expired for use of the parking space governed by the pay station, and in such event, the vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and the parking in any such part of a street or parking space where such
meter is located or which is governed by a pay station shall be a violation of this chapter and punished as set forth herein. (Ord. 04-4116, 4-6-2004)
B. Commercial vehicles may park in the parking zone to load or to unload merchandise, without depositing coins, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes. If any vehicle is parked longer than fifteen (15) minutes, the driver or owner of the vehicle is subject to the penalties prescribed in this title.
(1978 Code §23-276; amd. 1994 Code)
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any owner or driver to permit any vehicle to remain in any parking space
designated by any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle is parked beyond the established time period, or is
governed by any pay station device for which the time has expired for use of the parking space. Every hour that the vehicle remains after the
established time period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 04-4116, 4-6-2004)
D. Penalties for violating the provisions of this section shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1978 Code §23-276;
amd. 1994 Code)
9-5-4: USE OF PARKING LOTS:
A. Fees:
1. Fees are hereby established for parking on city parking lots, and those fees shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this
code.
2. In each lot designated by the city council by resolution, the city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to install such mechanical devices that
will reasonably assure that each driver or owner of any motor vehicle parking on such lots has paid the fee for the privilege of parking a motor
vehicle. The times during the day or night, the length of time that a vehicle may be parked and the days in which a fee shall be charged shall be set
by the city manager or designee. The rate, hours and days for the permitted use shall be posted at the entrance to any nonmetered lot in which a fee
is to be charged for the privilege of parking.
B. Method Of Parking: No driver or owner of a motor vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in any parking lot owned or operated by the city except in
the places and in the manner designated by a meter and/or a marked stall.
C. Time Limit: No driver or owner shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any parking lot owned or operated by the city for a period exceeding
twenty four (24) hours unless a special emergency exists and the driver or owner has obtained written permission from the chief of police.
D. Prohibited Parking:
1. Vehicles Exceeding Weight: No driver or owner shall stop, stand or park a vehicle having a gross load of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds,
including the vehicle itself, on any parking lot owned or operated by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 151/715
2. Blocking Driveways Or Aisles: It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver of any motor vehicle to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any
parking lot owned or operated by the city so as to block or partially block a driveway or aisle. (1978 Code §23-277; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765,
1-14-1997; Ord. 13-4553, 9-17-2013)
3. Parking Limited To Intended Use: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any parking lot owned and
operated by the city for more than ten (10) minutes for the principal purpose of conducting commercial activity from said vehicle, including, but not
limited to, selling merchandise and food. (Ord. 06-4222, 7-18-2006)
E. Unlawful Deposits: No driver or owner shall place or leave or deposit any object other than a motor vehicle upon any parking lot owned or operated by
the city unless a special permit is obtained from the chief of police. (1978 Code §23-277; amd. 1994 Code)
F. Permit Lots And Spaces: A parking permit system for city lots and parking spaces designated for permit parking is hereby established for designation by
the city manager or designee. The duration and fee for permits shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. The permit
holder is entitled to park in the city parking lot or parking space designated for such purpose, and the permit shall be issued by the city manager or
designee. No driver or owner other than a permit holder shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in any area in the city owned lot or parking spaces
designated by such signs or other markers for the exclusive use of permit holders. (Ord. 11-4440, 8-2-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
9-5-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any driver or owner to:
A. Parking Overtime: Cause, allow or permit any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the prescribed time period.
B. Damage To Parking Meters Or Devices: Deface, injure, tamper with, open, wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or
mechanical device installed under the provisions of this chapter.
C. Use Of Slugs: Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or mechanical device any slug, device, metallic substance or any substance,
except coins set forth in this chapter or the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1978 Code §23-278; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Markings: The city shall paint lines or markings designating each parking space. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park any vehicle
across any line or marking or to park such vehicle in such a position that the same will not be entirely within the designated area. (1978 Code §23-277;
amd. 1994 Code)
9-5-6: PENALTIES; PARKING TICKETS1:
A. Parking Violations: The penalties for violations of parking regulations shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Parking
violations may be charged on a notice of fine (ticket), and if the driver or owner charged admits the violation, payment of the scheduled penalty shall be
paid to the department of finance. If the driver or owner charged desires to contest the violation, the violation may be appealed to the parking violation
review panel as provided in subsection B of this section or may be charged and filed with the district court on a standard traffic citation pursuant to the
code of Iowa, as amended, as provided in subsection C of this section.
B. Administrative Review: A driver or owner charged with a parking violation may request an administrative review within twenty (20) calendar days of the
date the parking ticket was issued. The request shall be made on the form provided by the city and shall be reviewed by a three (3) member panel
made up of the parking superintendent, a member of the police department and one other city staff member. The panel shall consider the defenses or
mitigating circumstances set forth on the review request form and shall base its findings and determination thereon. The panel may dismiss any notice
of fine (ticket) for good cause, and upon dismissal, the city shall refund the fine money paid by the appealing party, less any unpaid parking fines then
owing by the driver or owner charged.
C. Violation Not Dismissed By Administrative Review: A driver or owner charged with a parking violation on a notice of fine (ticket) whose violation was
reviewed but not dismissed by the administrative review panel may request that the violation be charged on a standard traffic citation and tried in
magistrate court as a simple misdemeanor. If the driver or owner is found not guilty or the charge is dismissed by the magistrate, the city shall refund
any fine money paid for the violation. If found guilty, the driver or owner shall be credited with all fine money previously paid for the violation. (1994
Code)
D. Returned Checks: If any check or automatic bank debit for payment of parking fees, charges, fines, or penalties is returned, for any reason, to the city
from the financial institution from which it is written, a service fee shall be assessed identical to the service fee charged for returned checks or
automatic bank withdrawals for water service, as provided in section 3-4-3 of this code. (Ord. 09-4347, 6-16-2009)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIANS
9-6-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided in this title. (1978 Code §23-212)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 152/715
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway,
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise caution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person
upon a roadway. (1978 Code §23-218; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to pedestrian workers engaged in maintenance or construction work on a highway whenever the
driver is notified of the presence of such workers by a flagperson or a warning sign. (1978 Code §23-218)
9-6-2: PEDESTRIAN'S USE OF ROADWAYS:
A. Crossing At Other Than Crosswalks:
1. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection or where
a specified overhead pedestrian crossing is available shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway, except the city may restrict such a
crossing by ordinance.
2. Where traffic control signals are in operation at a marked crosswalk not an intersection, pedestrians shall cross only in the marked crosswalk. (1978
Code §23-213; amd. 1994 Code)
3. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in any commercial zone other than in a crosswalk. (1978 Code §23-215)
B. Crossing At Right Angles: Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic control device, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb. (1978 Code §23-214)
C. Use Of Crosswalks: Whenever practicable, pedestrians shall walk upon the right half of crosswalks. (1978 Code §23-219; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Walking On Highways: Pedestrians walking on or along a highway where sidewalks and/or curb improvements are not present shall walk on the left
side of such highway. (1978 Code §23-217)
E. Solicitation Of Rides:
1. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
2. Nothing in this subsection or this title shall be construed to prevent any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway, not
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1978 Code §23-220)
9-6-3: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS:
Pedestrians traveling through intersections regulated by lighted pedestrian crossing signals, as defined below, shall obey such signals. Pedestrians
traveling through intersections where no pedestrian crossing signals are present shall be subject to traffic control signals as otherwise declared in this title.
At all other places, pedestrians otherwise shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this title. Pedestrian crossing
signals are defined as:
A. Steady Walking Person: A steady walking person signal represents "walk". A pedestrian facing this signal indication is permitted to start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right of way to vehicles lawfully
within the intersection at the time that the steady walking person signal indication is first shown.
B. Flashing Upraised Hand: A flashing upraised hand signal represents "do not walk". A pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of
the signal indication, but any pedestrian who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed out of the traveled
way.
C. Steady Upraised Hand: A steady upraised hand signal represents "do not walk". A pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication. Any pedestrian who has already entered the roadway on a steady walking person signal shall have completed crossing through the traveled
right of way prior to the symbol turning to a steady upraised hand. (Ord. 07-4266, 6-19-2007)
9-6-4: SIGHT IMPAIRED PEDESTRIANS:
A. Use Of White Canes Restricted: For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares, it shall be unlawful for any person,
except persons wholly or partially blind, to carry or use on the streets, highways and public places of the state any white canes or walking sticks which
are white in color or white tipped with red. (1978 Code §23-221)
B. Duty Of Drivers Approaching Sight Impaired Persons: A driver of a vehicle who approaches wholly or partially blind pedestrians carrying a white cane or
walking stick or white tipped with red or being led by a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on either side of or slightly in front of such blind
person shall immediately come to a complete stop and take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the pedestrian. (1978
Code §23-222; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 153/715
Chapter 7
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
9-7-1: IMPROPER EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such
lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in the code of Iowa, as amended, or equipped with one or more unsafe tires.
(1978 Code §23-107)
9-7-2: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR OPERATING MECHANISM:
A. No person shall operate any vehicle when such vehicle is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3) in
number, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. No person shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
C. No stickers, signs or posters shall be placed in or on any window of a vehicle, except as required by the state or any governmental subdivision or
agency thereof. (1978 Code §23-136)
9-7-3: SAFETY BELTS AND HARNESSES:
A. Application Of Provisions: Except for motorcycles or motorized bicycles, 1966 model year or newer vehicles subject to registration in Iowa shall be
equipped with safety belts and safety harnesses of a type and installed in the manner required by the code of Iowa, as amended.
B. Use Required: The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor vehicle subject to registration in Iowa, except a motorcycle or a motorized bicycle,
shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt or safety harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or highway in this
city, except a child under six (6) years of age shall be secured as required under subsection C of this section.
C. Child Restraint Devices:
1. A child under the age of three (3) years, who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration and having a gross weight of less than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system which meets federal motor vehicle safety standards, and the
system shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
2. A child at least three (3) years of age but under the age of six (6) years, who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration and
having a gross weight of less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, shall be secured during transit as required by subsection C1 of this section or as
required by subsections A and B of this section.
3. The vehicle driver who violates subsection C1 or C2 of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor and shall not be subject to a penalty greater
than that provided by the code of Iowa, as amended.
D. Liability: The driver and front seat passengers and owner may each be charged separately for improperly used or nonused equipment under this
section. (1994 Code)
9-7-4: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
A. Signs Posted For Truck Weight Restrictions: Pursuant to section 9-1-3 of this title, traffic control devices may be established to prohibit the operation of
trucks exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds' gross weight on any city street or portion of a city street. However, such device shall not prohibit
necessary local operation on a city street for the purpose of a pick up or delivery.
B. Traffic Restricted On Certain Streets:
1. Authority: The city manager, or designee, may designate those heavily traveled streets which shall be closed to any class or kind of traffic which the
city manager, or designee, finds to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic. The streets shall be appropriately signed to give
notice of the restriction. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
2. Specific Streets Designated: No truck or other commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of sixteen (16) tons, except those specifically
exempted herein, shall be operated on Kirkwood Avenue and Lower Muscatine Road from the intersection of Kirkwood Avenue with Gilbert Court to
the intersection of Lower Muscatine Road with Sycamore Street; First Avenue from the intersection with Scott Boulevard to the intersection with D
Street; Court Street from the intersection with Summit Street to the intersection with Muscatine Avenue; or on North Summit Street or Dewey Street
from the intersection of North Summit Street with North Dodge Street to the intersection of Dewey Street with Brown Street. (Ord. 09-4339, 5-5-2009)
3. Exemptions: The following vehicles shall be exempted from the above prohibition:
a. Commercial vehicles making deliveries or furnishing services to premises fronting on the prescribed street if the premises has no other means of
access for delivery or services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 154/715
b. School buses.
c. City emergency and service vehicles. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
C. Flag Or Light At End Of Load: Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet (4') beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there
shall be displayed at the end of such load, in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag not less than
twelve inches (12") both in length and width, except between sunset and sunrise there shall be displayed at the end of such load a red light plainly
visible from the rear of such vehicle under normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred feet (200'). (1978 Code §23-108)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4786 - ELECTRIC ASSIST BICYCLES. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 8
BICYCLES
9-8-1: OPERATION OF BICYCLES1:
A. Observation Of Traffic Rules:
1. All persons riding bicycles upon any street or sidewalk within the city shall obey all traffic ordinances and rules as to traffic lights and highway and
street stop signs and shall be required to signal any change of direction or course of travel in the same manner as such signals are required under
the law governing the use of motor vehicles and shall not turn to the right or left in traffic except at regular intersections of streets, alleys or
driveways. (1978 Code §23-66; amd. 1994 Code)
2. All persons riding bicycles upon any street, sidewalk or bike lane within the city shall observe all ordinances and rules as to traffic limits and shall
make full and complete stops at official stop signs.
3. In addition, all persons riding bicycles shall be subject to the provisions of ordinances applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle, except as to those
provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. (1978 Code §23-66)
B. Method Of Riding:
1. A bicycle rider shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular bicycle seat.
2. No rider of a bicycle intended for one person shall carry a second person on any part of the bicycle, except infants may be carried when a suitable
and proper seat is provided.
3. No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which would prevent the rider from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
(1978 Code §23-68)
C. Riding On Roadways: Persons riding bicycles on the roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast and, on laned roadways, shall ride within a single
lane. No bicyclist shall ride so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. (Ord. 15-4635, 8-18-2015)
D. Careful Riding: No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any sidewalk or roadway except in a prudent and careful manner. (1978 Code §23-69)
E. Riding On Sidewalk:
1. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the central downtown business district. The central downtown business district is the area bounded
by and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south, Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to the north. (Ord. 97-3788,
6-3-1997)
2. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1978 Code §23-64; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
F. Riding On Bikeways: No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bicycle lane or path in any direction except that permitted by vehicular traffic
traveling on the same side of the roadway, provided bicycles may proceed either way along a lane or path where arrows or signs designate two-way
bicycle traffic. (1978 Code §23-70)
9-8-2: PARKING BICYCLES:
Regardless of any other provision of this title, no person shall park a bicycle on a street or alley in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian or motor
vehicle travel. Any bicycle within one block or three hundred feet (300') of a bicycle rack must be parked in such a rack. Any bicycle parked on public
property in a commercial district shall not be attached to poles, parking meters, except parking meters equipped with a bicycle rack, signs, trees, trash
receptacles, street hardware or any other permanent structure. (Ord. 96-3710, 1-23-1996)
9-8-3: LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS REQUIRED:
A. Reflectors Required: All bicycles shall be equipped with reflective surfaces visible at three hundred feet (300') from the rear when viewed in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. Reflective materials may be mounted on each side of each pedal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 155/715
B. Headlights Required At Night: All bicycles used during the hours from sunset to sunrise shall display or their drivers shall wear a lamp on the front part
of the bicycle, and the lamp shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') from the front of the bicycle. (1978 Code
§23-62)
9-8-4: VEHICLES IN BICYCLE LANES AND BICYCLE PARKING AREAS:
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle path, lane or parking area or park any motor vehicles in such a path, lane or parking area. Motorized
bicycles, motor bicycles and mopeds are prohibited from parking in bicycle parking areas, except as otherwise allowed pursuant to subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 11-4440, 8-2-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
B. The city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to install signs permitting motor vehicles to be parked in a designated bicycle lane, bicycle path or
parking area during specific times and days. When such signs are present, motor vehicle parking shall be permitted only during those times specifically
stated on the signs. (1978 Code §23-71; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-8-5: UNLAWFUL LICENSE APPLICATION, POSSESSION OR TRANSFER:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement of a material fact, either in the application for a city bicycle license or in the transfer of same, or who
intends to procure or pass title to a bicycle which the person knows or has reason to believe has been stolen or who receives or transfers possession
which the person knows or has reason to believe has been stolen shall be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1978 Code §23-74; amd. 1994 Code)
9-8-6: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. Impoundment Of Bicycles:
1. On finding a bicycle is: a) abandoned; b) inoperable; or c) unattended at a place where the bicycle constitutes an obstruction to vehicle or pedestrian
traffic or constitutes an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public or is in violation of an existing parking ordinance, the police
department or any officer, agent or employee of the city so designated may remove or cause the removal of such bicycle to a place designated by
the chief of police for the storage of impounded bicycles. (Ord. 15-4635, 8-18-2015)
2. Upon impoundment of such bicycle, the city shall notify the last known owner of such impoundment by first class mail. At the time of impoundment,
the city may cause to be filed a citation pursuant to state law upon the owner or driver of such bicycle at the time of impoundment. The owner or
driver may reclaim such bicycle upon presentation of proof of ownership or by a notarized declaration of ownership and by accepting such citation
and signing a promise to appear and payment of any accrued fees and charges. Such fees and charges shall be set by resolution.
3. If impoundment requires the destruction of a chain, padlock or other security device, agents or employees designated to enforce the parking
ordinances of the city or any peace officer are hereby authorized to destroy such security devices. (1978 Code §23-72; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Parking Violations:
1. If any bicycle is found stopped, standing, parked, or abandoned in any manner in violation of this title and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. (Ord. 01-3992, 12-11-2001)
2. In the event the city is unable to ascertain the owner, or the owner does not claim the bicycle within three (3) calendar months from the date of
impoundment, the city shall, except as noted below, cause such bicycle to be sold at a public auction. Notice of such disposition shall be published
pursuant to state law governing abandoned vehicles. In lieu of selling said bicycle at public auction, the city may donate it to: a) a nonprofit
organization or entity which serves low income/disadvantaged youth or families in Johnson County, Iowa, for use by members of the population
served; b) a low income/disadvantaged youth; or c) a homeless individual who has no other means of transportation. (Ord. 17-4697, 3-7-2017)
3. Proceeds from sales and impoundment fees shall be used to defray the costs of bicycle registration and bicycle facilities. (1978 Code §23-73)
Chapter 9
TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES
9-9-1: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES; NOTICES1:
A. Towing And Impoundment Authorized: The department may tow and impound or have towed and impounded any vehicle abandoned, provided the
department has notified the owner or person entitled to possession that the vehicle will be towed and impounded if the vehicle is not removed within
seventy two (72) hours of the time a towing notice is posted. Notice shall be deemed posted by securely attaching the notice to the driver's side window
of the vehicle. The notice shall state the date and time the notice is attached to the vehicle, the intent to tow the vehicle seventy two (72) hours after the
posting, the reason for the notice to tow and that all costs of removal, notification and storage must be paid before the vehicle may be reclaimed.
Vehicles parked in a city owned or operated parking lot may be towed and impounded twenty four (24) hours after the posting of notice to that effect.
This notice provision shall not be required in the case of a vehicle parked on or in a public street or alley determined by the department to create an
immediate hazard to vehicle or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 09-4348, 6-16-2009)
B. Notice After Impoundment And Prior To Sale:
1. When a vehicle has been impounded under the provisions of this title or seized under any provision of the laws of the state, the department shall
follow the procedures determined by state law for giving notice to the owner, lien holders and other persons entitled to possession of the proposed
sale of the vehicle as an "abandoned vehicle".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 156/715
2. If the vehicle was found and impounded under this title, the notice shall state that an objection may be made and a hearing held pursuant to section
9-9-10 of this chapter. (1994 Code)
9-9-2: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF CERTAIN ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Notwithstanding subsection 9-9-1A of this chapter, any vehicle illegally parked and left unattended as described herein is hereby declared a public
nuisance, per se, and may be towed and impounded by or under direction of the department without prior notice:
A. Any vehicle which substantially blocks a public or private driveway without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property.
B. Any vehicle which obstructs the movement of an emergency vehicle.
C. Any vehicle which obstructs or interferes with the use of a fire hydrant.
D. Any vehicle parked in violation of a posted parking regulation, where a temporary or permanent traffic sign indicates "Towaway Zone".
E. Any vehicle parked on a street or alley in a manner which obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
F. Any vehicle parked in violation of this title. (1994 Code)
G. Any vehicle parked in the "library outside book drop off" space in violation of section 9-4-15 of this title. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005)
9-9-3: VEHICLES TOWED AND IMPOUNDED PURSUANT TO ARREST OF DRIVER:
A vehicle may be towed and impounded by or under the direction of the department when the driver is arrested if:
A. The arrested person consents to the impoundment; or
B. The vehicle is not legally parked or will constitute a traffic hazard if left at its location at the time of arrest, and the arrested person is either unable or
unwilling to move it or have it moved; or
C. The vehicle may be towed and impounded pursuant to a provision of this title. (1994 Code)
9-9-4: IMPOUNDMENT FOR ACCUMULATED PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. Determination Of Towing And Impoundment: If any vehicle has accumulated a combination of parking violations, ramp charges, and/or vehicle unlock
fees, totaling fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, such vehicle may be towed and impounded or may be impounded by use of a "Denver boot" or similar
device, as hereafter provided. (Ord. 09-4344, 6-16-2009)
B. Notice Of Towing And Impoundment; Hearing:
1. Towing and impoundment shall occur only after notice and opportunity for an administrative hearing is offered to the last known owner or person
entitled to possession of such motor vehicle. Notice may be provided either on the citation or through a separate mailing. No vehicle shall be towed
and impounded unless such vehicle is on a public street or in a public parking lot.
2. Notice shall be in writing, either on the citation or through a separate mailing, and shall state that there is a right to request an administrative hearing
before towing and impoundment if such request is made within ten (10) calendar days of the notice, that failure to request a hearing within ten (10)
calendar days or failure to appear at a requested hearing waives the opportunity for hearing, and that the owner or other person entitled to
possession shall be responsible for all charges and costs incurred for towing and impoundment of the vehicle, in addition to charges for unpaid
parking tickets. (Ord. 09-4349, 6-16-2009)
C. Impoundment By Use Of Denver Boot: Impoundment by use of the Denver boot is subject to the following:
1. Impoundment shall not exceed twenty four (24) hours, except a peace officer may extend or reduce such time period for safety or traffic reasons.
2. No vehicle shall be impounded within the traveled portion of any street or on any portion of a street or sidewalk when the impoundment at such place
would create a hazard to the public or traffic.
3. On expiration of the time period contained at subsection C1 of this section, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded. (1994 Code)
9-9-5: EMERGENCY TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
If an emergency requires the immediate removal of a vehicle lawfully parked, the police department may authorize the vehicle to be towed and, if
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 157/715
necessary, impounded. The owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle may reclaim the vehicle at any time without charge, and the party
requesting emergency removal shall pay all costs and expenses resulting from the towing and impoundment. (1994 Code)
9-9-6: ENTRY INTO VEHICLES TO BE TOWED OR IMPOUNDED RESTRICTED:
If it is necessary to enter a locked or unlocked vehicle in order to tow or impound the vehicle, the entry must be made in the presence of a peace officer.
(1994 Code)
9-9-7: IMPOUNDMENT LOCATION:
All vehicles towed pursuant to this title shall be impounded in the areas or places designated by the city council. (1994 Code)
9-9-8: RECORDS KEPT:
When a vehicle is towed or impounded under the provisions of this title, the department shall maintain a record of the vehicle, including sufficient
identifying information, the date and hour of towing, location towed from, impoundment or towing destination, person performing the towing, reason for
towing or impoundment and the name of the peace officer authorizing the tow or impoundment. (1994 Code)
9-9-9: NONAPPLICABILITY TO VEHICLES AS EVIDENCE IN CRIMINAL CASES:
This title shall not affect the established procedures for seizing a vehicle as evidence in a criminal case. (1994 Code)
9-9-10: HEARING FOR OBJECTION TO TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. The owner, lien holder of record, a person entitled to possession or their duly authorized agent may object and request a hearing to a towing or
impoundment if a vehicle is towed and/or impounded with or without prior notice. Request for a hearing after an impoundment must be made within
twenty one (21) calendar days after impoundment or shall be deemed waived.
B. The person challenging the impoundment shall be informed of the reason for the towing and/or impoundment, and a hearing shall be held without
unnecessary delay before the city manager or designee.
C. The city manager or designee shall consider all relevant information offered by witnesses, including the person challenging the impoundment, and shall
set forth findings as to the objection and grounds for challenge. The city manager or designee shall notify the person challenging the impoundment of
the decision, and the decision shall indicate whether the towing and/or impoundment was appropriate.
D. If the city manager or designee finds the vehicle was improperly impounded, the vehicle shall be released to the person challenging the impoundment
upon compliance with subsection 9-9-11A of this chapter. All costs of towing, preservation, storage and notification accruing through the fourth calendar
day after the city manager's or designee's decision shall be paid by the city. All costs accruing thereafter shall be paid by the person challenging the
impoundment prior to the vehicle's release from impoundment. (1994 Code)
9-9-11: REDEMPTION OF TOWED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
A. Owner To Present Evidence Of Identity And Pay Costs Prior To Reclaiming: Before a person may recover a vehicle which has been towed and
impounded under the provisions of this title, the person shall present evidence to the department of the person's identity and right to possession of the
vehicle, sign a receipt for return of the vehicle and pay the costs of towing, preservation, storage, outstanding parking tickets, notification and
preliminary costs of sale unless some or all of these costs have been waived after hearing under section 9-9-10 of this chapter.
B. Right To Reclaim And Forfeiture:
1. The owner, lien holder of record or person entitled to possession of an impounded vehicle shall reclaim the vehicle within twenty one (21) calendar
days after:
a. The effective date of the notice provided in subsection 9-9-1B of this chapter;
b. Receipt of a vehicle release form from the city; or
c. Receipt of a decision from a hearing held pursuant to section 9-9-10 of this chapter.
2. If the owner, lien holder or person entitled to possession does not exercise the right to reclaim an impounded vehicle within the twenty one (21)
calendar day reclaiming period, such person shall be deemed to have waived any right, title, claim or interest in or to the vehicle.
3. The owner, lien holder of record or person entitled to possession may, upon written request and payment of additional storage charges, delivered to
the department prior to the expiration of the twenty one (21) calendar day reclaiming period, obtain an additional period of up to fourteen (14)
calendar days within which the vehicle may be reclaimed. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 158/715
Chapter 10
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
9-10-1: SAFE OPERATION:
A person who operates an electric personal assistive mobility device shall exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, shall yield the right of
way to any pedestrian, and shall not operate it in such manner as to indicate a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons. (Ord. 08-4317, 9-23-
2008)
9-10-2: PROHIBITED OPERATION:
No person shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility device upon a sidewalk in the central downtown business district. The central downtown
business district is the area bounded by and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south, Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson
Street to the north. (Ord. 08-4317, 9-23-2008)
Chapter 11
TRAFFIC CAMERAS, DRONES, AND LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION SYSTEMS
9-11-1: GENERAL:
The city shall not:
A. Use any automatic traffic surveillance system or device, automatic license plate recognition system or device, or domestic drone system or device for
the enforcement of a qualified traffic law violation, unless a peace officer or parking enforcement attendant is present at the scene, witnesses the event,
and personally issues the ticket to the alleged violator at the time and location of the violation; nor
B. Store, archive, transmit, share, publish, grant access to, sell, index, cross reference, or otherwise aggregate, distribute, analyze, or process any data
obtained through automatic traffic surveillance system or device, automatic license plate recognition system or device, or domestic drone system or
device unless the data directly pertains to a qualified traffic law violation or other criminal law violation for which a ticket, citation, or arrest was issued
or made by a peace officer or parking enforcement attendant who was present at the scene. (Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AUTOMATIC LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION SYSTEM: A computer based system(s) that captures an image of a license plate(s) and converts it to a
data file to be compared with databases or hot lists generated by various law enforcement agencies, and which produces an alert when there is a match
between the collected license plate data and those databases.
AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM OR DEVICE: A device or devices including, but not limited to, a camera system(s) that uses any
electronic, photographic, video, digital, or computer system designed for the purpose of producing a photograph, microphotograph, videotape, digital
video, or other recorded image or digital record of a vehicle and/or its operator and/or its occupants that is used to establish identity or ownership of a
vehicle and/or identify its operator, owner, or occupants.
DOMESTIC DRONE, DRONE, OR UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE: An aerial vehicle that does not carry a human operator that can fly autonomously or
be piloted remotely that is equipped with one or more onboard cameras or other sensors for registering, observing, or recording persons, objects, or
events or for transmitting such information as it is occurring or thereafter.
PARKING ENFORCEMENT ATTENDANT: Agents or employees designated to enforce the parking ordinances of the city.
QUALIFIED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: A violation of any of the following:
A. Any state or local law relating to compliance with a traffic control signal or railroad crossing sign or signal;
B. Any state or local law limiting the speed of a motor vehicle; or
C. Any state or local law regulating motor vehicle parking.
TICKET: Any traffic ticket, citation, summons, or other notice of liability, whether civil, criminal, or administrative, issued in response to an alleged qualified
traffic law violation detected or recorded by a traffic surveillance system or device. (Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013)
Title 10
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 159/715
Chapter 1
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AFFILIATED GROUP: A group of persons or an entity engaged in sports and/or recreation that: 1) is affiliated with and either sponsored or
cosponsored by the city of Iowa City including, but not limited to, organized youth soccer, boys' baseball, and girls' softball; and 2) has executed a
memorandum of understanding with the city for the use of public property.
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a parade/public assembly permit as provided in this chapter.
PARADE: A march or procession of more than twenty five (25) persons, vehicles or other forms of transportation, such as bicycles, or combination
thereof, in or upon the public right of way or in a park that necessitates or results in the exclusion, in whole or in part, of use of the public right of way or
the park by others.
PARADE/PUBLIC ASSEMBLY PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public property, including the public right of way, as provided in this
chapter.
PARK: Any park or playground owned or controlled by the city, including streets, trails, and roadways therein.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal
entity.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than twenty five (25) persons on the public right of way or one
hundred (100) persons in a park for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on the public right of way or in a park or occupies any area in the public right of way or in a park.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
B. Exemptions: The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
1. Funeral processions.
2. A gathering of an affiliated group or subpart thereof.
3. Spontaneous events responding to news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three (3) days of such public assembly or parade provided
that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city manager or designee at least one hour prior to such parade or public assembly. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to engage in, present, conduct or stage a parade or public assembly without first having obtained
a parade/public assembly permit as provided in this chapter.
B. No person shall knowingly participate in or conduct a parade or public assembly unless a parade/public assembly permit has been obtained.
C. All parades and public assemblies shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the parade/public assembly permit and shall be in
compliance with all applicable state and local laws. No person shall knowingly fail to comply with the terms and conditions of a parade/public assembly
permit.
D. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in any parade or public assembly. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
E. No parade or public assembly permittee may sell a good or a service unless the event: 1) reasonably expects to draw more than five hundred (500)
persons or occupy a substantial area within City Plaza or a similar area within the downtown; and 2) is a community wide attraction that supports the
economic vitality of the downtown. "Downtown" is defined in title 8, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
F. No parade or public assembly permittee may use amplified sound unless it either meets the criteria set forth in subsection E of this section or a business
located in the downtown obtains a permit for musicians to perform on the sidewalk in front of the business. "Amplified sound" is defined in section 6-4-1
of this code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the director of the parks and recreation department may approve the use of amplified sound in city
parks pursuant to written rules. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011; amd. Ord. 13-4521, 4-9-2013)
10-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 160/715
A. Filing Application:
1. An application for a parade/public assembly permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to use
any public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is not a natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who has
authority to act for the applicant with regard to the parade or public assembly.
2. All applications shall be filed at least three (3) working days in advance of the date of the requested use.
3. Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager or designee.
B. Application Form: The application form shall contain the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. An acknowledgment to be signed by a natural person that he or she has authority to act on behalf of the group that is requesting the permit.
3. The type of event that is planned, namely parade, or public assembly.
4. Proposed location or locations.
5. Expected size of group.
6. Date, time and expected duration of the use.
7. Names and contact information of the person(s) to be present at and who will serve as the contact person(s) for the applicant at the proposed
parade or public assembly.
8. List and description of mechanical or electronic equipment to be used, including sound amplification.
9. Number and type of any motor vehicles or other forms of transportation to be used, including bicycles.
10. Number and type of any animals to be used.
11. Proposal to monitor the event, including the names of any person not employed by the city who will be responsible for setting up, cleaning up, or
maintaining order and whether the police department will be needed to assist in maintaining order.
12. Proposal for cleanup. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
13. If the parade or public assembly requires equipment, cables, objects, structures, or similar items to be placed on City Plaza, on a sidewalk, or in a
park or if it lasts more than six (6) hours or if it is held on a street and requires the closure of more than one block, the applicant shall agree to pay on
behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting
from use of public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall
defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of public property and the public right of way.
"Block" means the area on the street in a residential zone between two (2) intersections or between an intersection and the stub/termination of a
street or five hundred feet (500') in a nonresidential zone. The indemnification requirement may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to
indemnify.
14. If the parade or public assembly requires equipment, cables, objects, structures, or similar items to be placed on City Plaza, on a sidewalk, or in a
park or if it lasts more than six (6) hours or if it is held on a street and requires the closure of more than one block, insurance is required in the
reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons and property based on the nature and size of the event, as determined by the
city's risk manager. "Block" means the area on the street in a residential zone between two (2) intersections or between an intersection and the
stub/termination of a street or five hundred feet (500') in a nonresidential zone. The speech content of the parade or public assembly shall not be a
factor in determining the amount of insurance. The insurance requirement may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to obtain insurance or to
pay the cost of insurance. (Ord. 13-4559, 10-15-2013)
15. Any other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for a permit in writing, which shall be mailed by
ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant and stating the reasons therefor within seven (7) working days of the application being filed, and
no later than the day prior to the event assuming the application is timely filed. The city manager or designee shall examine the application and shall
grant a permit if the following conditions are met:
1. The use will not unreasonably interfere with the privacy, safety, security, convenience and tranquility of the residents or inhabitants of the area in light
of the date and time of said proposed use.
2. The proposed public right of way can accommodate the group or use, based both on group size and on health and sanitation facilities, whether
available or to be provided by applicant.
3. The proposed use or activity is compatible with the normal activity of the proposed public right of way at the requested time or date.
4. The application demonstrates the applicant has the means, planning and coordination to hold the proposed event, considering the time of day,
location, public facilities available, traffic control, parking requirements and any monitoring required to protect the public health and safety.
5. The event will not interfere with either another event for which a permit has already been granted or an event organized and conducted by the city for
the same date and time.
6. The use will not substantially interrupt the flow of street and/or pedestrian traffic1.
7. The use will not require the excessive diversion of police from other duties or substantially interfere with the city's firefighting operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 161/715
8. The use does not create undue health or safety hazards.
9. All applicable fees have been paid.
10. The application is fully completed and executed.
11. The indemnification agreement has been signed, if applicable.
12. A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section has been provided, if applicable.
13. The application contains no material falsehood or misrepresentation.
14. The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue and be sued.
15. The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other outstanding and
unpaid debts to the city.
16. The use or activity intended by the applicant is not prohibited by law.
17. The applicant paid cleanup costs, if any, within thirty (30) days of the date of invoice as the result of a previously issued permit.
18. Additional police protection, if required under this chapter, has been secured.
B. Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the following information:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of permittee.
2. Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
3. If a parade, the route and staging area.
4. Number of monitors or policing personnel required for safe use of the public right of way.
5. Such other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-5: APPEALS REGARDING ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's decision to grant or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the determination to the city
council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In such event, a hearing shall be
held by the city council no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
B. Upon such hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the city manager's or
designee's decision. The city council's decision is the final decision. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued following an appeal, may revoke a parade/public assembly permit if:
1. It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material fact in the application;
2. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred;
3. When it is determined by the chief of police or the fire chief that, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public safety
requires such revocation;
4. The permittee's insurance has been canceled; or
5. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or local, state, or federal law.
B. A permit holder may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuance or denial of a permit. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-7: SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT:
The sale, transfer, or assignment of a permit is prohibited. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-8: FEES:
Fees for permits shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-9: POLICE PROTECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 162/715
A. The chief of police or designee shall determine whether and to what extent additional police or security protection is reasonably necessary for the
parade or public assembly for traffic control and public safety. The chief of police or designee shall base this decision on the size, location, duration,
time and date of the event, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the public right
of way. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of
ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on duty personnel will police the event. If additional police or security
protection for the parade or public assembly is deemed necessary by the chief of police or designee, the applicant shall be so informed. The applicant
shall have the duty to secure the police or security protection deemed necessary by the chief of police or designee at the sole expense of the applicant.
B. Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the primary purpose of public issue speech protected under the first amendment are
not required to pay for any police protection provided by the city. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-10: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
Chapter 2
PICKETING
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PICKETER: A person who engages in picketing with or without signs or placards.
PICKETING: The practice of standing, marching, congregating, protesting, demonstrating, or patrolling by one or more persons for the purpose of
persuading, discussing, educating, advocating, or informing another person or persons or for the purpose of protesting some action, attitude, policy, or
belief. It does not include social, random, or other everyday communication.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
RESIDENTIAL PICKETING: Picketing that is directed, focused, or targeted at a particular private residence and that takes place directly in front of the
particular private residence or the private residences on either side of the targeted private residence.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE: All zones defined in title 14, chapter 2, articles A and B of this code. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-2: USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR PICKETING:
A. No Picketing Except By Permit: No picketing except as authorized by a parade/public assembly permit issued under chapter 1 of this title, shall be
conducted on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular or bicycle traffic.
B. Interference With Traffic, Businesses And Public Facilities: Picketers shall not block or obstruct free passage of any pedestrian, vehicular traffic, or
bicycle traffic or interfere with ingress or egress to any business or public facility. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-3: RESIDENTIAL PICKETING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in residential picketing.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit: 1) the residential picketing of a residence which is used as the occupant's sole place of business; 2) the residential
picketing of a private residence used as a public meeting place; 3) a person or group of persons from marching without stopping at a particular private
residence; or 4) a person or group of persons from marching on a defined route without stopping at any particular private residence.
C. Before a person may be cited for violation of this provision, the person must have been ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation by
either a police officer or a person with authority to control the use of the private residence which is the focus or target of the residential picketing. (Ord.
04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-4: ADVANCED NOTICE OF PROPOSED PICKETING, PROTESTING OR DEMONSTRATING:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 163/715
10-2-5: DUTY TO DISPERSE AS DIRECTED BY POLICE:
A. Police officers are authorized to disperse persons who are picketing whenever such picketing is in violation of this chapter and poses a threat to public
health, safety or orderly flow of traffic1.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-6: OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 6-1-2M2 of this code.
Chapter 3
COMMERCIAL USE OF SIDEWALKS1
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a permit as provided in this chapter.
MOBILE VENDING CART: A nonmotorized structure on wheels that is easily moved and is used for vending.
MOBILE VENDING LOCATION: An appropriate area to operate a mobile vending cart as determined and assigned by the city manager, or designee, in
writing within the boundaries of city plaza and the 100, 200, and 300 blocks of Iowa Avenue for the operation of mobile vending carts. Each mobile vending
permit shall carry with it the authorization to operate at one or two (2) designated locations.
MOBILE VENDOR: Operator of mobile vending cart.
MOBILE VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public property, including public right of way, by a mobile vendor as provided in this
chapter.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
RESTAURANT: A business whose primary function is the service of food to customers and which meets the following criteria:
A. Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service to each floor of the premises which is open to the public while the kitchen is open;
B. Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
C. Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
D. Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with all of the following: a stove, a griddle, a grill or broiler, and a food refrigeration unit with a capacity
in excess of twenty (20) cubic feet;
E. Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of the hours that the business is open to the public; and
F. Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a restaurant if it advertises.
G. Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop, lunchroom or tearoom.
SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 164/715
SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public right of way, pursuant to an agreement, contiguous with any side of a building wherein
a restaurant is located and where food and beverages are taken for consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables in that area.
TEMPORARY USE OF SIDEWALK PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of sidewalk as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995;
amd. Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3790, 6-18-1997; Ord. 03-4067, 4-8-2003; Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004; Ord. 06-4195, 1-17-2006; Ord. 07-4278, 9-4-
2007; Ord. 12-4476, 4-17-2012)
10-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED:
Use of public sidewalks for any commercial purpose, including sidewalk cafes, shall be unlawful except as specifically provided herein or as specifically
authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995)
10-3-3: USE FOR SIDEWALK CAFES:
A. Sidewalk cafes are permitted in the public right of way only in the central business zones (CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones) and in the riverfront crossings
district. (Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
B. No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe without executing an easement agreement.
C. Each sidewalk cafe applicant shall file an application for an easement agreement with the public works department, on forms provided by the city.
D. The city manager, or designee, shall either grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the application being filed. If the application is granted,
the city manager, or designee, is authorized to enter into a public right of way easement agreement. If the application is denied, the applicant may
appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city council, and the appeals process shall be the same as provided for mobile vendors in
this chapter. The city retains the right to limit the number of sidewalk cafes.
E. After execution of an easement agreement, the city manager, or designee, shall retain the right to terminate the easement agreement but only after
written notice of violation has been given and the time to cure the violation has expired. Grounds for termination of the easement agreement shall
include, but not be limited to, repeated violations of the state and liquor control laws, violations of the easement agreement, and creating a safety
hazard, health hazard and/or public nuisance under state or local law. Additionally, the city manager, or designee, retains the right to terminate the
easement agreement and direct removal of sidewalk cafe operations if there is a substantial and reasonable need for use of the public right of way for a
valid public purpose. The cafe owner has the right to appeal a decision to terminate the agreement to the city council. The appeals process shall be the
same as provided for mobile vendors in this chapter.
F. The easement agreement, at a minimum, shall require the cafe operator to provide a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the city, and shall agree to
hold the city harmless against any and all liability arising from or relating to the operation of the sidewalk cafe or the location of the cafe on the public
right of way including, but not limited to, all claims arising from occurrences or accidents within the sidewalk cafe area, including the walkway through a
cafe. (Ord. 12-4493, 9-4-2012)
G. In the central business zones, sidewalk cafes shall operate only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. In
the riverfront crossings district, sidewalk cafes shall operate only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. in the
RFC-G zone. In all other RFC zones, sidewalk cafes shall operate only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Friday and Saturday. (Ord. 15-4642,
9-15-2015)
H. Food and beverages must be available for service to patrons in a sidewalk cafe during all hours of operation. Sidewalk cafes shall not operate when the
restaurant kitchen is closed.
I. A sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee monitoring the area at all times during the hours alcohol is consumed and shall
dispense any alcoholic beverage under state and local law.
J. Amplified sound equipment shall not be permitted.
K. The operation of any sidewalk cafe shall be in conformity with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
L. All fees for the operation of a sidewalk cafe shall be set by resolution.
M. The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance or policy adopted by the city council. A copy of the
policy and rules shall be on file with the city clerk and available on the city website. (Ord. 12-4493, 9-4-2012)
10-3-4: TEMPORARY USE OF SIDEWALK PERMITS:
The city manager or designee is authorized to issue temporary use of sidewalk permits to businesses or business organizations for any commercial
purpose in commercially zoned districts excluding permits for sidewalk cafes, sidewalk retailing, ambulatory vendors, and mobile vending carts. Temporary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 165/715
use of sidewalk permits shall be limited to the temporary use of sidewalks and public right of way abutting said businesses and shall be limited to no more
than four (4) days for any one permit. (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
A. Application For Permit:
1. Filing Application:
a. An application for a temporary use of sidewalk permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring
to use the public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is not a natural person, the application shall identify a natural person who
has authority to act for the applicant with regard to the temporary use of the sidewalk.
b. All applications shall be received five (5) days before proposed use.
c. Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager or designee.
2. Application Form: The application form shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
b. An acknowledgement to be signed by a natural person that he or she has authority over the permitted use of the sidewalk.
c. Name and address of applicant's business.
d. Days and hours of requested use.
e. Description of use.
f. An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any
person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising
out of the use of public property and the public right of way.
g. Insurance as required in a reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons or property based on the nature and size of the
event, as determined by the city's risk manager. The insurance requirement may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to obtain insurance
or to pay the cost of insurance.
h. Any other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary.
B. Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
1. Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for temporary use of sidewalk permit in writing,
which shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant, and state the reasons therefor within seven (7) working days of the
application being filed. The city manager or designee shall examine the application and shall issue said permit if the following conditions are met:
a. The applicant's proposed use will not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic along the public right of way or in or out of adjacent properties.
b. All applicable fees have been paid.
c. The application is fully completed and executed.
d. The indemnification agreement has been signed.
e. A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section has been provided.
f. The application contains no material falsehood or misrepresentation.
g. The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue and be sued.
h. The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other outstanding and
unpaid debts to the city.
i. No permit has already been issued for the same time and place.
j. The use does not conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time and
place.
2. Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the following information:
a. Name, telephone number, and address of permittee.
b. Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
c. The permittee shall only offer for sale its own goods and products and shall not offer for sale any tobacco product.
d. Such other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
C. Appeals: Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's decision to grant or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the determination to
the city council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In such event, a hearing
shall be held by the city council no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm
or modify in any regard the city manager's or designee's decision. The city council's decision is the final decision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 166/715
D. Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of a temporary use of sidewalk permit is expressly prohibited.
E. Revocation Of Permit:
1. The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued following an appeal, may revoke a permit if:
a. It is determined by the chief of police or the fire chief that, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public safety requires
such revocation is necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare.
b. The permittee has misstated any material fact in the application.
c. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred.
d. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit.
e. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms of the permit or local, state, or federal law.
f. The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
2. A permit holder may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuing or denying of a permit.
F. Fees: Fees for permits shall be set by resolution of city council. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-3-5: USE BY MOBILE VENDORS:
A. Application For Permit:
1. Filing Application:
a. An application for a mobile vendor permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to use the
public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is not a natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who has authority
to act for the applicant with regard to the mobile vending operation. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
b. Permits will be issued for three (3) year periods beginning May 1, 2013 to April 30, 2016. All applications for mobile vendor permits must be
received by January 31 of the calendar year for which the three (3) year permit will be issued. Permits for partial periods may be available as
provided in the administrative rules. (Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
c. Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
2. General Provisions:
a. No more than six (6) permits shall be issued for each three (3) year period. All permits shall be issued for City Plaza except that up to two (2)
permits may be issued for the 100, 200, and 300 blocks of Iowa Avenue. (Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
b. No tobacco or alcoholic beverages shall be offered for sale. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
c. At a minimum, mobile vendors shall operate from May 1 to October 1. (Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
d. No person may have an ownership interest, as determined by the city, in more than three (3) mobile vending cart operations.
e. If the city council decides to eliminate or reduce the mobile vending permit program, the city may terminate all permits upon one hundred twenty
(120) day notice to the permittees. (Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
3. Application Form: The application form shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
b. An acknowledgement to be signed by a natural person that he or she has authority over the permitted use of the sidewalk.
c. List of past permits issued. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
d. (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
e. Requested location or locations of operation.
f. Electrical appliances to be used.
g. Fuel needed to power equipment. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
h. (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
i. (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
j. Location of overnight cart storage.
k. Description of cart including its dimensions. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
l. (Rep. by Ord. 10-4386, 3-23-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 167/715
m. An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any
person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising
out of the use of public property and the public right of way.
n. Acknowledgment that the applicant has contacted the Johnson County health department and has reviewed health code requirements.
o. Insurance is required in a reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons and property based on the intended use, as
determined by the city's risk manager.
p. Any other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary.
B. Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
1. Standards: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for a mobile vendor permit in writing within a reasonable time, which
shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant, and state the reasons therefor no later than sixty (60) calendar days after
the application being filed. The length of time which is reasonable shall be determined by the type of use requested, the information supplied, the
time the application is filed, and the extent of advance preparation and planning demonstrated and reasonably required. The city manager or
designee shall issue a permit if the following conditions have been met:
a. A mobile vending location is available which will not interfere the free movement within the emergency/service lane.
b. The applicant's proposed mode of operation will not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic along the public right of way or in or out of adjacent
properties.
c. The applicant agrees to operate the applicant's business only at assigned mobile vending locations.
d. The dimensions of the applicant's vending cart shall not exceed a size of four feet (4') wide by nine feet (9') long by eight feet (8') high.
e. The applicant has adequate storage for the mobile vending cart off the city plaza or public right of way.
f. The applicant has obtained all necessary permits required by the county department of health.
g. All applicable fees have been paid.
h. The application is fully completed and executed.
i. The indemnification agreement has been signed.
j. A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section has been provided.
k. The application contains no material falsehood or misrepresentation.
l. The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant has, the damage has been paid in full, and the applicant has paid all other
outstanding and unpaid debts to the city.
m. The applicant has complied with applicable laws concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
n. The use or activity intended by the applicant is not prohibited by law.
2. Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the following information:
a. Permittee's name, telephone number, and address. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
b. (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
c. The permittee's mobile vending location.
d. Such other information that the City Manager or designee finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
C. Appeals: Any party aggrieved by the City Manager's or designee's decision to grant or deny a mobile vending permit may appeal the determination to
the City Council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. In such event, a hearing
shall be held by the City Council no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such hearing, the City Council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm
or modify in any regard the City Manager's or designee's decision. The City Council's decision is the final decision.
D. Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of a mobile vending permit is expressly prohibited.
E. Revocation Of Permit:
1. The City Manager or designee, or City Council if issued following an appeal, may revoke a mobile vending permit if:
a. It is determined by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief that, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public safety
requires such revocation.
b. The permittee has misstated any material fact in the application.
c. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred.
d. The permittee is operating a mobile vending cart in violation of the terms of the permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 168/715
e. The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
f. The permittee violates any administrative rules.
2. A permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuance or denial of a permit.
F. Fees: Fees for mobile vending permits shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
G. Administrative Rules: The City Manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the City Clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-3-6: SIDEWALK RETAILING PERMIT:
The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue an annual sidewalk retailing permit to businesses or business organizations for any commercial
purpose in commercially zoned districts, excluding permits for sidewalk cafes, temporary use of sidewalks, ambulatory vendors, and mobile vending carts,
upon completion of an application form prepared by the City Manager or designee. The sidewalk retailing permit shall be limited to the use of sidewalks
and public right-of-way abutting said businesses and shall be subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
A. Use is limited to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. March 1 to October 31; (Ord. 18-4771, 11-20-2018)
B. Insurance coverage as required by the City's Risk Manager;
C. Execution of an agreement to indemnify the City;
D. Rules as established by the City Manager or designee, a copy of which shall be on file with the City Clerk and available on the City website;
E. No fee shall be charged; and
F. No sale, transfer, or assignment of a sidewalk retailing permit is allowed.
The city manager or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully completed the application which includes signing the indemnification
agreement and providing a certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section. If the permit is denied, the city manager or designee shall state
the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of the application being filed. The process for appeals and revocation of the permit shall be the same as
for a temporary use of sidewalk permit. (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
10-3-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 95-
3676, 5-9-1995; amd. Ord. 03-4067, 4-8-2003; Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
Chapter 4
POSTING HANDBILLS1
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature which: a) advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; b) directs
attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests
thereof by sales; c) directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind; or d) while containing reading
matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the
private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter that is not a newspaper.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-2: MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION GENERALLY; UNLAWFUL DISTRIBUTIONS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
Distribution of commercial handbills and noncommercial handbills shall be made in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-
4-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 169/715
10-4-3: POSTING OF HANDBILLS PROHIBITED:
In the right of way or on public land, no person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any
commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill calculated to attract the attention of the public, upon any right of way or any lamppost, electric light,
telephone pole, bulletin board of a kiosk, railway structure, hydrant, tree or tree box, or upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other public
part of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm except as may be authorized or
required by law. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-4: BILLBOARD MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All billboards and supports, braces, guys and anchors therefor shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted or posted at all times. No person shall
maintain billboards in such a manner to allow wastepaper or refuse to accumulate in or about the premises on which the same are constructed or
maintained, and such accumulation of wastepaper or refuse shall be deemed unlawful littering. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-5: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code;
amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 5, article B of this code for sign regulations.
Chapter 5
CITY PLAZA
10-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the use of city plaza in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare as follows:
A. Making city plaza an active and attractive environment and encouraging a pleasant and aesthetic ambience designed to attract pedestrian focused
traffic and use.
B. Providing the opportunity for creative and colorful pedestrian focused activities.
C. Encouraging the upgrading of storefronts and the development of compatible and well designed elements within zone 1.
D. Limiting the use of vehicles and bicycles in city plaza. (1978 Code §9.1-1; amd. 1994 Code)
E. Supporting economic activity by allowing vendors to sell their goods in city plaza.
F. Ensuring safe movement of pedestrians in city plaza. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMBULATORY VENDOR: A person selling goods or services, including arts and crafts, while moving through zones 1, 2 and 3 and operating without the
use of a mobile vending cart and with a minimum of equipment such as a person selling balloons and a portrait artist.
AMBULATORY VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public property, including public right of way, by an ambulatory vendor as
provided in this chapter.
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a permit as provided in this chapter.
AUDIO AMBIENCE: A localized use of sound intended to create a pleasant, relaxing atmosphere.
CITY PLAZA: That part of city property extending from the northern right of way line to the southern right of way line of College Street from the eastern
right of way line of Clinton Street to the western right of way line of Linn Street; and extending from the western right of way line to the eastern right of way
line of Dubuque Street from the southern right of way line of Washington Street to the southern right of way line of College Street. Also, beginning at the
northwest corner of Lot 4, Block 65, of the original Town of Iowa City, Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof, thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes 00
seconds east, an assumed bearing, along the southerly right of way line of Washington Street, 60.28 feet; thence south 00 degrees 03 minutes 02
seconds west, 110.36 feet; thence south 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds west, 59.93 feet to a point on the easterly right of way line of Dubuque Street,
thence north 00 degrees 07 minutes 39 seconds west, along said easterly right of way line, 110.65 feet to the point of beginning. Except for the following:
Commencing at the northwest corner of Lot 4, Block 65, the original Town of Iowa City, Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof; thence north 90
degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east, an assumed bearing, along the southerly right of way line of Washington Street, 60.28 feet to the point of beginning;
thence south 00 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds west, 110.36 feet; thence south 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds west, 1.50 feet; thence north 00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 170/715
degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds east, 36.36 feet; thence south 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds west, 2.50 feet; thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes 02
seconds east, 18.0 feet; thence north 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds east, 2.50 feet; thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds east, 56.0 feet,
to the southerly right of way line of Washington Street; thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east, an assumed bearing, along said southerly
right of way line of Washington Street, 1.50 feet to the point of beginning. For purposes of this title, City Plaza includes Black Hawk Mini Park.
COMMERCIAL: The exchange of goods or services for money or other consideration.
KIOSK: A small, public owned structure that is stationary and that contains newspaper vending units.
LANDSCAPING: Live plant material used strictly for an ornamental or ecological purpose.
MOBILE VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public property, including public right of way, by a mobile vendor as provided in
chapter 3 of this title.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. postal service, in accordance
with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law. And, in addition thereto,
shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.
PERMANENT STRUCTURE: Any structure erected for a year round use.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including City Plaza.
SEASONAL CONSTRUCTION: Any structure erected for a seasonal or temporary activity and is removed from the plaza in the off season.
SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public sidewalk contiguous with a building wherein a restaurant is located and where food
and beverages are taken for consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables in that area. Permitted sidewalk cafes must abide by the requirements
and limitations set forth in this title.
ZONE 1: The ten foot (10') strip directly abutting the private property lines in City Plaza. Zone 1 extends the length of the City Plaza along all sides of the
plaza. Zone 1 is illustrated on the City Plaza map that is kept on file in the office of the city clerk, which can be amended, from time to time, by resolution of
the city council.
ZONE 2: The six foot (6') pedestrian lanes in the City Plaza adjoining zone 1 on each side, the landscaped areas, the areas with street furniture and
features and other areas as specified on the City Plaza map. Zone 2 is illustrated on the City Plaza map that is kept on file in the office of the city clerk,
which can be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council.
ZONE 3: The emergency/service lane in City Plaza. Zone 3 is illustrated on the City Plaza map that is kept on file in the office of the city clerk, which can
be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code §9.1-2; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995; Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004;
Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011; Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
10-5-3: BICYCLE AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Bicycles: No person shall ride a bicycle within the City Plaza; no bicycles shall be left unattended within City Plaza unless located in a bicycle rack; no
bicycle shall be locked or affixed to any post or structure other than a bicycle rack.
B. Nonmotorized Vehicles: No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle within the City Plaza, except for persons with disabilities using a
vehicle designed for use by persons with disabilities. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-4: MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, except emergency vehicles, within the limits of City Plaza without authorization issued by the city manager or
designee:
A. Any business located on property which does not otherwise abut a public right of way other than City Plaza may be granted continuous motor vehicle
authorization upon a showing that such is necessary to provide for the delivery of goods to or from the business. Such authorization shall allow the
vehicle within the City Plaza only during active loading and unloading.
B. Any person may be granted such authorization upon a showing that the placement or operation of a motor vehicle upon City Plaza for a specified,
limited period of time is necessary for delivery or other legitimate purpose. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-5: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATIONS FROM BUILDING RUNOFF1:
Removal of accumulations of snow and/or ice in zone 1 of City Plaza resulting from building runoff shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property
owner. Violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 04-4135, 8-3-
2004)
10-5-6: ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 171/715
No person shall take, accompany or allow any animal into City Plaza with the following exceptions:
A. An animal permitted in section 8-4-12 of this code;
B. An animal trained to assist persons with disabilities;
C. An animal securely confined within an animal carrier, kennel, cage, or crate and does not create a public nuisance; or
D. A dog restrained with a leash no greater than six feet (6') in length and not:
1. Within fifteen feet (15') of the concrete border of the playground equipment located south of the public library;
2. In a limestone planter;
3. Tethered or tied to any object on public or private property; or
4. In a sidewalk cafe. (Ord. 12-4504, 12-4-2012)
10-5-7: USE OF CITY PLAZA:
A. Commercial Use: No commercial use of City Plaza is allowed except as authorized in this title. (Ord. 06-4195, 1-17-2006)
B. Private Uses Authorized In Each Zone:
1. Zone 1:
a. Ambulatory vendor permits, arts and crafts vendor permits, sidewalk cafe permits, parade/public assembly permits.
b. Building extensions where, in the sole judgment of the city council, such extensions enhance the quality of City Plaza.
c. Landscaping with the permission of the city manager or designee.
d. Display window extensions with the permission of the city manager or designee.
e. Building front and/or basement extensions, provided the use of the extension is the same as the store activity with the permission of the city
manager or designee.
2. Zone 2:
a. Permits issued under either this chapter or chapter 1 of this title.
b. Landscaping with the permission of the city manager or designee.
c. Newspaper racks.
d. Temporary placement of noncommercial objects and structures as authorized herein.
3. Zone 3:
a. Ambulatory vendor permits.
C. Modification Of Plaza Landscaping: City Plaza landscaping may be modified or removed to a limited extent if the net effect enhances the ambience of
the City Plaza and if approved by the city manager or designee. In such cases, the person must agree to restore the City Plaza landscaping to its
original condition and provide a bond or escrow account in an amount determined by the city manager or designee.
D. Days And Hours Of Operation: Buildings extended onto the City Plaza are to be open at least during normal retail business hours, Monday through
Saturday, throughout the year. Mobile vendors shall operate during the times prescribed in this chapter.
E. Authority Of City Manager: The city manager or designee may:
1. Require a reasonable amount of insurance coverage for any use in the City Plaza not inconsistent with other provisions of this title to minimize the
risk of harm to persons and property when the activity or event being sponsored on City Plaza creates a higher than usual risk of city or public liability
exposure due to the nature of the activity or event or due to the expected number of participants or spectators as determined by the city's risk
manager.
2. Waive the insurance requirements for events or activities sponsored by the agencies of the state, the University Of Iowa or other governmental
subdivisions, provided such entities enter into an agreement satisfactory to the city attorney to protect and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents
and employees from and against all claims, lawsuits, damages, losses and expenses in any manner resulting from or arising out of the activity or
event covered by the permit or to accept full responsibility for safe activity or event and to defend the city, its officers, agents and employees with
regard thereto.
F. Newspaper Vending Units In Kiosks:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 172/715
1. Newspapers may utilize the newspaper vending units in the kiosks.
2. Upon the filing of an application by a newspaper with the city manager or designee and upon payment of an annual administrative fee, payable April
1 of each year and set by city council resolution, the city shall make available one unit in a kiosk. Each newspaper may utilize only one unit unless
the number of applications does not exceed the available kiosk units.
3. If the number of applications exceeds the available kiosk units, the city will handle the applications on a lottery basis, to be conducted by the city
manager or designee prior to April 1 of each year. After completion of the lottery, if needed, the city manager or designee shall provide written notice
of the lottery results to the requesting newspapers. The selected newspapers shall pay the annual administrative fee to the city manager or
designee.
4. The newspaper which pays the administrative fee and is assigned a space may not affix a logo or sign to its assigned unit.
5. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit or interfere with alternative methods of distribution available to newspapers throughout the city,
as permitted by federal law.
G. Placement Of Noncommercial And Commercial Objects And Structures:
1. No person shall place any freestanding noncommercial object or structure in City Plaza without authorization issued by the city manager or
designee.
2. To obtain authorization, the person shall inform the City Manager or designee of the proposed duration of the placement, the proposed location of
the object or structure, and the physical dimensions of the object or structure.
3. Upon receipt of such information, the City Manager or designee shall promptly authorize the display in Zone 2 only for a maximum of thirty (30) days
in any one year period, unless the City Manager or designee finds that said object or structure will impede the flow of pedestrian traffic at the
proposed location. If the City Manager or designee finds that said object or structure will impede the flow of pedestrian traffic at the proposed
location, then the City Manager or designee shall deny the authorization in writing.
4. Any party aggrieved by the City Manager's or designee's decision to grant or deny such authorization may appeal the determination to the City
Council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. In such event, a hearing shall be
held by the City Council no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such hearing, the City Council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse,
affirm or modify in any regard the City Manager's or designee's decision. The City Council's decision is the final decision. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
5. No person shall place any freestanding commercial object or structure in City Plaza, unless issued a permit as follows: (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004;
amd. Ord. 17-4733, 11-21-2017)
a. The City Manager or designee may issue a permit to an association of downtown businesses for the placement of a structure on City Plaza for
commercial purposes under the following conditions:
(1) The applicant must complete an application prepared by the City Manager's Office. (Ord. 17-4733, 11-21-2017)
(2) The duration of the permit cannot exceed forty five (45) days per calendar year except for calendar years 2018 and 2019. (Ord. 18-4748, 5-1-
2018)
(3) Insurance coverage as required by the City's risk manager.
(4) Execution of an agreement to indemnify the City.
(5) The structure must be approved by the building official.
(6) No sale, transfer or assignment of the permit is allowed.
(7) Other conditions consistent with the purpose of this title.
b. The City Manager or designee shall either grant or deny the application within seven (7) working days of the application being filed. The City
Manager or designee shall have the discretion to deny the application due to the amount of space requested and/or the conflicting demands for
space during the time period requested. The process for appeals and revocation of the permit shall be the same as for a temporary use of
sidewalk permit. (Ord. 17-4733, 11-21-2017)
H. Permit For Amplified Sound:
1. The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue a permit for "amplified sound", as defined in section 6-4-1 of this Code, on City Plaza subject to
the following conditions:
a. Use is limited to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. on Mondays
through Fridays and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays;
b. The location is limited to Black Hawk Minipark and the stage south of the fountain;
c. No sale, transfer, or assignment of the amplified sound permit is allowed without written consent of the City;
d. No sign or advertisement is allowed except for a sign identifying the permittee;
e. The City Manager or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully completed the application. If the permit is denied, the City Manager
or designee shall state the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of the application being filed.
2. The City Manager or designee may revoke the permit if:
a. It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material fact in the application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 173/715
b. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred; or
c. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or local, State, or Federal law.
3. The process for appeals of a denial or revocation of the permit shall be the same as for a parade/public assembly permit.
I. Amplified Sound Compliance: No person shall use amplified sound in City Plaza except as authorized in this title. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
10-5-8: CITY PLAZA USE PERMITS:
A. Mobile Vendors: The requirements for mobile vendors in City Plaza are identical to those for mobile vendors as provided in section 10-3-5 of this title.
B. Ambulatory Vendors:
1. Application For Permit:
a. Filing Application:
(1) An application for an ambulatory vendor permit shall be filed with the City Manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to
use the public right-of-way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is not a natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who
has authority to act for the applicant with regard to the ambulatory vending operation.
(2) All applications must be received at least five (5) working days before the proposed start of operations.
(3) Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the City Manager or designee.
b. Application Form: The application form shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) An acknowledgment to be signed by a natural person that he or she has the authority to act on behalf of the ambulatory vending operation.
(3) List of past permits issued.
(4) Product to be sold.
(5) Hours of operation.
(6) Months of operation.
(7) An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on behalf of the City all sums which the City shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the City for damages of any kind resulting from use of public property and the public right-of-way, whether sustained by
any person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the City any claim against the City
arising out of the use of public property and the public right-of-way.
(8) Acknowledgment that the applicant has contacted the Johnson County Health Department and has reviewed Health Code requirements.
(9) Fee.
(10) Insurance is required in a reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons or property based on the nature and size of the
event, as determined by the city's risk manager. The insurance requirement may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to obtain
insurance or to pay the cost of insurance.
(11) Any other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary.
2. Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
a. Standards: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for the ambulatory vendor permit within a reasonable time, which
shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant and stating the reasons therefor no later than sixty (60) working days of the
application being filed. The length of time which is reasonable shall be determined by the type of use requested, the information supplied, the time
the application is filed, and the extent of advance preparation and planning demonstrated and reasonably required. The city manager or designee
shall issue an ambulatory vendor permit if the following conditions have been or will be met:
(1) The application is received at least five (5) working days before the proposed start of operations.
(2) The applicant will operate without the use of a mobile vending cart and with a minimum of equipment.
(3) The applicant's proposed mode of operation will not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic along the City Plaza right of way, nor shall it
interfere with such pedestrian movement into or out of retail establishments fronting on the plaza2.
(4) The applicant will conduct the vending completely within the boundaries of City Plaza.
(5) The applicant has obtained all necessary permits required by the county department of health.
(6) All applicable fees have been paid in full.
(7) The application is fully completed and executed.
(8) The indemnification agreement has been signed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 174/715
(9) A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section has been provided.
(10) The application contains no material falsehood or misrepresentation.
(11) The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue and be sued.
(12) The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other outstanding
and unpaid debts to the city.
(13) The applicant has complied with applicable laws concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
(14) Such other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
b. Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, telephone number, and address of permittee.
(2) Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
(3) Such other information that the city manager or designee finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
3. Appeals:
a. Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's decision to issue or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the determination to the
city council if, within ten (10) working days after the decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In such event, a hearing
shall be held by the city council no later than at its next regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said
appeal in accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
b. Upon such hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the city manager's
or designee's decision. The city council's decision is the final decision.
4. Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of an ambulatory vendor permit for City Plaza is expressly prohibited.
5. Revocation Of Permit:
a. The city manager or designee, or city council if issued following an appeal, is authorized to revoke an ambulatory vendor permit issued under this
chapter whenever:
(1) The permit has failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter;
(2) The permitted activity creates an obstruction to pedestrian use of the City Plaza or a nuisance or violates of any statute, law, rule or regulation
involving the permitted event;
(3) It is necessary to protect health or safety as determined by the police chief or designee or fire chief or designee;
(4) The permittee has misstated any material fact in the application;
(5) There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred;
(6) The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit; or
(7) The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
b. A permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the issuance or denial of a permit.
6. Fees: Fees for ambulatory vendor permits shall be set by resolution of the city council.
C. Permanent And Temporary Structures: The city manager or designee, upon approval of city council, may enter into an agreement for the sale or lease
of public right of way in the City Plaza for the construction of an addition to an existing storefront or for the temporary or seasonal use of zone 1 by the
owner or operator of abutting property. Said lease or sale shall only be entered into after careful consideration and assurance that the following
conditions have been or will be met:
1. Building Design:
a. Additions to buildings shall be harmonious in scale and design with permanent neighboring structures and with the City Plaza.
b. Materials shall be suitable for the style and design of buildings in which they are used.
c. Materials which are architecturally harmonious shall be used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible
from public ways.
d. Selection of materials shall be guided by the following:
(1) Harmony with adjoining buildings.
(2) Relationship to the brick and wood theme of City Plaza.
(3) Materials shall be of durable quality.
e. Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.
f. Colors shall be selected for their harmony and/or ability to complement the color scheme of the City Plaza.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 175/715
g. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the
building or shall be located so as not to be visible from any public ways.
h. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building
design.
2. Signs:
a. All signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color, lettering, location and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design and
shall be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings.
b. Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and be harmonious with building design and the materials used in the City Plaza.
c. Every sign shall express, in scale and in proportion, an appropriate visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
d. Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious with
the design. If external spotlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view.
3. Additional Criteria:
a. The design review committee may, from time to time, formulate additional design criteria for the review of proposed construction pursuant to this
chapter. Such criteria shall become effective when adopted by the city council by resolution.
b. No building permit for the construction of any temporary structure or any building extension to be constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be
issued until plans for said construction have been reviewed by the design review committee and approved by the city council. The design review
committee shall, within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of said plans, review the plans and advise approval, approval with conditions or
disapproval in a written report forwarded to the city council and the applicant. City council approval of the plans shall require a majority of votes
cast at any meeting at which a quorum is present.
4. Illumination: Nighttime interior illumination of all building fronts and basement extensions, display window extensions and basement stairwells is
required during hours of operation.
5. Construction Costs: All costs of construction are to be paid by the permittee, including costs of damage or repair to the City Plaza caused by the
construction. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
D. Information Tables: The city manager or designee is authorized to grant a permit for the placement of an information table in City Plaza subject to the
following conditions: (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
1. The location shall be determined by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 13-4515, 1-22-2013)
2. The size of the table shall not exceed three feet by three feet (3' x 3').
3. Soliciting as defined in section 8-5-2 of this code is prohibited.
4. The purpose of the table is limited to providing noncommercial information to the general public. Information containing commercial and
noncommercial information is allowed if the commercial information is characteristically intertwined with noncommercial information. "Noncommercial
information" is information that is of public concern or that conveys political, social, religious, or philosophical messages. "Commercial information" is
information proposing the exchange of goods or services for money or other consideration.
5. Commercial activity is prohibited.
6. Goods or services cannot be provided or demonstrated. Collection of signatures incident to provision of information, including, but not limited to,
gathering signatures for a petition or registering persons to vote, shall not be considered a service.
7. The city manager or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully completed the application. If the permit is denied, the city manager or
designee shall state the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of the application being filed.
8. The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued following an appeal, may revoke a permit if:
a. It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material fact in the application;
b. There is a substantial and material variance between the information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred; or
c. The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or local, state, or federal law.
9. The process for appeals of a denial or revocation of the permit shall be the same as for a parade/public assembly permit. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
10-5-9: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this chapter. A copy of
said rules shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 176/715
Chapter 6
IOWA RIVER
10-6-1: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter of the code shall incorporate by reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations
contained in chapter 462A, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if
set forth herein.
Definitions
Classification Of Vessels
Required Equipment
Prohibited Operations
Right-Of-Way Rules
Permit To Drive Over Ice
Authorized Emergency Vessels
Collisions, Accidents And Casualties
Boat Liveries
Buoys
Penalty
(1994 Code)
10-6-2: PROHIBITED OPERATIONS, ADDITIONALLY:
A. No person shall:
1. Waterskiing Or Skiing In Certain Areas: Operate any vessel towing persons on water skis, surfboards or similar devices on the Iowa River in the area
bounded by the Coralville Mill Dam and the Burlington Street Dam, except during regattas, races, marine parades or exhibitions authorized by the
natural resource commission or its successor to be held in such area.
2. Swimming In Certain Areas: Swim in the Iowa River between the Iowa Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam.
3. Walking, Ice Skating, Fishing In Certain Frozen Areas: Walk, ice skate, fish or otherwise be upon the surface of the ice on the Iowa River between
the Iowa Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam. (1978 Code §24-83; amd. 1994 Code)
B. No craft or vehicle shall be operated on the surface of the ice on the Iowa River between the Iowa Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam.
C. No owner or operator of any vessel propelled by a motor of more than six (6) horsepower shall permit any person under twelve (12) years of age to
operate such vessel, except when accompanied by a responsible person of at least eighteen (18) years of age who is experienced in motorboat
operation. (1978 Code §24-83)
D. No person owning or operating a vessel shall permit such vessel to be occupied by more passengers and crew than the registration capacity permits.
(1978 Code §24-85)
Chapter 7
CITY CEMETERY
10-7-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
The director of parks and recreation shall be charged with the care and maintenance of the city cemetery and shall herein be referred to as "director".
(1978 Code §9-1; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-2: REGULATIONS:
Regulations for the city cemetery shall be established by resolution of the city council, which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk, available for
inspection by the public during normal business hours. (1978 Code §9-2)
10-7-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
Rates and charges for services and burial spaces of the city cemetery shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be on file in the office
of the city clerk, available for inspection by the public during normal business hours. (1978 Code §9-3)
10-7-4: NONPERPETUAL CARE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 177/715
All city cemeteries shall be nonperpetual care cemeteries, and all lots sold after the effective date of ordinance 77-2823 shall be maintained as such. The
establishment of the cemeteries as nonperpetual care cemeteries shall in no way alter any rights of purchasers under perpetual care as established by
ordinance 2331. (1978 Code §9-10)
10-7-5: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall be in the city cemetery, whether on foot, in a vehicle or otherwise, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven thirty o'clock
(7:30) A.M. unless granted special authorization by the director. (1978 Code §9-5; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-6: SPEED LIMIT:
No person shall operate any vehicle within the city cemetery at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. (1978 Code §9-6; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Animals: No person shall bring or permit any dog or domestic animal to enter into the city cemetery unless such animal is on a leash or confined in
either a vehicle or in a cage, kennel, crate, or carrier. Said prohibition does not apply to an animal trained to assist persons with disabilities. (Ord. 17-
4700, 3-21-2017)
B. Discharge Of Firearms1: No person shall discharge any gun, toy gun, toy weapon, pistol or other firearm within the city cemetery, except firearms
utilizing blank ammunition may be discharged within the city cemetery in conjunction with a funeral, committal or memorial service, provided prior
approval is obtained from the director or designee. This subsection shall not apply nor be construed to prevent any United States, state, county or city
peace officer from discharging any firearms in the execution of official duties. (1978 Code §9-7; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Defacement Of Monuments: No person shall mar or deface any monument, stone or statuary within the city cemetery. (1978 Code §9-8; amd. 1994
Code)
D. Injury To Plants: No person shall pick any wild or cultivated flowers or injure any shrub, tree or plant material within the city cemetery. (1978 Code §9-9;
amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Chapter 8
TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS1
10-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PLANT MATERIALS: Any form of plant vegetation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes public parks, city right of way or any other public property owned or controlled by the city and dedicated to public use.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A business or service engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service of public consequence and need.
STREET: The improved portion of public right of way primarily intended for vehicle travel, including alleys.
TREES: Any woody vegetation. (1994 Code)
10-8-2: FORESTRY ADMINISTRATION:
Upon appointment by the city manager or designee, the city forester shall have authority to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and
plant materials on streets and public places in order to ensure public safety and protect public places. (1978 Code §34-18; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-3: CONTAINER PLANTING:
A. Approval And Permit Required: No person shall establish a container either above or below ground for trees and plant materials on public places
without approval of the city council. Following city council approval, a permit will be issued by the city forester. Containers and their maintenance
become the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 178/715
B. Maintenance Required; Notice To Remove Or Replant: All containers and trees and plant materials shall be maintained to quality and design standards
as required by the city forester. Failure to properly maintain containers and trees and plant materials may result in a notice to replant or remove, to be
issued in writing by the city forester. Failure to comply with the forester's notice may result in the city's removing, with costs to be assessed against the
abutting property owner, after written notice, in the same manner as a property tax, as provided in chapter 364, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code
§34-19; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-4: FELLING TREES IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Trees or branches which are felled or trimmed onto public places must be removed as directed by the city manager or designee. (1994 Code)
10-8-5: DAMAGE TO TREES OR PLANT MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall damage, move, remove or otherwise injure or vandalize any trees or plant materials located within public places. (1994 Code)
B. Trees and plant materials near any excavation or construction of any building or structure shall be adequately protected as determined by the city
forester. (1978 Code §34-25; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-6: NUISANCES2:
A. Generally: Any tree or plant material so placed as to substantially interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic is a public nuisance.
B. Cotton Bearing Trees: Cotton bearing cottonwood trees and all other cotton bearing poplar trees are deemed a public nuisance as provided by the code
of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §34-23; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-7: TRIMMING TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS:
Trees or plant materials on public or private property abutting on any street or public place shall be trimmed to a sufficient height to allow free passage of
pedestrian and vehicular travel as required by standards established by the city forester. (1978 Code §34-24; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-8: PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS:
Work performed by a public utility company under a permit issued under section 10-8-11 of this chapter to treat, trim or remove trees or plant materials on
or within a public place shall be performed in accordance with the standards established by the city forester. The city forester may assign an inspector to
supervise the provisions of the permit, and the cost of such service shall be charged to the public utility. (1978 Code §34-26; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-9: IMPROPER PLANTING OF TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS:
Whenever any tree or plant material shall be planted in or within a public place contrary to standards established by the city forester, the city forester may
require its removal or replanting. Failure to so remove or replant may result in the city's removing, with costs to be assessed against the abutting property
owner, after written notice, in the same manner as a property tax, as provided in chapter 364, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §34-29; amd. 1994
Code)
10-8-10: ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE:
The city forester is hereby authorized to establish specific standards governing the planting, selection of species, support, treatment of root systems,
trimming, spraying, removal, filling of cavities and bracing for all trees and plant materials in, on or within public places. (1994 Code)
10-8-11: PERMITS FOR WORK ON PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Permit Required: No person, except the city or a person hired by the city, shall treat, plant, trim, remove or otherwise disturb any tree or plant material
on any street or public place without first obtaining a permit from the city forester. (1978 Code §34-49; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Storage Of Materials That May Inhibit Growth: No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any street or public place any stone, brick, sand,
concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any trees or plant materials growing therein,
except upon approval of the city forester. (1978 Code §34-56; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Public Utility Installations: All permits issued for the installation of public utilities that affect public trees or public plant materials shall first be approved
by the city forester. A public utility may be issued a permit to treat, trim or remove any tree or plant material on any street or public place. (1978 Code
§34-57; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-12: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 179/715
No person shall interfere with the city forester in carrying out the duties of this chapter. (1994 Code)
10-8-13: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Chapter 9
PARKS AND RECREATION REGULATIONS
10-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A person who applies for permit as authorized in this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The director of the parks and recreation department.
PARADE: A march or procession of more than twenty five (25) persons, vehicles or other forms of transportation, such as bicycles, or any combination
thereof, in or upon the public right of way or in a park that necessitates or results in the exclusion, in whole or in part, of use of the public right of way,
including a park by others. Funeral processions shall not be deemed to be included in this definition and shall not be considered a parade.
PARK FACILITY: A baseball field, softball field, soccer field, tennis court, secured shelter, or unsecured shelter in a park or Riverside Festival Stage.
PARK, PUBLIC PARK: Any park or playground owned or controlled by the city, including streets, trails, and roadways therein.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than twenty five (25) persons for a common purpose as a result of
prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public right of way or in a park or occupies any area
in the public right of way or in a park.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use.
SPONSORING AGENCY: Any organization or group, regardless of whether it is legally constituted, and including, but not limited to, corporations and
partnerships, on whose behalf a natural person or individual makes application for a park permit.
TRAIL: A way or place, the use of which is controlled by the city as owner of the real property, used for persons walking, jogging, skateboarding, in-line
skating, or bicycling or motorized devices designed for and used by persons with disabilities. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4791 - OPEN CONTAINERS. Go to new ordinance.
10-9-2: PROHIBITED ACTIONS IN PARKS:
In any park no person shall:
A. Damage To Property, Animals, Trees And Plant Materials:
1. Pick or destroy any plant materials or walk or run upon any flowerbeds.
2. Break or tear any limbs or branches from any tree.
3. Throw objects or missiles at any animal or bird or molest any animal or bird in any way.
4. Tear down, mutilate, destroy or carry away any sign constructed under the authority of the city council or the parks and recreation department.
5. Tear down, mutilate, destroy or burn any building, shelter equipment, picnic table, grill, or any personal property owned by the city.
B. Motor Vehicles And Traffic1:
1. Park any vehicle in any area where parking is prohibited by posted signs.
2. Drive any vehicle within any park, except upon the designated streets, driveways and parking areas of such parks, except motorized devices
designed for and used by persons with disabilities.
3. Drive any vehicle within any park at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted2.
4. Drive any vehicle in the wrong direction upon any one-way street within a park.
C. Weapons: Carry firearms or weapons into any park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 180/715
D. Animals:
1. Bring, cause or permit any pet to enter into any park unless such animal is on a leash or confined in either a vehicle or in a cage, kennel, crate, or
carrier.
2. Ride any horse in any park except upon streets and trails, and then only if the horse rider provides for the immediate disposal of solid waste material
excreted by any animal. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
3. This provision shall not apply to: a) an animal trained to assist persons with disabilities; b) a person issued a permit as authorized in section 8-4-12
of this code; or c) a dog in a city dog park that has been issued a use permit. (Ord. 12-4504, 12-4-2012)
E. Fires3: Build or aid and abet the building of any fire in any park, except in stoves or fireplaces designated for such purposes.
F. Alcoholic Beverages4: Possess or consume any beer or alcoholic beverages in any park, except if said person has purchased said alcoholic beverage
from an "authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site", as those terms are defined in subsection 4-5-3D of this code.
G. Practice Golf: Practice golf in any park.
H. Unauthorized Use Of Buildings: Occupy any shelter or building or recreation area which has been reserved by others through the provisions of this
chapter or install any unauthorized reserved sign in any shelter, building or recreation area.
I. Hours:
1. Except as provided for specified parks herein, occupy any park, whether on foot or in a vehicle, or permit any vehicle to remain parked in any park
between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless granted special authorization by the city.
2. From April 15 to October 31, the hours shall be from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in City Park and Mercer Park.
3. Occupy, whether on foot or in a vehicle, or permit any vehicle to remain parked from dusk to dawn at the following parks: Waterworks Prairie Park,
Peninsula Park, Hickory Hill Park, and Ryerson's Woods Park. "Dusk" means thirty (30) minutes after the time designated each calendar day as
"sunset" and "dawn" means thirty (30) minutes before the time designated each calendar day as "sunrise" by the United States Naval Observatory
for Iowa City, Johnson County, Iowa. Said designations can be accessed via the internet at http://aa.usno.navy.mil. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
J. Bicycles And Nonmotorized Vehicles:
1. No person shall travel upon or operate a bicycle or nonmotorized vehicle within Chauncey Swan Park or Black Hawk Mini Park. (Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-
2013)
2. Persons may travel upon or operate bicycles and nonmotorized vehicles in all other City parks except where posted as prohibited, and only to the
extent the nonmotorized vehicles are used in a safe manner so as not to injure persons or property.
3. This provision shall not apply to a person with disabilities using a nonmotorized device designed for a person with disabilities. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
K. Commercial Use: No commercial use of City parks is allowed except as approved by the Director. (Ord. 10-4400, 7-12-2010)
L. Smokeless Tobacco: In addition to the prohibition of use of tobacco and electronic cigarettes in City parks as provided in title 6, chapter 10 of this Code,
no person shall use smokeless tobacco in any City park except when in a privately owned vehicle. Smokeless tobacco is defined as any product that
contains cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco and is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal cavity, including, but not limited to, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco products and snus. (Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017)
10-9-3: TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS5:
A. Duties Of Director: The Director is hereby authorized and directed to: 1) designate streets and drives for use within the parks; 2) designate parking
areas for the parks; and 3) prohibit, regulate or limit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on the streets, driveways and parking areas in the parks
at all times or during specified hours. The Director shall also cause signs to be posted designating streets, drives and parking areas or prohibiting,
regulating or limiting stopping, standing or parking in the parks.
B. Vehicle Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Violations: If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner violative of the provisions of
this chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, there is a rebuttable presumption that the owner is responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-4: FACILITY PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to use any park or the facilities of any park without complying with the
requirements of chapter 1 of this title including first having obtained a parade/public assembly permit if applicable.
B. Secured Shelter: No person or sponsoring agency shall use a secured shelter without obtaining the authorization of the Director or designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 181/715
C. Park Facility: Any person or sponsoring agency may reserve a park facility by completing and filing an application with the Director on a form prepared
by the Director. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-5: FEES FOR USE OF CITY PARK AND RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES:
A. Fees Established: Upon recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Commission, all parks and recreation fees shall be established by resolution of
the City Council. (1994 Code)
B. Reduction Or Waiver Of Fees: Notwithstanding the above, the Director is authorized to reduce or waive fees for use of park facilities or equipment for
affiliate groups or organizations providing public recreational opportunities and which are under the sponsorship or cosponsorship of the Parks and
Recreation Department. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-6: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (1994
Code)
Chapter 10
CHUTES AND VAULTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGREEMENT: The official agreement between the city and a property owner and/or lessee authorizing a person to use a chute or vault.
CHUTE: A below grade passageway through which goods may pass and persons may gain access to private property that is located below grade. Said
passageway extends from an at grade opening covered by a vault hatch located within the public right of way to a private property line and includes the
entire passageway below the right of way from said opening to said property line.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY ADMINISTRATOR: Public works director, or his or her designee.
VAULT: The area that is located below grade in the public right of way contiguous to an adjoining building on private property, which is utilized by a person
for such uses as storage, office space, and deliveries. Access to a vault may be through the adjoining building or through a vault hatch located at grade
level within the public right of way. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-2: USE PROHIBITED:
Use of chutes and vaults within the public right of way shall be unlawful except as specifically provided herein or as specifically authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-3: AGREEMENTS FOR CHUTES AND VAULTS:
A. Application: An application to enter into an agreement to use a chute or vault in the public right of way shall be filed with the city department of public
works on a form provided by said department. The application shall include the name of the property owner abutting the portion of the right of way
containing said chute or vault and the name of all lessees. A person shall submit with said application a certificate of insurance that complies with the
insurance provision of this chapter.
B. Agreement Required: Beginning ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof, no person shall use a chute or vault in the public right of way without
first executing an agreement with the city. Agreements will be executed on behalf of the city by the director of public works if the director determines
that the use is a minimal intrusion into the public use of the right of way and that pedestrian traffic will not be materially impaired. All agreements shall
include provisions for the following:
1. Insurance: A person shall provide, at the time the application is filed, a certificate of insurance for general liability and casualty insurance, naming the
city of Iowa City as an additional insured, which provides coverage in the following minimum amounts: comprehensive general liability for bodily
injury and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. A
person shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city before cancellation of said insurance.
2. Maintenance: A person shall maintain the chute and vault and its appurtenant vault hatches within the right of way in good and reasonable repair as
determined by the public right of way administrator.
3. Inspection: The city may inspect a chute or vault after giving twenty four (24) hours' notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 182/715
4. Hold Harmless: A person shall pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed upon the
city for damages of any kind resulting from using or accessing a chute or vault, whether sustained by any person or persons, caused by accident or
otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of the public right of way.
5. Assumption Of Risk And Waiver Of Liability: A person shall acknowledge that there are risks arising from other uses, operation, repair, and
maintenance of the right of way, including, but not limited to, utilities such as water mains, water lines, sewer mains, sewer lines, gas lines, fiber optic
lines, pedestrian traffic, and vehicular traffic, and will absolve the city of liability for damages sustained by said person as a result of such approved
uses of the right of way.
6. Temporary Use: A person shall acknowledge and agree that the city is not empowered to grant a permanent use of its right of way for private
purposes.
C. Sealed: If the use of a chute or vault is abandoned, if a person using a chute or vault refuses to enter into an agreement, or if an agreement is
terminated, the city may seal the chute or vault. "Abandoned" means no use for ninety (90) continuous days.
D. Additional Requirements: The public right of way administrator may establish additional requirements, as necessary, for the protection of the right of
way. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal infraction. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
Chapter 11
FARMERS' MARKET
10-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECTOR: The director of city parks and recreation department.
FARMERS' MARKET: An open air market sponsored by the city that is intended to provide an opportunity for individuals to sell permitted items that are
grown or produced by them, which conform to all applicable city, county and state health and safety provisions, including state department of agriculture
regulations.
FARMERS' MARKET VENDOR: Person who is authorized under this chapter to occupy a stall and to sell items in the farmers' market or who is a grilling
vendor.
GRILLING SITE: A location designated by the director that a grilling vendor is authorized to occupy in order to prepare and sell items consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
GRILLING VENDOR: Person who is authorized under this chapter to occupy a grilling site to grill or cook food and offer the prepared item for sale. A
grilling vendor who grills or cooks food on site may in addition sell nonalcoholic beverages that have been prepared on site.
PERSON: A natural person.
SEASON VENDOR: A farmers' market vendor who is authorized by the city to occupy a stall or grilling site for the entire season.
STALL: A space designated by the director that a farmers' market vendor is authorized to occupy in order to sell items consistent with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004; amd. Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007; Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010)
10-11-2: REGISTRATION:
A. Authorization Required: No person shall sell or offer for sale any item at the farmers' market without authorization from the director or designee.
B. Obtaining Authorization: In order to receive authorization, a person shall register with the director at least one day in advance of the market date on a
form prepared by the director.
C. Registration Form: The registration form shall contain the following information:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the farmers' market vendor.
2. Agreement to indemnify the city. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-3: STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OR DENYING AUTHORIZATION:
The director or designee shall examine the registration form and shall grant authorization if the following conditions are met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 183/715
A. All applicable fees have been paid. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
B. A stall or grilling site is available. (Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007)
C. The person has not had his or her farmers' market authorization revoked in the last year. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
D. If there are more registrants than available stalls and grilling sites, selection will be pursuant to standards set forth in the administrative rules.
Notwithstanding any other provision, the administrative rules may provide that a vendor who has violated any provision of this chapter or an
administrative rule will not be given priority. (Ord. 16-4677, 9-20-2016)
E. Grilling vendor only:
1. The grilling vendor has obtained insurance in a reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons and property based on the
intended use, as determined by the city's risk manager.
2. The person has obtained all necessary permits required by the Johnson County health department. (Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007)
3. Such other requirements as the director may establish in the administrative rules. (Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007; amd. Ord. 16-4677, 9-20-2016)
F. If the person intends to sell alcohol, the person has obtained all necessary permits and licenses from the state of Iowa. (Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010)
10-11-4: APPEALS:
A. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the director to grant or deny authorization under this chapter may appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the
date of the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager.
B. The hearing shall be before the city manager, who may reverse, affirm or modify, in any regard, the determination of the director based upon the
standards enumerated herein. The city manager's decision is the final decision of the city. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-5: REVOCATION OF AUTHORIZATION:
A. Authorization may be revoked by the director if:
1. The farmers' market vendor has misstated in any way material facts on the registration form.
2. There is a material variance between the information on the registration form and the facts reasonably ascertained by the director.
3. When, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, as determined by the director, city manager, fire chief, or chief of police, that
the safety of the public requires such revocation.
4. The farmers' market vendor is operating in violation of the terms and conditions of the authorization.
B. A person may appeal a revocation of authorization in the same manner as appealing the denial of authorization as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-6: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The director is authorized to establish administrative rules. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-7: FEES:
Fees for authorization of a farmers' market vendor shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
Title 11
PUBLIC LIBRARY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 184/715
Chapter 1
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
11-1-1: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a free public library for the city, to be known as the Iowa City public library. (1978 Code §20-1)
11-1-2: BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES:
A. Board Created: There is hereby created a board of trustees of the Iowa City public library. (1978 Code §20-16)
B. Membership; Appointment: The board of trustees of the city public library, hereinafter referred to as the "board", consists of nine (9) members. All
resident board members are to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. If the library is receiving funds for countywide public
library service on a contract basis, there may be one nonresident board member who shall be appointed by the county board of supervisors with the
approval of the city council. (1978 Code §20-17; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Qualifications Of Trustees: All members of the board shall be bona fide residents of the city, except the nonresident member, and all shall be over the
age of eighteen (18) years. (1978 Code §28-18; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Terms And Vacancies:
1. Terms Of Office: All appointments to the board shall be for six (6) years except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number, as near as possible, to stagger the terms. The present incumbents are
confirmed in their appointments and terms.
2. Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if the trustee moves permanently from the city, or in case of a nonresident member, from the
county, or if the trustee is absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings of the board. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment of the
mayor with the approval of the city council, or in the case of the nonresident member, with the approval of the board of supervisors, with the
concurring approval of the city council. An appointed trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. (1978 Code §20-19;
amd. 1994 Code)
E. Powers And Duties Generally: The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1. To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary. The city finance officer shall serve as
board treasurer but shall not be a member of the board.
2. To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms.
3. To direct and control all the activities and operations of the library.
4. To employ a librarian and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees
shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting in favor thereof.
5. To remove, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board, the librarian and provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended.
6. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the board.
7. To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to fix charges therefor.
8. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use and management
of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library purposes by the city council and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the construction or remodeling of library buildings and of all other monies belonging to the library, including fines and rentals collected,
under the rules of the board.
10. To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of such property; and to expend the funds received from
such gifts, for the improvement of the library.
11. To keep a record of its proceedings.
12. To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests.
13. To have authority to make agreements with the local county historical association, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to
care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles
and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are, in their judgment, of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for library purposes. (1978 Code §20-20; amd. 1994 Code)
F. Contract With Others For Use Of Library:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 185/715
1. Contracting: The board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, any other city, school, corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township or county or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by
their respective residents. Where deemed appropriate or beneficial by the board and city council, the board may authorize the city council to
negotiate and execute such library services contracts on its behalf. The terms and conditions of any such authorization shall be set forth in a joint
agreement between the board and city council, copies of which shall be maintained by the city clerk.
2. Termination Of Contract: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the
governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the
territory of such party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the
election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the
contract. (1978 Code §20-21)
G. Annual Report: The board shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close of the city fiscal year. This report shall contain statements
of the condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected and the amount of money
expended in the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further information required by the city council. (1978 Code §20-22)
H. Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services. (1978 Code §20-19)
11-1-3: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The board created by this chapter may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents, upon contractual arrangements, fee charges or other methods of
recovering the cost thereof, in any one or more of the following ways:
A. By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents of the city or upon payment of a special nonresident library fee.
B. By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
D. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library materials to nonresidents. (1978 Code §20-2)
11-1-4: CONDUCT WITHIN LIBRARY:
No person shall engage in conduct, such as loud talking or audible use of sound equipment, which interferes with the order and quiet attendant in a library
setting and/or which materially disturbs the ability of library patrons to receive information. (1994 Code)
11-1-5: LIBRARY ACCOUNT; EXPENDITURES:
All money appropriated by the city council from the general fund for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for the
library. Expenditures shall be paid only on orders of the board of trustees, signed by its president and secretary. (1978 Code §20-4; amd. 1994 Code)
11-1-6: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Title 12
FRANCHISES
Chapter 1
ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE1
12-1-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called the "company", and its successors and assigns, the
nonexclusive right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city of Iowa City, hereinafter the "city", an electric light and power
system including the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wire, transmission lines, conduits and other appliances for the transmission and
distribution of electric energy along, under and upon the streets, avenues and alleys to serve customers within and without said city, and to furnish and sell
electric energy to said city and its inhabitants. The city council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other public places at the request of the
company. Rights are hereby granted for all existing facilities located in other public places prior to the date of this agreement. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 186/715
12-1-2: FRANCHISE CONTINUATION; TERMINATION:
The city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less than two (2) years prior to the tenth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this franchise will terminate on the tenth anniversary of the effective date. The city
may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less than two (2) years prior to the twentieth anniversary of the effective date hereof.
In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this franchise will terminate on the twentieth anniversary of the effective date. If both such
resolutions are adopted, this franchise will terminate on the twenty fifth anniversary of the effective date. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
A. This franchise is renewed and continued for a period of ten (10) years until December 4, 2027. (Ord. 16-4681, 11-1-2016)
12-1-3: RIGHTS OF COMPANY SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
The rights and privileges hereby granted to the company, its successors and assigns, are subject to applicable provisions of the Iowa Code, including, but
not limited to, the restrictions and limitations of Iowa Code chapter 364 (2007) or as subsequently amended or changed, this code, any other applicable
statutes or regulations promulgated by federal or state agencies under federal or state laws, all of said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes and regulations
as presently enacted or subsequently amended. The company reserves the right to challenge or contest the city's interpretation or application of any of
said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations. The city may make such lawful and reasonable amendments to the provisions of this code
affecting or regulating the company in its operation of the electric utility, as the city deems necessary and proper, within the scope of its authority as
authorized by the constitution and code of Iowa. The franchise granted herein shall not restrict in any manner the right of the city in the exercise of any
power which it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the constitution or laws of the state of Iowa. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-4: RESTRUCTURED RETAIL ELECTRIC UTILITY INDUSTRY:
Nothing in this agreement shall be construed or interpreted to limit or prohibit the city, residents or businesses of Iowa City from participating in or enjoying
any benefits and protections of a restructured retail electric utility industry to the extent that such benefits and protections are made available to consumers
of competitive retail electric services under state and federal rules, regulations and law. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-5: PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES:
The company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place thereon the necessary wires, fixtures and accessories as well as to excavate
and bury conduits or conductors for the distribution of electric energy in and through the city, provided the same shall be placed in accord with this
franchise and any regulation the city may from time to time adopt or amend regarding the placement of facilities or structures of utilities, and other right of
way users' facilities or structures, in the right of way. All electric utility system components placed above, upon, in or under public right of way, and the
wires placed thereon or therein, shall comply with the national electrical safety code as adopted by the regulations of the Iowa utilities board. The company
shall not without express approval from the city place in the right of way any substation operating at greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) volts,
transmission lines, equipment or appliances operated at greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) volts or pad mounted distribution facilities of greater than
fifteen thousand (15,000) volts serving an underground distribution feeder system. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-6: EXCAVATIONS:
The company is authorized to make excavations in city streets, avenues and alleys for purposes of routine repair, replacement, and maintenance of poles,
wires, conduits, lines or other electric utility system components. In making such excavations, the company shall obtain a city permit therefor and shall not
unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets, avenues or alleys, shall provide the public works director with twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to the actual
commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the city in its regulation of the use of city right of way in performing
such work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the company may proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit,
provided, however, that the company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work. (Ord.
07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-7: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION OF WORK:
Prior to commencing significant construction or maintenance projects in the public right of way, the company shall use its best efforts to notify the
contiguous affected customers. Best efforts shall include, but are not limited to, at least one of the following: door hangers, telephone contact, or direct
mail. Notification shall not be required in the event of emergency repairs or electric outage restoration efforts. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-8: TREE PRUNING:
The company is authorized and empowered consistent with this franchise to prune or remove at company expense any tree extending into any street,
alley, right of way or public grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs, branches or trunks from interfering
with the wires and facilities of the company. The pruning shall be completed in accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards,
ANSI Z133.1 - 2006, American national standard for arboriculture operations - safety requirements, and ANSI A300 (part 1) - 2001 Pruning, American
national standard for tree, shrub, and other woody plant maintenance - standard of practices pruning, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and city
ordinances regarding the pruning of trees and the protection of its facilities upon public ground. The company shall not remove or prune any tree on public
grounds, other than right of way, except in an emergency or when necessary to alleviate an existing electrical outage without first obtaining permission of
the city's public works director, nor shall the company dig or otherwise excavate under the canopy of any tree on public ground, unless using trencherless
technologies or directional boring, except in an emergency or when necessary to alleviate an existing electrical outage, without having first given the city's
public works director twenty four (24) hours' notice. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 187/715
The company shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the company's negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation,
operation or maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify and save harmless the city for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-
27-2007)
12-1-10: AUTHORITY OF COMPANY:
The company, and its successors and assigns, is authorized to extend its lines, wires and conduits, to expand its transmission and distribution systems, to
engage in repair work and to install new distribution and transmission systems within the city. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-11: AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The company shall maintain the availability of service throughout the entire city including newly annexed areas, excluding areas designated by the Iowa
utilities board to be the exclusive service territory of another electric provider, by extending lines or facilities in a manner consistent with Iowa law. (Ord. 07-
4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-12: STREET MODIFICATIONS:
The city shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of company service lines and facilities on city owned
right of way without charge to company. In planning for the extension or modification of streets and roads, the city shall, to the extent practicable in the
discretion of its public works director, design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of company facilities. Nothing in this franchise shall be
construed as a guarantee that in either existing right of way or in future acquired right of way the city will provide sufficient space for any particular need of
the company nor shall the city be required to obtain additional right of way solely for the use of the company. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-13: FURNISH SUFFICIENT ENERGY FOR DEMAND:
The said company, its successors and assigns, as long as it shall operate under the terms of this franchise, shall furnish electric energy in sufficient
quantities to supply the reasonable demands of said city and the inhabitants thereof in accordance with the company's rules, regulations and conditions of
service as approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-14: COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS TO BENEFIT CITY:
The company shall make an annual written report to the city council summarizing community contributions which benefit the people of Iowa City which
have been made by the company or its foundation. The written report shall include the name of each entity to which such contributions have been made,
the amount of such contribution and a comparison showing contributions for that year and the three (3) prior years. The report shall be filed with the city
council within three (3) months of the close of the company's fiscal year. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-15: CITY USE OF COMPANY POLES:
The city shall be privileged upon thirty (30) days' advance notice to the company, without charge, to make use of the distribution poles of the company that
are placed within city right of way for any city alarm, city control, or city communication function, excluding any paid subscriber services (but including any
city owned cable or wireline communication system for which use the city shall pay an amount consistent with federal law), to the extent that such use
shall not interfere with their use by the company, but the city shall hold the company harmless from any and all causes of action, litigation or damages
arising through the placing of the facilities of the city upon the company's poles. If at the sole discretion of the company, it is determined that said
attachments may create a clearance violation or other hazardous situation, or that wind or other conditions may place undue stress on specific company
facilities, the city shall not be authorized to attach to those facilities. If attachments are in place, upon notification by the company of damage or potential
damage, the city shall promptly remove said attachments. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-16: FRANCHISE FEE; AUDIT:
The city reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant to the Iowa Code, on the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts,
derived from the distribution and the retail sale of electricity by the company to customers within the current or future corporate limits of the city. The city
shall provide the company with ninety (90) days' advance notice of the effective date of any franchise fee put into effect by the city. The city may require
the company to provide an accounting to establish that the fee has been correctly calculated. The city may include a requirement that an audit of the
calculation and basis for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted by an auditor of the city's selection and the company will cooperate with such an
audit. Said audit shall not be conducted more than once a year. The city shall pay the costs of the audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of
franchise fees by an amount equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in which event the company shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 07-4294,
11-27-2007)
12-1-17: EMINENT DOMAIN:
With the permission of the city council, to be separately given in regard to each application to use powers of eminent domain, company shall have the
power to condemn private property for the purpose of providing electric service to the public and in a reasonable relationship to an overall plan of
distributing electrical energy within the city. The company must establish the necessity of each taking of private property and, when so established, the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 188/715
council shall approve the condemnation of the private property by resolution if the council finds the use of such powers is in the public interest, does not
create an unacceptable public safety problem and there is not any reasonable alternative. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-18: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in such manner as
the city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public
improvement of, in, or about any such street or alley, or promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement. The city may require the company to
place or bury its electrical utility system components underground as consistent with company tariffs (it is the understanding of the parties that under
current tariffs the company shall assume and pay as its own expense the cost of moving a line from one aboveground location to another aboveground
location and the city shall reimburse the company for any additional cost occasioned by placing a facility underground). (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-19: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND/OR CONSERVATION PROGRAMS:
The company shall, at all times during which this franchise is in effect, maintain, administer and operate such energy efficiency and/or conservation
programs within the city, as may be approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-20: DISASTER OR EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMUNICATIONS TASK FORCE:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a disaster or emergency response communications task force to address such topics as a
dedicated communications link between the city and the company during emergencies, an interoperable radio communications system between the
company and the city, a reverse telephone messaging system and participation by the company in city and Johnson County joint drills and emergency
training exercises. It is the intent of the parties that such participation may be established by a separate agreement which refers to this franchise. (Ord. 07-
4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-21: RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a city task force to identify and utilize city generated renewable energy options, including sewage
treatment gas or landfill gas available to the city. In the event that the city should at any time during the term of this franchise become an alternate energy
producer of electrical energy at a municipally owned or operated facility the company shall, if requested by the city, enter into an agreement to purchase
the electric energy produced from such qualifying alternate generating facility, subject to applicable statutory requirements and regulations. (Ord. 07-4294,
11-27-2007)
12-1-22: FRANCHISE IS BINDING; ASSIGNMENT OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
This franchise shall apply to and bind the city and the company and their successors and assigns; provided that any assignment by the company shall be
subject to the approval of the city council by resolution, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
The city expressly reserves the right to terminate the franchise granted herein if the company breaches any of the provisions of this franchise; provided,
however, there shall be no termination if the company shall correct the breach within sixty (60) days' written notice provided by the city to do so.
The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the city to insist upon or seek
compliance with any such terms or conditions. Further, it is agreed that the subject matter of this franchise is unique and may be enforced by specific
performance, at the city's option, since a remedy at law may be inadequate. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-23: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the company.
The company shall within thirty (30) days after the approval of this chapter by the city council, file in the office of the clerk of the city its acceptance in
writing of all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following city council approval and written acceptance by the company, this chapter shall be
published in the "Iowa City Press Citizen". The effective date hereof shall be the date of publication. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this franchise ordinance are for any reason declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise ordinance, which
are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and remain in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise ordinance contained no illegal or void
provisions. In the event any provision or provisions are ruled illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city and the company shall forthwith
amend this franchise to insert a successor provision that complies with the applicable court ruling. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
Chapter 2
GAS FRANCHISE1
12-2-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called "company", and to its successors and assigns, the right
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 189/715
and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city of Iowa City, Iowa hereinafter called the "city", a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and rights of way of the city to serve customers within and without the city and to
furnish and sell natural gas to the city and its inhabitants. The city council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other public places upon
request from the company. Rights are hereby granted for all existing facilities located in other public places prior to the date of this agreement. (Ord. 07-
4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-2: FRANCHISE CONTINUATION; TERMINATION:
The city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less than two (2) years prior to the tenth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this franchise will terminate on the tenth anniversary of the effective date. The city
may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less than two (2) years prior to the twentieth anniversary of the effective date hereof.
In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this franchise will terminate on the twentieth anniversary of the effective date. If both such
resolutions are adopted, this franchise will terminate on the twenty fifth anniversary of the effective date. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
A. This franchise is renewed and continued for a period of ten (10) years until December 4, 2027. (Ord. 16-4682, 11-1-2016)
12-2-3: RIGHTS OF COMPANY SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
The rights and privileges hereby granted to the company, its successors and assigns, are subject to applicable provisions of the Iowa Code, including, but
not limited to, the restrictions and limitations of Iowa Code chapter 364 (2007) or as subsequently amended or changed, this code, any other applicable
statutes or regulations promulgated by federal or state agencies under federal or state laws, all of said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes and regulations
as presently enacted or subsequently amended. The company reserves the right to challenge or contest the city's interpretation or application of any of
said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations. The city may make such lawful and reasonable amendments to the provisions of this code
affecting or regulating the company in its operation of the natural gas utility, as the city deems necessary and proper, within the scope of its authority as
authorized by the constitution and code of Iowa. The franchise granted herein shall not restrict in any manner the right of the city in the exercise of any
power which it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the constitution or laws of the state of Iowa. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-4: EXCAVATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES:
The company shall have the right to excavate in any city street, avenue or alley for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains,
conduits, and other gas system components, provided the same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and any regulation the city may from time to
time adopt or amend regarding the placement of facilities or structures of utilities, provided same is not in conflict with company's standards or state and
federal regulation, and other right of way users' facilities or structures, in the right of way. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-5: MAINTENANCE OF GAS SYSTEM; NOTICE; PERMIT:
The company is authorized to make excavations in city streets, avenues and alleys for purposes of routine repair, replacement, and maintenance of gas
pipes, mains, conduits, and other gas system components. In making such excavations, the company shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets,
avenues or alleys, shall provide the public works director with twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, and shall
comply with all provisions and requirements of the city in its regulation of the use of city right of way in performing such work. The company shall not dig or
otherwise excavate under the canopy of any tree on public ground, unless using trencherless technologies or directional boring. In emergencies which
require immediate excavation, the company may proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that the
company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-6: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION OF WORK:
Prior to commencing significant construction or maintenance projects in the public right of way, the company shall use its best efforts to notify the
contiguous affected customers. Best efforts shall include, but are not limited to, at least one of the following: door hangers, telephone contact, or direct
mail. Notification shall not be required in the event of emergency repairs or natural gas restoration efforts. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The company shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the company's negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation,
operation or maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify and save harmless the city for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-
27-2007)
12-2-8: AUTHORITY OF COMPANY:
The company, and its successors and assigns, is authorized to extend its natural gas distribution system and to engage in repair work and to install new
gas distribution and transmission facilities within the city. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-9: AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The company shall maintain the availability of service throughout the entire city including newly annexed areas, by extending natural gas facilities in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 190/715
manner consistent with Iowa law. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-10: STREET MODIFICATIONS:
The city shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of company service lines and facilities on city owned
right of way without charge to company. In planning for the extension or modification of streets and roads, the city shall, to the extent practicable in the
discretion of its public works director, design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of company facilities. Nothing in this franchise shall be
construed as a guarantee that in either existing right of way or in future acquired right of way the city will provide sufficient space for any particular need of
the company nor shall the city be required to obtain additional right of way solely for the use of the company. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-11: FURNISH SUFFICIENT GAS FOR DEMAND:
The said company, its successors and assigns, as long as it shall operate under the terms of this franchise, shall furnish natural gas in sufficient quantities
to supply the reasonable demands of said city and the inhabitants thereof in accordance with the company's rules, regulations and conditions of service as
approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-12: COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS TO BENEFIT CITY:
The company shall make an annual written report to the city council summarizing community contributions which benefit the people of Iowa City which
have been made by the company or its foundation. The written report shall include the name of each entity to which such contributions have been made,
the amount of such contribution and a comparison showing contributions for that year and the three (3) prior years. The report shall be filed with the city
council within three (3) months of the close of the company's fiscal year. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-13: FRANCHISE FEE; AUDIT:
The city reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant to the Iowa Code, on the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts,
derived from the distribution, delivery and retail sale of natural gas by the company or other natural gas providers utilizing the distribution system of the
company, to customers within the current or future corporate limits of the city. The city shall provide the company with ninety (90) days' advance notice of
the effective date of any franchise fee put into effect by the city. The city may require the company to provide an accounting to establish that the fee has
been correctly calculated. The city may include a requirement that an audit of the calculation and basis for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted by
an auditor of the city's selection and the company will cooperate with such an audit. Said audit shall not be conducted more than once a year. The city
shall pay the costs of the audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of franchise fees by an amount equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in
which event the company shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-14: EMINENT DOMAIN:
With the permission of the city council, to be separately given in regard to each application to use powers of eminent domain, company shall have the
power to condemn private property for the purpose of providing natural gas to the public and in a reasonable relationship to an overall plan of distributing
natural gas within the city. The company must establish the necessity of each taking of private property and, when so established, the city council shall
approve the condemnation of the private property by resolution if the council finds the use of such powers is in the public interest, does not create an
unacceptable public safety problem and there is not any reasonable alternative. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-15: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in such manner as
the city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public
improvement of, in, or about any such street or alley, or promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-16: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND/OR CONSERVATION PROGRAMS:
The company shall, at all times during which this franchise is in effect, maintain, administer and operate such energy efficiency and/or conservation
programs within the city, as may be approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-17: DISASTER OR EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMUNICATIONS TASK FORCE:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a disaster or emergency response communications task force to address such topics as a
dedicated communications link between the city and the company during emergencies, an interoperable radio communications system between the
company and the city, a reverse telephone messaging system and participation by the company in city and Johnson County joint drills and emergency
training exercises. It is the intent of the parties that such participation may be established by a separate agreement which refers to this franchise. (Ord. 07-
4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-18: FRANCHISE IS BINDING; ASSIGNMENT OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
This franchise shall apply to and bind the city and the company and their successors and assigns; provided that any assignment by the company shall be
subject to the approval of the city council by resolution, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 191/715
The city expressly reserves the right to terminate the franchise granted herein if the company breaches any of the provisions of this franchise; provided,
however, there shall be no termination if the company shall correct the breach within sixty (60) days following written notice provided by the city to do so.
The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the city to insist upon or seek
compliance with any such terms or conditions. Further, it is agreed that the subject matter of this franchise is unique and may be enforced by specific
performance, at the city's option, since a remedy at law may be inadequate. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the company.
The company shall within thirty (30) days after the approval of this chapter by the city council, file in the office of the clerk of the city its acceptance in
writing of all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following city council approval and written acceptance by the company, this chapter shall be
published in the "Iowa City Press Citizen". The effective date hereof shall be the date of publication. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-20: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this franchise ordinance are for any reason declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise ordinance, which
are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and remain in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise ordinance contained no illegal or void
provisions. In the event any provision or provisions are ruled illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city and the company shall forthwith
amend this franchise to insert a successor provision that complies with the applicable court ruling. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
Chapter 3
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE1
12-3-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED; NONEXCLUSIVE:
To the extent not inconsistent with federal law:
A. The city may grant to any person a franchise to construct, maintain and operate plants and systems for the purpose of sending, transmitting and
distributing voice, audio, data, information, images, graphics, video, alarm monitoring and similar services in wire, wireless, electronic and digital form.
Such information, services and technologies include, but are not limited to, telephone, video dialtone, direct broadcast satellite (DBS), multi-point
distribution system (MMDS), satellite master antenna television (SMATV), wireless cable, and personal communication systems (PCS).
A franchise granted under this chapter shall be for a term of not more than twenty five (25) years. The franchise may be granted, amended, extended
or renewed only by an ordinance, but no exclusive franchise shall be granted, amended, extended or renewed.
B. No such ordinance shall become effective unless approved at an election. The proposal may be submitted by the city council on its own motion to the
voters at any city election. Upon receipt of a "valid petition" as defined in section 362.4, code of Iowa, as amended, requesting that a proposal be
submitted to the voters, the city council shall submit the proposal at the next regular city election or at a special election called for that purpose prior to
the next regular city election. If a majority of those voting approves the proposal the city may proceed as proposed.
C. The person asking for the granting, amending, extension or renewal of a franchise shall pay the costs incurred in holding the election, including the
costs of the notice. A franchise shall not be finally effective until an acceptance in writing has been filed with the council and payment of the costs has
been made.
D. The franchise ordinance may regulate the conditions required and the manner of use of the streets and public grounds of the city.
E. If a city franchise fee is assessed to customers of a franchise, the fee shall not be assessed to the city as a customer. (Ord. 95-3682, 6-27-1995)
F. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as to grant unto the company an exclusive right upon the streets and alleys or to interfere with any
rights already granted or to prevent the grant of similar privileges to other individuals or companies for like purposes. (1978 Code §14-56)
12-3-2: POLE REQUIREMENTS:
All poles installed pursuant to this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of the committee on streets and alleys and shall be so located as not to
interfere with the public use and travel of the streets and alleys. All poles shall be neat, symmetrical, shaven and kept neatly painted, and no electrical
conductors shall be placed thereon less than twenty feet (20') above the surface of the ground. (1978 Code §14-53)
12-3-3: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
After the installation of the poles and fixtures referred to in section 12-3-2 of this chapter, said company shall restore the surface of the streets, alleys and
sidewalks to the same condition in which it found them. The work of restoring the street as aforesaid shall be done under the supervision of the committee
on streets and alleys. Any expense to which the city shall be put by reason of the neglect of the company to do such work in a workmanlike manner shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 192/715
be paid by the company upon the presentation of bills certified by such committee. In case the company's lines shall be found to interfere with the change
of grade of any street or with any public improvement, the company shall, upon receipt of written notice thereof from the council, move its lines at its own
expense so as to conform with such change of grade or such improvement. (1978 Code §14-54)
12-3-4: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The company shall hold the city free and harmless from all damages or claims for damage of any kind whatsoever caused by the construction or negligent
maintenance of its lines and shall be liable for injuries to public or private property of every kind. (1978 Code §14-55)
12-3-5: POLICE AND FIRE ALARMS:
In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the company shall furnish, free of cost to the city, one tenpin cross-arm for its fire alarm and
police wires upon all poles installed pursuant to this chapter. (1978 Code §14-57)
12-3-6: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
The company shall be at all times subject to all ordinances now in force or that may hereafter be passed, relative to the use of public streets and alleys or
other public places2. (1978 Code §14-58)
Chapter 4
CABLE TELEVISION
Division 1. Enabling Ordinance
12-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ENABLING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meanings specified herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and words in the singular number include words in the plural number.
ACCESS OR PUBLIC, GOVERNMENT, AND EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS: Public, educational, government, library, and university access
channels.
ADDITIONAL SERVICE: A subscriber service provided by the grantee for which a special charge is made based on program or service content, time or
spectrum space usage.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES: All revenue received by the grantee from all sources in connection with the operation of grantee's cable television system.
Gross revenues shall include, without limitation, amounts for all cable service, including, but not limited to, basic service and tier service, premium and pay
per view services, advertising, leased access, installation and all other revenues derived from the operation of grantee's cable television system. Gross
revenues shall not deduct the following: a) any operating expense; b) any accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or c) any
other expenditures, regardless of whether such expense, accrual or expenditure reflects a cash payment, but revenue shall be counted only once in
determining gross revenue. Gross revenues shall also include the revenue of any affiliate, subsidiary, parent, or any person or entity in which each grantee
has a financial interest, derived from the operation of the cable television system for advertising, or for any other business operation of the cable television
system, to the extent such revenue is derived through any means that has the effect of avoiding the payment of franchisee fees that would otherwise be
paid to the grantor. Revenues of both grantee and an affiliate, subsidiary, parent, or any person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest that
represents a transfer of funds between them and that would constitute gross revenues of both the grantee and the affiliate, subsidiary, parent, or any
person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest shall be counted only once for purposes of determining gross revenues. Gross revenues shall
not include franchise fees, any other fee, assessment, sales or other similar tax imposed by law on subscribers or that grantee is legally obligated to
collect.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICES OR BASIC SERVICES: A separately available basic service tier to which subscription is required for
access to any other tier of service. Such basic service tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: All signals carried in fulfillment of the cable act,
sections 614 and 615; any public, educational, and governmental access programming required in this chapter or the franchise; any signal of any
television broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier
beyond the local service area of such station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee.
CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of: a) video programming; or b) other programming service; and c) subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection (or use) of such video programming or other programming service or as otherwise provided by law or regulation.
CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering
a television channel as defined by the federal communications commission.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM CHANNEL CAPACITY: The highest total number of cable television channels on which television signals from separate
sources may be delivered downstream simultaneously to every subscriber in the network. The network may have additional channel capacity for
specialized or discrete purposes, but the technical performance specified shall not be materially degraded thereby.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 193/715
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CABLE SYSTEM (Also Referred To As SYSTEM): A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations; b) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights of way; c) a facility of a common carrier which is
subject, in whole or in part, to the provision of title II of the cable act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems. Cable television system, for the purpose of this chapter, shall include facilities owned or operated by a person providing cable service or multiple
channels of video programming to subscribers on private property that receive cable service or multiple channels of video programming in whole or in part
via cable, fiber or other wires or lines that are within the public rights of way regardless of whether the person providing cable service or multiple channels
of video service from a common carrier pursuant to tariff or otherwise or other person that retains the programming on private property receives video
programming transmission services, cable service, or other multiple channel video ownership, control and responsibility for all facilities located outside of
the private property line.
CHANNEL FREQUENCY RESPONSE: Within a cable television channel, the relationship as measured at a subscriber terminal between amplitude and
frequency of a constant amplitude input signal at all specified frequencies within each channel.
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa, its officers and employees unless otherwise specifically designated, the area within the territorial city limits of the city and
such territory presently outside the city limits over which the city may assume jurisdiction or control by virtue of annexation.
CLOSED CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE: Such video, audio, data and other services provided to and between institutional users. These may
include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way video, voice, audio or digital signals transmitted among institutions and/or to residential subscribers.
COMMENCE OPERATION: Operation will be considered to have commenced when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the
offering of full network services to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the dwelling units located within the designated service area.
COMMISSION: Refers to the Iowa City telecommunications commission.
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT OR CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, the cable television consumer protection and
competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act of 1996, as it may be amended or succeeded.
COMPLAINT: An oral or written indication from a subscriber of a problem with any aspect of cable service.
CONTIGUOUS: Abutting or within two hundred feet (200').
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Iowa City, and any legally appointed or elected successor or agency.
DATA GRADE: Coded transmissions primarily digital in nature.
DAYS: Business days.
DOWNSTREAM: The direction of transmission over the cable television system from the head end or hub to a subscriber's terminal.
DROP: A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user television set, radio or other terminal.
FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing in the
industry at the time.
FIBER: A transmission media of optical fiber cable capable of carrying transmissions by means of light wave impulses.
FIBER NODE: The local transition point between the fiber distribution portion and the coaxial distribution portion of the upgraded cable communications
system.
FRANCHISE: A franchise contract entered into voluntarily by the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced
specifications, franchise proposal, applications and other related material. The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter grants the nonexclusive rights to
construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along the streets and public ways and grounds within all or a specified area in the city.
Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the city.
FRANCHISE AREA: The entire city, or portions thereof, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise stated in the
franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of the city, including all territory thereafter annexed to the city.
FRANCHISE FEE: The percentage, as specified by this chapter, of the grantee's gross revenues from all sources payable in exchange for the rights
granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement.
FULL NETWORK SERVICE: All basic services and additional services offered by the grantee.
GRANTEE: All persons including, but not limited to, subsidiaries, parent or affiliate companies, associations or organizations having any rights, powers,
privileges, duties, liabilities or obligations, under this chapter, and under the franchise ordinance, collectively called the franchise, and also includes all
persons having any title to or interest in the system, whether by reason of the franchise itself directly or by interest in a subsidiary, parent or affiliate
company, association or organization by any subcontract, transfer, assignment, management agreement or operating agreement or an approved
assignment or transfer resulting from a foreclosure of a mortgage security agreement or whether otherwise arising or created, and shall include the lawful
successor, transferee, or an assignee of such franchisee or grantee.
HEAD END: The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower, building and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at the
starting point of a cable television system, excluding the studio.
HUB CONFIGURATION: A cable television system design technology wherein all transmission paths either originate or terminate at a central location
within the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 194/715
INSTALLATION: The extension and/or construction of the system from the main trunk and/or feeder cable to subscribers' terminals except where such a
procedure is required by this chapter without charge when it will mean the extension and/or construction of the system to one point in a designated
building.
LOCAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A facility, within the community remote from but connected to the hub, which distributes signals from the hub to a
specified area in the cable television system.
LOCAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A facility which originates from a local distribution center as opposed to the hub.
MAY: Is permissive.
NETWORK NOISE: That combination of undesired and fluctuating disturbances within a cable television channel, exclusive of undesired signals of
discrete frequency which degrade the reproduction of the desired signal and which are due to modulation processes, thermal effects and other noise
producing effects, not including hum. Network noise is specified in terms of its RMS voltage or its mean power level as measured in a four (4) MHz band
above the lower channel boundary of a cable television system.
NEW HOUSING AREA: Any area containing any newly constructed, rehabilitated, or restored residential or commercial unit which does not exist prior to
the effective date of the franchise.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: Any channel or a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable television service, which includes video programming, which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, and which the federal communications commission or its successor has certified as compliant with part 76 of the rules of the federal
communications commission, 47 CFR, part 76, as amended from time to time.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation or any lawful successor transferee.
PHYSICAL MILES OF PLANT: Total miles of trunk, feeder, super trunk, and fiber optic cable.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY OR STREETS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS: The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any
public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right of way
now or hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's
cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the streets and public grounds shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by
the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only
such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give.
REASONABLE NOTICE: The provision of notice of contemplated action delivered at least forty eight (48) hours prior to such action.
RESIDENT: Any person residing in the city or as otherwise defined by applicable law.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER: A subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession.
SALE: Includes any sale, asset exchange or offer for sale.
SHALL AND MUST: Each is mandatory.
STRAND MILE: Messenger strand as measured from pole to pole without taking into consideration sag or downguys, and for buried plant, actual trench
feet.
STUDIO: The land, electronic processing equipment, towers, building, cameras, lights and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at
the grantee's local origination and/or public access plants of a cable television system, excluding the head end.
SUBSCRIBER TERMINAL: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED: Operation will be considered substantially completed when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to
permit the offering of full network services to at least ninety percent (90%) of the dwelling units in the service area to which access is legally and
reasonably available.
SYSTEM FACILITIES: The cable communications system constructed for use within the city, without limitation, the head end, antenna, cables, wires, lines,
towers, amplifiers, converters, health and property security systems, equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city designed,
constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio,
radio, television and electronic signals to and from subscribers, in the city and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city
intended for the use of the cable communications system; provided, however, such system facilities excludes building, contracts, facilities, and equipment
where its sole use is for providing service to other system facilities located outside the city limits.
TERMINAL ISOLATION: At any subscriber terminal, the attenuation between that terminal and any other subscriber terminal in that network.
UPSTREAM: A signal originating from a terminal to another point in the cable television system including video, audio or digital signals for either programs
or other uses such as security alert services, etc. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-3: CABLE TELEVISION ADMINISTRATOR AND IOWA CITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION:
A. Administrator: The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint a cable television administrator for the purpose of exercising the city's continuing
administration of the franchise. Such responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, the following matters:
1. Receive and investigate such complaints, disputes or disagreements as may be directed or referred to the city of Iowa City, Iowa, between
subscribers or potential subscribers and grantees of a cable television system and other distribution systems interconnected with the cable television
system, not first able to resolve their differences.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 195/715
2. Report recommendations upon complaints, disputes or disagreements after investigation to the Iowa City telecommunications commission for the
issuance of finding.
3. Review and audit reports, records, communications and grantee regulations submitted to the city of Iowa City, Iowa, and conducting such
inspections of the system as may be necessary in support of such review as provided for in this chapter.
4. Work with the public and the media to assure that all tariffs, rates, charges and rules pertinent to the operation of the cable television system in the
city of Iowa City, Iowa, are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours and upon reasonable request.
5. Confer and coordinate with the grantee on the interconnection of the city's cable television system with other similar networks.
6. Advise the Iowa City telecommunications commission.
7. Other such duties as the city manager or Iowa City telecommunications commission may assign.
8. Promote usage and understanding of the access channels.
9. Research and recommend new technologies that may be useful to the city, community, and cable system.
B. Commission Established: Within thirty (30) days of the granting of the first franchise, there shall be appointed a commission to be known as the Iowa
City telecommunications commission.
C. Composition And Term: The Iowa City telecommunications commission shall consist of five (5) citizens of the city appointed by the city council for a
term of three (3) years; except that the first appointees shall be appointed one for a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and two (2) for
a term of three (3) years; and thereafter, each shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Following system completion, it is recommended that a
majority of the members be subscribers to the system at the time of their appointment.
D. Commission Powers And Duties: The duties of the Iowa City telecommunications commission shall be as follows:
1. Resolving disputes or disagreement between subscribers, potential subscribers and grantee should such parties be unable first to resolve their
dispute. The Iowa City telecommunications commission shall conduct a public hearing upon any petition by any person seeking resolution of a
dispute concerning the operation of any franchise granted hereunder. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the Iowa administrative code, and
following such hearing, the Iowa City telecommunications commission shall issue its finding or determination. Said finding or decision shall be final,
and any person aggrieved may seek relief therefrom in the district court of Iowa as provided by state law.
2. Reviewing and auditing reports submitted to the city as required and said such other correspondence as submitted to the city concerning the
operation of the cable television system so as to ensure that the necessary reports are completed and fulfilled pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
3. Work with the public and the media to assure that all records, rules and charges pertinent to the cable television system in the city of Iowa City are
made available for inspection at reasonable hours upon reasonable notice.
4. Confer with the grantee and advise on the interconnection of the city's cable system with other cable and communications systems.
5. Subsequent to the initial franchise, solicit, review and provide recommendations to the city council for selection of applicants for franchise under this
chapter.
6. Initiate inquiries, receive requests for review of rates charged by the grantee and provide recommendation on such actions to the city council.
7. Conduct evaluations of the system at least every three (3) years with the grantee and, pursuant thereto, make recommendations to the city council
concerning system improvements and amendments to this chapter or any franchise agreement.
8. Establish and administer sanctions as authorized by the city council to ensure compliance with this chapter.
9. Make recommendations to the grantee of the cable television system and to the educational and governmental users of the educational and
governmental access channels.
10. Ensure that the grantee makes the public access channel available to all residents of the city on a nondiscriminatory basis.
11. Assure that the operation of the public access channel be free of program censorship and control.
12. Cooperate with the entities operating access channels as those entities develop rules for such channels.
13. Perform such other duties and functions relative to public access channels as may be appropriate in order to maximize its use among the widest
range of individuals, institutions and other organizations within the city. This shall include recommendations to the city council for utilization of the
annual franchise payment.
E. Rules And Regulations: The Iowa City telecommunications commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out its
functions and to ensure that due notice is given to all parties concerning any hearing on any complaints to said Iowa City telecommunications
commission and the hearings are held promptly in accordance with reasonable notice to all parties. The Iowa City telecommunications commission
shall also have such powers to include the election of its own officers. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-4: REGULATORY JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURES:
A. Continuing Regulatory Jurisdiction: The city shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of any franchise granted
hereunder and may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the conduct of the business
contemplated thereunder. Provided, however, such exercise of rights or powers subsequent to the effective date of a franchise will not impair the rights
of the grantee thereunder, and if locally imposed, place an undue financial burden on such grantee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 196/715
B. Regulatory Procedures:
1. The Iowa City telecommunications commission shall consider any inquiry or proceeding, excluding those described in subsections B2 and B3 of this
section, requiring city council action to be taken in regard to the cable television system or franchise, whether upon application or request by the
grantee or any other party or on its own motion, and shall submit such consideration, together with the Iowa City telecommunications commission's
recommendation, to the city council. Any action by the city council on any Iowa City telecommunications commission recommendation shall be taken
only after thirty (30) days' notice of said proposed action, inquiry or proceeding is published in the official newspaper having general circulation and a
copy of said notice is served upon the grantee. The grantee shall have an opportunity to respond at the hearing and/or in writing. Members of the
public shall have an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the proposed action and appear at said proceeding or hearing; however, such
hearing or proceeding shall be set no later than ninety (90) days after notice to the grantee and the city council shall act upon this proceeding within
one hundred eighty (180) days of the notice of hearing unless such time is extended by agreement between the city council and the grantee. The
decision of the city council shall become a final determination.
2. Rate regulation procedures shall be conducted in accordance with the time frame established in division 2, "Rate Regulations", of this chapter.
3. The city shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to act upon any request for approval of a transfer that contains or is accompanied by such
information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and by the city. If the city fails to render a final decision on the request within one
hundred twenty (120) days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the city agree to an extension of time.
4. The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response, including
response by the public, the person or persons in authority to whom such responses shall be addressed and such other procedures as may be
specified by the city council. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date, location and time of such hearing. The grantee will be
provided with reasonable notice for any hearing conducted in regard to its operation.
C. Triennial Franchise Review:
1. On or about the third and sixth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise, the city will schedule a public meeting or meetings with the
grantee to review the franchise performance, plans and prospects. The city may require the grantee to reasonably make available specified records,
documents and information for this purpose, and may inquire in particular whether the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services equivalent
to those being generally offered at that time in the industry in comparable market situations.
2. The city shall first confer with the grantee regarding modifications in the franchise which might impose additional obligations on the grantee, and the
grantee may in turn seek to negotiate relaxations in any requirements previously imposed on it which are subsequently shown to be impractical.
3. Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of such negotiations, the city may direct the grantee to show cause why specified terms and conditions
should not be incorporated into the franchise and the grantee may similarly file with the city a written request that specified obligations of its franchise
be removed or relaxed. Implementation of such requests shall correspond as nearly as possible with the procedures set forth herein. The Iowa City
telecommunications commission will recommend to the council changes in the franchised rights and obligations of the grantee only if it finds from all
available evidence that such changes will not impair the economic viability of the system or degrade the attractiveness of the system's service to
present and potential subscribers.
D. Expiration: Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter, the city may in its sole discretion grant or deny renewal of the
franchise of the grantee in accordance with the provisions of the cable act. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-5: SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANCHISE:
A. Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted hereunder by the city of Iowa City, Iowa, shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant a
franchise to any person, firm, company, corporation or association at any time. The grant of one franchise does not establish priority for use over the
other present or future permit or franchise holders or the city's own use of the streets and public grounds. The city shall at all times control the
distribution of space in, over, under or across all streets or public grounds occupied by the cable communications system.
B. Franchise Amendable: The scope of any franchise granted hereunder shall be deemed amendable from time to time by mutual consent, to allow the
grantee and the city to innovate and implement new services and developments.
C. Privileges Must Be Specified: No privilege or exemption shall be inferred from the granting of any franchise unless it is specifically prescribed. Nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it would not be in the public interest to do so.
D. Authority Granted: Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in,
upon, along, above, over and under streets which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use in the city, towers, antennas, poles,
cables, electronic equipment and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of a cable television system in the city, subject to limitations
contained in this chapter.
E. Previous Rights Abandoned: A franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities
owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by a grantee or any successor pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable
communications system in the city. The acceptance of a franchise shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all
such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the city. All construction, operation and maintenance by the grantee of any cable
system in the city shall be under the franchise and not under any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority.
F. Subject To Other Regulatory Agencies' Rules And Regulations: The grantee shall at all times during the life of any franchise granted hereunder be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and other duly authorized regulatory state and federal bodies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 197/715
G. Pole Use Agreements Required: No franchise granted hereunder shall relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole or conduit use
agreements from the gas, electric and telephone companies, or others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of the city, wherever the grantee
finds it necessary to make use of said poles or conduits.
H. No Right Of Property: The award of any franchise hereunder shall impart to the grantee no right of property in or on city owned property.
I. Franchise Binding: All provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted hereto shall be binding upon the grantee, its successors, lessees or
assignees.
J. General City Ordinances: Any franchise granted by the city is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect and hereafter made
effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, taxes,
fees to be paid, or manner of construction.
K. No Waiver Of Rights: No course of dealing between the grantee and the city nor any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall
operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of the grantee in contravention of rights except to the extent expressly
waived by the city or expressly provided for in the franchise. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-6: THE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
No cable communications system, open video system, or person providing cable service shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city or be
allowed to operate within the city without a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. All cable television franchises in the city shall be subject to the terms
of this chapter. Any franchise granted for an open video system shall comply with all sections of this chapter, unless precluded from compliance by specific
sections of applicable law.
A. Franchise Required: No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any public street in the city,
or within any other public property of the city, any equipment or facilities for the distribution of cable service over a cable television system or an open
video system to any subscriber unless a franchise authorizing the use of the streets or properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. Any franchise granted for an open video system shall comply with all
sections of this chapter, unless precluded from compliance with specific sections by federal or state law, rule, or regulation.
B. Franchise Applications: Public notice of request for proposals. The city may invite applications for a cable television franchise by means of a public
notice advertising the availability of its request for proposals.
1. The public notice shall contain, but need not be limited to:
a. A description of the franchise area which is sought.
b. A statement that a formal request for proposals is available to prospective applicants from a city official whose name, address, and telephone
number are specified.
c. A statement that applications for the franchise must be submitted in writing in the form and manner specified in the request for proposals no later
than a date certain.
d. A statement that all applications will be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at a specified location.
C. Request For Proposals: Prior to inviting any applications for any television franchise, the city shall prepare a request for proposals that shall contain, but
need not be limited to, the following:
1. A description of the cable television system and services desired by the city including any system specifications established by the city.
2. A statement specifying the form that all applications shall follow.
3. A statement indicating the amount of the application fee (if any) to be submitted with the application, and the manner in which such fee is to be
submitted.
4. A statement that all applications must contain the information required by the request for proposal.
5. The closing date for the submission of applications.
6. The name, address, and telephone number of the city official(s) who may be contacted for further information.
D. Review Of Qualifications: Specific permission to operate a cable television system under the provisions of this chapter may be granted by the city
council of the city to any grantee after: a review of the legal, character, financial, technical qualifications; an analysis of adequacy and feasibility of the
grantee's construction arrangements; an assessment of whether public, educational and governmental access channel and institutional network
capacity, equipment, facilities, services, and financial support are reasonable; a determination of whether the proposal meets the future cable
communications needs of the city; and a review of the provision of other such information, equipment, services and support as required by the city, and
after the city council has approved the grantee's qualifications as a part of a public proceeding affording due process.
E. City Discretion: The city, at its discretion, may reject any application for a franchise. In awarding a franchise, the city: Shall allow the applicant's cable
system a reasonable period of time to become capable of providing cable service to all households in the franchise area; may require adequate
assurance that the cable operator will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channels and institutional network capacity,
equipment, facilities, services, and financial support; shall determine the ability of the proposal to meet the future cable communications needs of the
city; and may require adequate assurance that the cable operator has the financial, technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 198/715
F. Requirement For Public Hearing On Reasonable Notice: The city shall conduct a public hearing prior to awarding any cable television franchise. The
hearing shall be preceded by reasonable notice to each of the franchise applicants and to the public, and shall be conducted by the city in accordance
with the following procedures:
1. There shall be an agenda for the hearing which shall specify the proposal(s) to be considered at the hearing.
2. Every person who has applied for a cable television franchise shall appear at the hearing either in person or by authorized representative. The
application of any applicant not so appearing shall not be further considered, except for good cause shown.
3. All applicants shall be given an opportunity to participate in the hearing, but nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the presiding officer to
establish reasonable time limits and otherwise limit repetitive statements or questions.
4. The notice of hearing shall:
a. Conform to all relevant state and local laws and ordinances.
b. Describe the agenda to be considered at the public hearing.
c. Indicate that copies of all franchise applications are available for public inspection during normal business hours at a place to be specified in the
notice.
G. Duration Of Franchise: Upon filing by the grantee of the proper acceptance, the bond and the required insurance and security fund, the franchise shall
take effect as provided in section 12-4-10 of this chapter, and shall continue in full force and effect for a term to be set by the council in the franchise.
H. Exemptions: Subsections B, C, D, E, and F of this section do not apply to an incumbent operator afforded renewal rights under section 626 of the cable
act. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-7: OPERATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Operation To Be In Accordance With Rules: The grantee shall maintain and operate its cable television system in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the federal communications commission, the state of Iowa and/or the city as are incorporated herein or may be promulgated.
B. Interruption Of Service; Notification: The grantee, whenever it is necessary to interrupt service over the cable television system for the purpose of
network maintenance, alteration or repair, shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to the subscribers, and unless such
interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to the affected subscribers.
C. Office And Phone For Complaints: The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits which shall be open during all normal business hours,
including some weeknight and Saturday hours, have a listed local telephone number and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be received at any time.
D. Service Records Maintained: The grantee shall at all times make and keep a list of all complaints and interruptions or degradation of service received or
experienced during the term of franchise. The records maintained above shall also include complaint response time and service restoration period and
shall be continuously open to inspection, examination or audit, subject to subscriber privacy rights pursuant to section 631 of the cable act, by any duly
authorized representative of the city or member of the public.
E. Grantee Rules And Regulations: The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct
of its business as shall be reasonable and necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this chapter and any
franchise granted hereunder.
1. Rules To Be In Conformance With Other Regulations: None of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions promulgated under this subsection E
shall be in conflict with the provisions hereof or the laws of the state, or the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission or any
rules and regulations promulgated by the city in the exercise of their regulatory authority granted hereunder.
2. All Rules To Be Filed With City: Three (3) copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions promulgated under this subsection E, together with
any amendments, additions or deletions thereto, shall be kept currently on file with the city clerk and another copy thereof shall be maintained for
public inspection during normal business hours at grantee's office in the city and the copy shall be provided to the Iowa City telecommunications
commission; no such rules, regulations, terms, conditions or amendments, additions or deletions thereto shall take effect unless and until so filed and
maintained. This subsection E2 is not intended to apply to the company's personnel and other internal rules and regulations.
F. Subscribers' Antennas: The grantee shall not require the removal or offer to remove or provide any inducements for removal of any potential or existing
subscriber's antenna as a condition of provision of service.
G. Antenna Switch: The grantee, upon request from any subscriber, shall install at a reasonable charge a switching device to permit a subscriber to
continue to utilize the subscriber's own television antenna.
H. Service Response: The grantee shall provide same day service response, seven (7) days a week for all complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments received prior to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. each day. In no event shall the response time for calls received subsequent to two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. exceed twenty four (24) hours.
I. State Of The Art:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 199/715
1. This section shall be reviewed by the city during its triennial reviews whose time frames are set forth in subsection 12-4-4C of this chapter. In the
event that the grantee, its parent company, management firm or affiliates have installed state of the art improvements in any system of similar size
owned by grantee, its parent company, management firm or affiliates, which increase channel capacity and provide additional cable service, make
bidirectional capacity operational from the home, provide improvements in technological performance, provide for interactive services, and/or other
substantial improvements, then the grantee shall make said improvements available to the city of Iowa City subscribers within one year.
2. The city shall hold a hearing to determine whether state of the art technology is required hereunder. Such hearing shall afford the grantee an
opportunity to make a presentation on the state of the art change and whether the conditions specified herein indicate that a state of the art change
is needed. The city may require the grantee to implement state of the art changes which meet the threshold specified herein. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-
2005)
12-4-8: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY:
A. Governing Requirement: At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall comply with all laws, rules or regulations of the city, state or federal
governments, their regulatory agencies or commissions which are now applicable or may be applicable hereafter to the construction and operation of
the cable communications system, including, without limitation, all laws, ordinances, or regulations now in force or hereafter enacted. Nothing herein
shall be deemed a waiver of grantee's right to challenge the validity of any such law, rule or regulation.
B. Change In Law Or Regulation: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws
and regulations of the local, state and federal governments. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or
any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the
franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state, or federal law or regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, or
any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to
exist between such law or regulation and the laws or regulations of the city, this chapter and the franchise. The city, at its option, may notify the grantee
that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the
grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the city in the development of alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of
authority and power permitted by law. The city shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to
carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter and the franchise, subject to applicable federal and state law.
C. Authority: The city reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable
television system, the franchise and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not
presently permitted to the city, the city and the grantee shall negotiate in good faith to determine what additional regulation by the city shall be
permissible.
D. Right Of Amendment Reserved To City: The city may from time to time, add to, modify or delete provisions of this chapter as it shall deem necessary in
the exercise of its regulatory powers. Provided, however, such exercise of rights or powers subsequent to the effective date of a franchise will not
impair the rights of the grantee thereunder, and if locally imposed, place an undue financial burden on such grantee. Such additions or revisions shall
be made only after a public hearing for which the grantee shall have received written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing.
E. Grantee Agrees To City's Rights: The city reserves every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by an ordinance of the city, and
the grantee by its acceptance of the franchise agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its lawful
exercise of such rights or powers which have been or will be enacted or established, subject to federal and state law.
F. City's Right Of Intervention: The city shall have the right to intervene and the grantee specifically agrees by its acceptance of the franchise not to oppose
such intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party, provided, however, grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify the
city for any such suit.
G. Powers Of The City: Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision governing the franchise shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of
any governmental right or power of the city.
H. City's Right Of Inspection: The city reserves the right during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to inspect all system facilities and property and
supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and to perform network measurements to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
I. City's Right Of Acquisition: Upon expiration of the term of the franchise or revocation or other termination as provided by law, the city shall have the right
to purchase the cable television system as specified in subsection 12-4-11D of this chapter.
J. City's Right Of Network Installation: The city reserves the right during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to install and maintain free of charge
upon or in the poles and conduits of the grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for municipal networks, on the following conditions: that such
installation and maintenance thereof does not interfere with the operation of the grantee; that such fixtures be used for governmental and educational
purposes, and the city agrees to indemnify the grantee for such use. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-9: APPLICATIONS FOR FRANCHISE:
No franchise may be granted until the applicant has successfully completed the application procedure.
A. Proposal Bond And Filing Fee: All applicants must provide a proposal bond as required herein and pay a nonrefundable filing fee to the city of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) at the time the application is submitted. This bond and filing fee does not apply to an incumbent operator afforded
renewal rights under section 626 of the cable act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 200/715
B. Request For Proposal: All applicants must complete the request for proposal (RFP) issued by the city which shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. Name And Address Of Applicant: The name and business address of the applicant, date of application and signature of applicant or appropriate
corporate officer(s).
2. Description Of Proposed Operation: A general description of the applicant's proposed operation, including, but not limited to, business hours,
operating staff, maintenance procedures beyond those required in this chapter, management and marketing staff complement and procedures and, if
available, the rules of operation for public access.
3. Signal Carriage: A statement of the television and radio services to be provided, including both off the air and locally originated signals.
4. Special Services: A statement setting forth a description of the automated services proposed as well as a description of the funds, services, and
production facilities to be made available by the grantee for the public, municipal and educational channels required to be made available by the
provisions of this chapter.
5. Schedule Of Charges: A statement of the applicant's proposed schedule of charges as set forth herein.
6. Corporate Organization: A statement detailing the corporate organization of the applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its officers
and directors and the number of shares held by each officer and director.
7. Stockholders: A statement identifying the number of authorized outstanding shares of applicant's stock, including a current list of the names and
current addresses of its shareholders holding three percent (3%) or more of applicant's outstanding stock.
8. Intracompany Relationships: A statement describing all intracompany relationships of the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated
companies.
9. Agreements And Understandings: A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the
applicant and any other person, firm, group or corporation with respect to any franchise awarded hereunder and the conduct of the operation thereof
existing at the time of proposal submittal.
10. Financial Statement: If applicant is a corporation, audited financial statements for the two (2) previous fiscal years. If applicant is a partnership,
copies of the U.S. partnership return of income (IRS form 1065) for the two (2) previous fiscal years. If applicant is a sole proprietorship, copies of the
U.S. individual income tax return (IRS form 1040) for the two (2) previous fiscal years.
11. Financial Projection: A ten (10) year operations pro forma which shall include the initial and continuous plant investment, annual profit and loss
statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets and annual levels of subscriber penetration. Costs and revenues anticipated for
voluntary services shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as required in this chapter, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma.
12. Financial Support: Suitable written evidence from a recognized financing institution, addressed to both the applicant and to the city, advising that
the applicant's financial ability and planned operation have been analyzed by the institution, and that the financing institution is prepared to make the
required funds available to applicant if it is awarded a franchise.
13. Construction Timetable: A description of system construction including the timetable for provision and extension of service to different parts of the
city.
14. Technical Description: A technical description of the type of system proposed by the applicant, including, but not limited to, system configuration
(i.e., hub, dual cable), system capacity, two-way capability, etc.
15. Technical Statement: A statement from the applicant's senior technical staff member or consultant advising that he/she has reviewed the network
description, the network technical standards, performance measurements, channels to be provided, service standards, construction standards and
conditions of street occupancy as set forth in or required by this chapter, and that the applicant's planned network and operations will meet all said
requirements.
16. Existing Franchises: A statement of existing franchises held by the applicant including when the franchises were issued and when the systems
were constructed and the present state(s) of the system(s) in each respective governmental unit, together with the name and address and phone
number of a responsible governmental official knowledgable of the applicant.
17. Convictions: A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its officers or directors or holders of three percent (3%) or more of its voting stock
has in the past ten (10) years been convicted of or has charges pending for any crime other than a simple misdemeanor traffic offense, and the
disposition of such case.
18. Operating Experience: A statement detailing the prior cable television experience of the applicant including that of the applicant's officers,
management and staff to be associated, where known, with the proposed franchise.
19. Franchise Renewal Information: Subject to section 626 of the cable act, if an application is for renewal of a franchise, the proposal must include, in
addition to the information required in subsections B1 through B18 of this section:
a. A summary of the technical, financial and programming history of the network since the granting of the original franchise.
b. A statement and timetable that outlines all proposed changes, expansion or improvements in the system as to services, programming or technical
specifications during the forthcoming three (3) year review period.
C. Special Interests: In order to maximize the potential of the cable television system, comparative evaluations of applications will reflect the city's special
interest in the following areas:
1. Programming And Production Assistance: A proposal for funding facilities, equipment or personnel beyond those required elsewhere to be
designated to effect and promote public, educational, and government access, and community programming development.
2. Discrete Carriage Capacity: A proposal for the origination, experimental uses and/or interconnection by or of agencies specified in section 12-4-17 of
this chapter for specialized needs and a plan accommodating such future needs as may arise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 201/715
3. Bidirectional Capacity: A proposal for effectuating the cable television system's bidirectional capacity and integration of the city's interactive system.
4. Multiorigination: A proposal for system construction in such a way that it is possible to allow occasional simultaneous cablecasting of different
programs on the same channel to different parts of the city.
5. University Of Iowa: A proposal for interconnecting the city's cable television system with a University of Iowa cable network as specified by the
university so that residents of the city will benefit from the university's resources.
6. Converters: A proposal for inclusion of converters or other subscriber technology as part of the basic service.
7. Institutional Network: A proposal to provide bidirectional interconnection of video, voice, audio and data among public sector locations and
interconnect to the subscriber network.
8. Home Interactive: A proposal to provide two-way services to subscribers' homes.
D. Additional Requirements: The application for franchise shall respond specifically, and in sequence, to the RFP. Twenty (20) copies of the application
shall be supplied to the city. The city may, at its discretion, consider such additional information as part of the application.
E. Supplementation To Applications: The city reserves the right to require such supplementary, additional or other information as the city deems
reasonably necessary for its determinations. Such modifications, deletions, additions or amendments to the application shall be considered only if
specifically requested by the city. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-10: ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE:
A. Franchise Acceptance Procedures: Any franchise awarded hereunder and the rights, privileges and authority granted thereby shall take effect and be in
force from and after the sixtieth day following the award thereof, provided that within sixty (60) days following award from the effective date the grantee
shall file with the city the following:
1. A notarized statement by the grantee of unconditional acceptance of the franchise; and
2. A certificate of insurance as set forth in section 12-4-14 of this chapter; and
3. A letter of credit as set forth in section 12-4-15 of this chapter; and
4. Reimbursement to the city for the costs of publication of this chapter, and cost of the initial franchising process; and
5. Written notification of the grantee's location and address for mail and official notifications from the city.
B. Forfeiture Of Proposal Bond: Should the grantee fail to comply with subsection A of this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges or authority under
this chapter whatever, and the amount of the proposal bond or certified check in lieu thereof, submitted with its application, shall be forfeited in full to
the city as liquidated damages.
C. Grantee To Have No Recourse: The grantee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage
arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or its regulation or from the city's lawful exercise of its authority to grant additional franchises
hereunder. This shall not include negligent acts of the city, its agents or employees.
D. Acceptance Of Power And Authority Of City: The grantee expressly acknowledges that in accepting any franchise awarded hereunder, it has relied
upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise.
E. Inducements Not Offered: The grantee, by accepting any franchise awarded hereunder acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the
franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the city concerning any term or condition of
the franchise that is not included in this chapter. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-11: TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Grounds For Revocation: The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the
following circumstances:
1. If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise and fails to cure the default
within sixty (60) days after receipt of written notice of the default from the city, or such longer time as specified by the city.
2. If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the construction bond, letter of credit and liability and indemnification
coverages as required in this chapter.
3. If a petition is filed by or against the grantee under the bankruptcy act or any other insolvency or creditors' rights law, state or federal, and the
grantee shall fail to have it dismissed.
4. If a receiver, trustee or liquidator of the grantee is applied for or appointed for all or part of the grantee's assets.
5. If the grantee makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors.
6. If the grantee violates any order or ruling of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee, unless the grantee or any party
similarly affected is lawfully contesting the legality or applicability of such order or ruling and has received a stay from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 202/715
7. If the grantee evades any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise.
8. If the grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or cable subscribers.
9. Subject to sections 12-4-19 and 12-4-20 of this chapter, if the grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the schedule contained in the
franchise or beyond any extended date set by the city.
10. If the grantee materially misrepresents facts in the application for a franchise.
11. If the grantee ceases to provide services over the cable communications system for seven (7) consecutive days for any reason within the control of
the grantee.
12. If the grantee fails to comply with any material access provisions of this chapter or the franchise.
B. Procedure Prior To Revocation: Upon the occurrences of any of the events enumerated in subsections A1, A2, A11, and A12 of this section, the city
council may, after hearing, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the grantee citing the reasons alleged to constitute cause for revocation, set a
reasonable time in which the grantee must remedy the cause. If, during the thirty (30) day period, the cause shall be cured to the satisfaction of the city,
the city may declare the notice to be null and void. If the grantee fails to remedy the cause within the time specified, the council may revoke the
franchise. In any event, before a franchise may be terminated, the grantee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the city council.
C. Effect Of Pending Litigation: Unless a stay is issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or
court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise.
Failure of the grantee to perform material obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
D. Purchase Of System By City: If a renewal of a franchise held by a grantee is denied and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a
transfer of ownership of the system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be:
1. At fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself; or
2. In the case of any franchise existing on the effective date of this chapter, at a price determined in accordance with the franchise if such franchise
contains provisions applicable to such an acquisition or transfer.
3. If a franchise held by the grantee is revoked for cause and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the
system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at an equitable price.
E. Restoration Of Public And Private Property: In removing its plants, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill at its own expense any excavation
made by it and shall leave all public ways and places and private property in as good condition as existed prior to grantee's removal of its equipment
and appliances, without affecting the electric or telephone cables, wires or attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. Liability insurance, indemnity, the performance bond and security fund
provided in this chapter shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal.
F. Restoration By City; Reimbursement Of Costs: If the grantee fails to complete any work required by subsection E of this section or any work required by
other law or ordinance within the time established and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall
reimburse the city the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the city may recover such costs as provided
in this chapter.
G. Lesser Sanctions: Nothing shall prohibit the city from imposing lesser sanctions or censures than revocation.
H. Expiration; Extended Operation: Upon the expiration of a franchise, the city may, by resolution, on its own motion or request of the grantee, require the
grantee to operate the franchise for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of any such resolution under the same terms
and conditions as specified in this chapter and the franchise. All provisions shall continue to apply to operations during an extension period. The city
shall serve written notice at the grantee's business office of intent to extend under this section at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the original
franchise or any extensions thereof. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-12: REPORTS AND RECORDS OF THE GRANTEE:
A. Annual Financial Reports Required: The grantee shall file annually with the city clerk not later than three (3) months after the end of its fiscal year during
which it accepted a franchise hereunder and within four (4) months after the end of each subsequent fiscal year, two (2) copies of:
1. The report to its stockholders; and
2. An annual, fully audited and certified revenue statement from the previous calendar year for the Iowa City system, including subscriber revenue from
each category of service and every source of nonsubscriber revenue.
B. Annual Facilities Report Required: Within thirty (30) days of a request by the city, the grantee shall file annually with the city clerk two (2) copies of a
total facilities report setting forth the total physical miles of plant installed or in operation during the fiscal year and a strand map showing the location of
same.
C. Annual Service Record Report Required: The grantee shall make available to the city for its inspection at the grantee's office, a list of all trouble
complaints and network downtime received or experienced during the fiscal year. All such submitted data shall also include complaint disposition and
response time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 203/715
D. Annual Measurements Report Required: The grantee shall within thirty (30) days of a request by the city, provide two (2) copies of a report on the
network's technical measurements, as set forth herein.
E. Tests Required By City: Technical tests required by the city as specified in this chapter and the franchise shall be submitted within fourteen (14) days of
notification.
F. Annual Operations Reports Required: The grantee shall file annually with the city clerk not later than three (3) months after the end of its fiscal year
during which it accepted a franchise hereunder and within four (4) months after the end of each subsequent fiscal year two (2) copies of the following
supplemental information:
1. If a nonpublic corporation, a list of all current shareholders and bondholders both of record or beneficial. If a public corporation, a list of all
shareholders who individually or as a concerted group hold five percent (5%) or more of the voting stock of the corporation.
2. A current list of all grantee's officers and directors including addresses and telephone numbers.
3. The names of both business and residential addresses and phone numbers of the cable television system resident manager and engineer.
4. Two (2) copies of all types of subscriber agreements. Copies of individual subscribers' agreements are not to be filed with the city.
5. Copies of all rules and regulations promulgated by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
6. A copy of the annual report(s) of the parent firm(s) which own an interest of more than three percent (3%) or more of the voting stock of the grantee;
and such other annual report(s) of subsidiaries or divisions of the parent firm(s) as the city deems necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and
the franchise.
G. Annual Subscriber Notification: Copies of all annual subscriber notifications required by the federal communications commission.
H. Application For Certificate Of Compliance: The grantee shall give formal notice to the city that it is seeking a certificate of compliance from the federal
communications commission. Within five (5) calendar days upon filing such a request with the federal communications commission, the grantee shall
file two (2) copies of its application for certification with the city clerk.
I. Public Availability Of Reports: Such documents and reports as required under this chapter must be available to the public in the office of the city clerk,
during normal business hours. Subscribers shall be notified of the availability of such reports in ways approved by the Iowa City telecommunications
commission.
J. Correspondence: The grantee shall, upon request of the city, file with the city clerk a copy of each petition, application and communications transmitted
by the grantee to, or received by the grantee from, any federal, state or other regulatory commissions or agencies having competent jurisdiction to
regulate and pertaining to the operations of any cable television system authorized hereunder.
K. City's Access To Records:
1. Reasonable Notice: The city reserves the right during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to have access, necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter and the franchise, at all normal business hours and, upon the giving of reasonable notice, to all of the grantee's books, necessary for the
enforcement of contracts, engineering plans, income tax returns, accounting reports, financial statements and service records and other like
materials relating to the property and the operation under the franchise, and to all other records required to be kept hereunder. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent the grantee from enjoining the city from reviewing documents relating to proprietary interests not related to its operation under
this chapter in the city's regulatory program.
2. Additional Reports: The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to
its operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or
duties of the city in connection with this chapter or the franchise.
3. Confidential Information: The grantee acknowledges that the reports, books and records which must be prepared and furnished to the city in
connection with this chapter or a franchise granted under this chapter may constitute public records under state law and the grantee may be required
to permit examination and copying of such records upon request. If the city receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any information,
which the grantee has designated as confidential, the city shall immediately advise the grantee of the request and provide the grantee with a copy of
any written request.
L. Proof Of Bonds And Insurance: Grantee shall submit to the city the required bond, or a certified copy thereof and all certificates of insurance required by
this chapter. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-13: FRANCHISE PAYMENT:
A. Filing Fee: Applicants for an initial franchise hereunder shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee to the city of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) which sum
shall be due and payable at the time of submission of the application.
B. Franchising Compensation: Grantees of a franchise hereunder shall provide an initial payment to the city in an amount equal to the direct costs of
granting the initial franchise including, but not limited to, consultant fees, which sum shall be due and payable concurrently with the grantee's
acceptance of the franchise, to offset the city's costs in the franchise awarding process. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 204/715
C. Annual Franchise Payment: Grantees of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the city an annual fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the "annual
gross revenues", as defined herein, in lieu of all other city permits and fees, to be utilized in part by the city to offset its cable television related
regulatory and administrative costs and to maximize awareness and use of the public, education, and governmental access and institutional network
capacity. If the maximum franchise fee allowed by law is greater than five percent (5%), the city may require the higher amount. The franchise payment
shall be in addition to any other payment owed to the city by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of municipal property taxes or
other state, county or local taxes. The city shall provide the grantee written notice forty five (45) days prior to collection of an increased franchise fee.
(Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4201, 4-4-2006)
D. Method Of Computation; Interest:
1. Sales taxes or other taxes levied directly on a per subscription basis and collected by the grantee shall be deducted from the local annual gross
revenues before computation of sums due the city is made. Payments due the city under the provisions of subsection C of this section shall be
computed quarterly as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 for the respective quarters of each year ending on said dates and
shall be paid quarterly within three (3) months after each respective computation date at the office of the city clerk during the city clerk's regular
business hours. The payment period shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise. The city shall be furnished a statement with each
payment, by the grantee's division controller, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenue and the above charges, deductions and computations, for
the quarterly payment period covered by the payment.
2. In the event that any payment is not made as required, interest on the amount due, as determined from the annual gross revenues as computed by a
certified public accountant shall accrue from the date of the required submittal at an annual rate of twelve percent (12%). The percentages
designated in this section may be amended no more than once each year by the council, consistent with increased costs for municipal facilities and
supervision and applicable rules of other regulatory agencies.
E. Rights Of Recomputation: No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the city. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-14: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Indemnification Of Franchise: It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and any grantee hereunder that the grantee shall
save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand which the city may legally be
required to pay as a result of the enactment of this chapter and the award of a franchise to grantee, except as such suit, judgment, execution, claim or
demand may arise from the process or action of selection of a grantee or grantees for award of a franchise as provided herein.
B. Indemnification Of City In Franchise Operation: It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and any grantee hereunder that
the grantee shall save the city and its agents and employees harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including attorney
fees sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the installation, operation or
maintenance of the cable television system by the grantee, its employees or agents, as authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder. This provision shall not apply to acts of the city,
its agents or employees.
C. Reimbursement Of Costs: The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder agrees that it will pay all expenses and
costs incurred by the city in defending the city with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsections A and B of this section, except as
such expenses may arise from the process (as above). Should the city decide to hire its own defense, such expenses will be borne by the city.
D. Public Liability Insurance: The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder agrees that it will maintain throughout
the term of the franchise, any extensions thereto or as required in this chapter, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy naming as the
additional insured the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company registered in the state of Iowa, and which maintains
a Best's rating of A- or better, in forms satisfactory to the city manager, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage,
occasioned by the operations of grantee under any franchise granted hereunder, in the amounts of:
1. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit, however, of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for
bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, and
2. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident.
E. Automobile Liability Insurance: The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will
maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned, or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of:
1. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence;
2. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and consequent death to any one person; and
3. Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage per occurrence.
F. Insured: At any time during the term of the franchise, the city may request and the grantee shall comply with such request, to name the city as an
additional insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise.
G. Inflation: To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits, all of the coverages, limits, and amounts of the insurance provided for
herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of every three (3) year period of the franchise, applicable to the next three (3) year period, at the
sole discretion of the city, upon a finding by the city of increased insurance risks requiring such changed limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 205/715
H. Notice Of Cancellation Or Reduction Of Coverage: The insurance policies mentioned above shall contain an endorsement stating that the policies are
extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee under the terms of this chapter and shall contain the following endorsement:
This policy may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City Manager of a written
notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage.
I. Evidence Of Insurance Filed With City Manager: All certificates of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the city manager during the term of any
franchise granted hereunder or any renewal thereof.
J. Extent Of Liability: Neither the provisions of this chapter nor any insurance accepted by the city pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or
for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
K. Insurance For Contractor And Subcontractors: Grantee shall provide coverage for any contractor or subcontractor involved in the construction,
installation, maintenance or operation of its cable communications system by either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance policies or
requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate insurance coverage consistent with this section and appropriate to the extent of its
involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of grantee's cable communications system. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-15: BONDS:
A. Proposal Bond: Each applicant for an initial franchise hereunder shall submit a proposal bond in a form acceptable to the city manager or a certified
check on a bank that is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, payable to the order of the city in an amount of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00). Said bond shall remain in effect until such time as the applicant accepts the franchise and furnishes both the construction bond
and the letter of credit as provided herein.
B. Construction Bond: The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder agrees that it will maintain through the rebuild
or construction of the cable television system as required by this chapter, a faithful construction bond running to the city, with at least two (2) good and
sufficient sureties or other financial guaranties approved by the city manager, in the penal sum total of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the grantee in the construction or rebuild of a cable television system complying with related provisions of this chapter
and the franchise, and upon the further condition that if the grantee shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance or regulation governing the construction
or rebuild of the cable television system, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss
suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of repair, construction, removal or abandonment
of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. In addition, failure to meet
construction deadlines shall result in forfeiture of said bond or withdrawal from the construction bond. The bond shall contain the following
endorsement:
This policy may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City Manager of a written
notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage.
C. Release Of The Bond: Upon the city's determination that the construction or rebuild of a cable television system is complete, the grantee shall be
notified by the city that the bond required under this section shall be released.
D. Letter Of Credit:
1. The grantee shall obtain, maintain, and file with the city an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the city and licensed to
do business in the state in an amount of seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), naming the city as beneficiary for the faithful performance by it
of all the provisions of the franchise and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under the contract and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system. The letter of credit shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise or upon the replacement of the
letter of credit by a successor grantee.
2. Within thirty (30) days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the letter of credit pursuant to subsection D1 of this section, the
grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the city clerk a sum of money or securities sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount of
seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) up to a total during the franchise term of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
3. If the grantee fails to pay to the city any compensation required pursuant to this chapter within the time fixed herein; or, fails, after ten (10) days'
notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to repay to the city, within such ten (10) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the
city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise; notice of such failure by the office of the
city manager, to comply with any provisions of the contract which the office of the city manager reasonably determines can be remedied by an
expenditure of the letter of credit, the city clerk may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund.
Upon such withdrawal, the city clerk shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.
4. If the grantee wishes to contest withdrawal, the grantee may petition to the Iowa City telecommunications commission for a hearing within ten (10)
days from date notice of withdrawal is mailed or otherwise given.
E. Replenishment Of Letter Of Credit And Construction Bond: No later than thirty (30) days, after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of a
withdrawal pursuant to subsections C and D of this section, and after the total amount of funds in the letter of credit is fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), the grantee shall replenish the letter of credit or construction bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to make
timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit and construction bond shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-16: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 206/715
A. Schedule Filings: Subject to federal law, grantee shall file with the city schedules which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any
kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. No rates or charges shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed. Grantee shall
notify the city and subscribers in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of any change in services offered, rates, charges, or terms
and conditions related thereto.
B. Nondiscriminatory Rates: Unless otherwise allowed by FCC regulation, grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general
class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall
prohibit the grantee from offering: 1) discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; 2) promotional discounts;
3) reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; or 4) discount for senior citizens and/or low income residents. Grantee's
charges and rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills.
C. City Regulation: To the extent that federal or state law or regulation may now, or as the same may hereafter be amended to, authorize the city to
regulate the rates for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by grantee, the city shall have the right
to exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion
of the city.
D. Rate Regulation Of The Basic Tier And Charges: The city will follow FCC rate regulations. In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties; and the city attorney, or designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the
city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations.
E. Ability To Petition: If applicable, the city shall have the right to petition the federal communications commission or other appropriate agency or
organization to obtain rate regulation authority or to petition the federal body to review or regulate rates in the city.
F. Notification Of Charges: The grantee may establish charges for its services not specified in subsection A of this section; however, all such charges,
including, but not limited to, additional service, leased channel, discrete channel, and production rates shall be made public and two (2) copies of the
schedule of charges, as originally and thereafter modified, shall be filed with the city clerk thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such charges.
G. Deposits On Advance Payments To Be Approved: The grantee shall receive no deposit, advance payment or penalty from any subscriber or potential
subscriber other than those established in the schedule of charges previously filed with and/or approved by the city council.
H. Purchase Of Switch: In the event that the FCC does not regulate antenna switches, and/or that a switch or other appurtenant device is required to
permit subscribers to receive full broadcast network service, the grantee shall give the subscriber the option of purchasing the switch at a reasonable
cost at the time of initial installation thereof, or of purchasing said switch or other appurtenant device at the then prevailing local installment plan
interest rate. The grantee hereby agrees to allow the subscriber to provide a switch or other appurtenant device at its subscriber terminal, provided that
such device meets with the approval of the grantee. Such approval shall not be withheld if it is shown that such device does not interfere with the
operation of the cable television system. If the subscriber elects not to purchase or provide said switch or other appurtenant device, the grantee may
make an additional charge for the rental of such switch or other appurtenant device providing that the additional charge is in accordance with the
schedule of charges contained in the grantee's application for a franchise hereunder or hereafter shall be filed with and approved by the city.
I. Subscriber Refunds In Addition To Those Authorized By The FCC:
1. If any subscriber of the grantee of less than ten (10) days terminates services due to the grantee's failure to render service to such subscriber of a
type and technical quality provided for herein;
2. If service to a subscriber is terminated by the grantee without good cause; or
3. If the grantee ceases to provide service for twenty four (24) hours or more, the cable television system authorized herein for any reason except
termination or expiration of a franchise granted hereunder;
the grantee shall refund to such subscriber an amount equal to the monthly charge, installation and connection charge paid by such subscriber in
accordance with the then existing schedule of charges.
J. Disconnection: Except as provided by FCC rate regulations, there shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet. If any subscriber fails
to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet. Such
disconnection shall not be effected until forty five (45) days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge, and after adequate written notice of the
intent to disconnect has been delivered to the subscriber in question. Upon payment of charges due and the payment of a reconnection charge, if any,
the grantee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service after request by subscriber.
K. Rates Subject To Other Regulations: The grantee in submitting its request for approval of initial rates or any subsequent rates shall do so for basic
service and related equipment to be performed to or for subscribers described in this chapter. If FCC rules and regulations, or any other applicable laws
or regulations, shall subsequently determine that the city of Iowa City has jurisdiction over other services or service to be offered or performed, said
rates shall be subject to approval by the city at that time.
L. Reduction Of Fees: If during the term of any franchise or renewal thereof granted hereunder, the grantee receives refunds or if the cost of operation to
the grantee is reduced as a result of an order of any regulatory body having competent jurisdiction, the grantee shall pass on to its subscribers on a
prorated basis any such savings or reduced costs pursuant to FCC regulations.
M. Rate Change Procedures:
1. Limitation On Application For Increase In Rates: The grantee shall not, unless allowed by FCC regulations, file more than one application for an
increase in fees, rates or charges during any calendar year except to seek relief from the imposition of federal, state or local taxes or other legally
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 207/715
imposed fees not contemplated in the most recent rate determination.
2. Review Of Rates:
a. The Iowa City telecommunications commission shall review the grantee's schedule of fees, rates or charges that are within the city's regulatory
jurisdiction, upon application by the grantee as herein provided or at any time on its own motion. The Iowa City telecommunications commission
shall submit such schedule and any contemplated modifications thereof, together with its recommendations, to the city council as expressed in
such a resolution. The city council may, pursuant to FCC regulations, reduce or increase such fees, rates or charges adopted for this purpose and,
unless allowed by FCC regulations, no change in the grantee's schedule of fees, rates or charges shall be effective without prior action of the Iowa
City telecommunications commission and the approval of the city council.
b. No such resolution shall be adopted without prior public notice and opportunity for all interested members of the public, including the grantee, to be
heard, subject to the procedures set forth in this chapter. No change in city regulated fees, rates and charges shall take effect until thirty (30) days
after the approval of the rates by the city council.
3. Documentation Of Request For Increase: Any increase requests, in addition to other factors described in this section, shall be supported by a
showing of increased costs for the existing services or proposed services and shall be filed in two (2) copies with the city clerk. If a grantee requests
a change, it shall present in detail in writing the statistical basis, in addition to other requirements as set out in this section, for the proposed fee
change in accordance with FCC rules.
4. Records To Be Made Available: For the purposes of determining the reasonableness of grantee fees, rates or charges, grantee records relating the
same shall be made available to the city. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-17: PUBLIC, EDUCATION AND GOVERNMENT CONNECTION TO CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM:
The grantee shall provide, upon request within the city one connection and monthly service for basic service and all nonpay services to such public,
parochial and nonprofit private schools, the University of Iowa, city designated public access facility, city and other government buildings and other
agencies, provided such designated locations are within two hundred feet (200') of any network cable route. Initial installation shall be without charge.
Rates for monthly service to residential or living units within such entities may be negotiated with each such entity. The grantee may charge for any excess
footage on the basis of time and material for any such locations beyond the two hundred foot (200') limitation if such connection is designated by the city.
The city reserves the right for itself and the above entities at their individual expense to extend service to as many areas within such schools, buildings and
agencies as it deems desirable without payment of any additional installation fee or monthly fee to grantee. All such extensions, however, shall be
accomplished in such a way so as not to interfere with the operation of the cable television system. Institutions receiving free drops will consult with
grantee on the technical standards to be used for such extensions. The grantee shall comply with the public, educational and government access
requirements specified in the franchise. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-18: INTERCONNECTION OF NETWORK:
The grantee shall be interconnected with other communities and cable companies as specified in the franchise. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-19: CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE FOR INITIAL CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Application: It is hereby deemed in the public interest that the system be extended as rapidly as possible to all residents within the city. Within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of a franchise granted hereunder, the grantee shall file with the appropriate authorities and utilities all initial papers
and applications necessary to comply with the terms of this chapter including the application for franchise and any additions or amendments thereto
and shall thereafter diligently pursue all such applications. After the grantee has diligently pursued the acquisition of necessary pole attachment
contracts, or other necessary easements, and where such necessary contracts have not been executed or easements obtained after a reasonable
period of time as determined by the city, the city may, at its discretion, provide assistance to ensure the extension of the system to all residents.
B. Commencement Of Construction: Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of FCC certification, the grantee shall initiate construction
and installation of the cable television system. Such construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence.
C. Commencement Of Operation: Within twelve (12) months of the effective date of FCC certification, the grantee shall commence operation within the
meaning set forth in this chapter.
D. Sustained Completion Of Construction: Within the time specified in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall have substantially completed
construction of the service area within the meaning set forth in this chapter.
E. Provisions Of Basic Service: Within the time specified in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall have placed in use sufficient distribution facilities so
as to offer basic service to one hundred percent (100%) of the dwelling units in the service area to which access is legally and reasonably available.
F. Delays And Extension Of Time: The city council may in its discretion extend the time for the grantee, acting in good faith, to perform any act required
hereunder. The time for performance shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any period during which the grantee demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the city council that the grantee is being subjected to delay or interruption due to any of the following circumstances if reasonably beyond
its control:
1. Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change outs or obtaining of easement rights.
2. Governmental or regulatory restrictions.
3. Labor strikes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 208/715
4. Lockouts.
5. War.
6. National emergencies.
7. Fire.
8. Acts of God.
G. When Certain Operations Are To Commence: If FCC certification is not required for a franchise granted under this chapter, all time periods specified in
subsections A, C, D and E of this section shall commence with the effective date of a franchise granted hereunder. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-20: CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE FOR REBUILD CONSTRUCTION:
A. Compliance With Construction And Technical Standards: Grantee shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards or guidelines, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and detailed technical
standards provided for in the franchise.
B. Construction Timetable: The grantee shall construct and complete the system rebuild in accordance with the timetable set forth in the franchise.
C. Delays And Extension Of Time: The city council may in its discretion extend the time for the grantee, acting in good faith, to perform any act required
hereunder. The time for performance shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any period during which the grantee demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the city council that the grantee is being subjected to delay or interruption due to any of the following circumstances if reasonably beyond
its control:
1. Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change outs or obtainment of easement rights.
2. Governmental or regulatory restrictions.
3. Labor strikes.
4. Lockouts.
5. War.
6. National emergencies.
7. Fire.
8. Acts of God. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-21: NETWORK DESCRIPTION:
A. System Bandwidth Capability:
1. The grantee shall install a cable network according to the following specifications: The initial system shall be designed to a capacity equivalent to a
minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) MHz and as specified in the franchise. The grantee at its option may provide for this increased capacity at the
time of initial construction.
2. As total bidirectional capacity is a priority goal of the city, applicants for a franchise hereunder may propose greater channel capacities and more
sophisticated two-way capabilities than the minimums set forth herein. However, such proposal shall describe the particular community needs to be
served thereby and shall detail, as part of the financial projection and support required in this chapter the associated costs and revenues.
B. System Configuration: The grantee shall design and construct the network using fiber to the node architecture, or better, in such a way as to provide
maximum flexibility and to provide service to the fewest number of homes per fiber node as economically feasible.
C. Protection Of Subscriber Privacy Mandatory: Grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this chapter and other
applicable federal, state, and local laws.
D. Notice Of Privacy Provisions: At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber, and at least once a
year thereafter, grantee shall provide notice consistent with and in accordance with federal law in the form of a separate written statement to each
subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of:
1. The privacy rights of the subscriber and the limitations placed upon grantee with regard to this chapter and all other applicable federal, state, and
local subscriber privacy provisions.
2. The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such
information.
3. The nature, frequency, and purpose of any disclosure which may be made of such information, including an identification of the types of persons to
whom the disclosure may be made.
4. The period during which such information might be maintained by the cable operator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 209/715
5. The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such information in accordance with this chapter and other applicable federal,
state, and local law.
6. A request for the subscriber signature allows for use of personally identifiable information.
E. Collection Of Personally Identifiable Information Prohibited: Grantee shall not use or permit the use of the cable system to collect personally identifiable
information concerning any subscriber, except as necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the subscriber.
Grantee shall not install or permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises for the two-way transmission of any
aural, visual, or digital signals without the prior written consent of the subscriber. Grantee shall not tabulate, nor permit others to tabulate, any
subscriber use of the cable system which would reveal the opinions or commercial product preferences of individual subscribers, whether residential or
business, or of any occupant or user of the subscriber's premises without written authorization from the subscriber for his or her participation in a shop
at home or similar service. When providing such service, the grantee may tabulate only those responses essential to the functioning of that shopping or
other service, and may not use any such tabulation of individual preferences for any other purposes. Tabulations of aggregate opinion or preference
are permitted, provided the aggregations are sufficiently large to assure individual privacy.
F. Disclosure Of Subscriber Information Prohibited: Grantee shall not without the specific written authorization of the individual subscribers involved, sell or
otherwise make available to any party any list of the names and addresses of individual subscribers, any list which identifies the viewing habits of
individual subscribers, or any personal data, social security number, income and other data the grantee may have on file about individual subscribers,
except as necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the
subscriber, provided, however, that such disclosure shall not reveal directly or indirectly the extent of viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable
service or other service provided by the cable operator, or the nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the cable system.
G. Notices Of Monitoring: Grantee shall report to the affected parties, the city and other appropriate authorities, any instances of monitoring or tapping of
the system, or any part thereof, of which it has knowledge, which is not authorized under this section whether or not such activity has been authorized
by grantee. Grantee shall not record or retain any information transmitted between a subscriber or user and any third party, except as required for
lawful business purposes. Grantee shall destroy all subscriber or user information of a personally identifiable nature after a reasonable period of time,
unless retention of such information is authorized by the affected subscriber or user.
H. Polling By Cable: No poll or other upstream response from a subscriber shall be conducted or obtained except as part of a program that contains an
explicit disclosure of the nature, purpose and prospective use of the results of the poll or upstream response and where the program has an
informational, entertainment or educational function which is self-evident. Grantee or its agents shall release the results of upstream responses only in
the aggregate and without individual references.
I. Monitoring Devices: Grantee shall provide written notice to each subscriber when equipment is to be installed on the system which would permit the
recording or monitoring of individual viewing habits of a subscriber or household; such equipment shall be installed only after prior written permission
has been granted by the subscriber. Such permission may be valid for one year only and may be renewed by permission of the subscriber. In no event
shall such permission be obtained as a condition of service or continuation thereof. Grantee shall give each subscriber annual written notice of any
such monitoring and of the subscriber's right to terminate the monitoring in accordance with the terms and conditions of the subscriber's contract with
grantee.
J. Personally Identifiable Information: Grantee shall not predicate regular subscriber service on the subscriber's grant or denial of permission to collect,
maintain or disclose personally identifiable information. A subscriber may at any time revoke any permission previously given by delivering to the
grantee a written statement of that intent.
K. Correction Policy: Each subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable information regarding such subscriber that grantee collects or
maintains or allows to be collected or maintained, and such subscriber shall be provided the opportunity to correct any error in such information.
L. Viewing Habits: Any information concerning individual subscriber viewing habits or responses, except for information for billing purposes, shall be
destroyed within sixty (60) days of collection. Information for billing purposes shall be kept for two (2) years and then destroyed unless otherwise
required to be kept by law.
M. System Performance: This section is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system
performance.
N. Subscriber And User Contracts:
1. This section shall be enforceable directly by every aggrieved subscriber or user and by every aggrieved person seeking to become a subscriber or
user. Grantee shall include the following provision in every contract or agreement between grantee and any subscribers or user:
The subscriber/user, as part of this contract, has certain rights of privacy prohibiting the unauthorized monitoring of service and publication of
personal information under the control of (Name of Grantee), including without limitation, information regarding program selections or service uses.
(Name of Grantee) shall make available upon the request of the subscriber/user further description of said rights as established in its ordinance and
franchise with the City of Iowa City.
2. Grantee shall not allege or contend that any actual or potential subscriber or user may not enforce this chapter by reason of lack of privacy. (Ord. 05-
4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-22: NETWORK TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
Each cable television system must be so designed, installed and operated as to meet FCC technical standards and standards set forth in the franchise.
(Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 210/715
12-4-23: PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENTS:
A. General Requirements: Test procedures utilized shall be in accordance with those promulgated by the FCC and the National Cable Television
Association.
B. Additional Tests And Inspections: The city reserves the right to:
1. Require additional tests for cause at specific terminal locations at the expense of the grantee; and
2. Conduct its own inspections of the cable television system on its own motion at any time during normal business hours with reasonable advance
notice.
C. Report Of Measurements Combined: To the extent that the report of measurements as required above may be combined with any reports of
measurements required by the FCC or other regulatory agencies, the city shall accept such combined reports, provided that all standards and
measurements herein or hereafter established by the city are satisfied. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-24: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Antennas And Towers: Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designated for the proper loading zone as specified in the Electronics Industry
Association's specifications as amended from time to time.
B. Compliance With Aviation Requirements: Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations of the federal aeronautical agency, the state aeronautics board governing the erection and operation of supporting
structures or television towers, and all other applicable local or state codes and regulations.
C. City Approval Of Construction Plans: Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or rebuild of the cable communications
system under this chapter, the grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for review, such information as specified in the
franchise. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the cable communications
system shall be commenced by any person until approval, therefor, has been received from the city.
D. Contractor Qualifications: Any contractor proposed for work of construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of system equipment must
be properly licensed under laws of the state, and all local ordinances. In addition, the grantee shall submit to the city, every two (2) years, a plan to hire
persons locally for the construction, installation, operation, maintenance and repair of the system equipment.
E. Minimum Interference: The grantee's system and associated equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed in any
public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way.
F. City Maps: The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights of
way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation.
G. Quality Of Construction: Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in an orderly
and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for aesthetic and engineering
considerations.
H. Construction Standards: The construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and/or removal of the cable communications system shall meet all of
the following safety, construction, and technical specifications and codes and standards:
Occupational safety and health administration regulations (OSHA).
National electrical code.
National electrical safety code (NESC).
National cable television standard code.
AT&T manual of construction procedures (blue book).
Bell telephone systems code of pole line construction.
All federal, state and municipal construction requirements, including FCC rules and regulations.
Utility construction requirements.
All building and zoning codes, and all land use restrictions, as the same exist or may be amended hereafter. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-25: ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 211/715
A. Approval For Poles: No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, types and any other
pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire holding structure of the grantee shall give rise to a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby.
B. Requirements To Use Existing Poles: Where poles already exist for use in serving the city and are available for use by the grantee, but grantee does
not make arrangements for such use, the city may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-26: CONSTRUCTION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Progress Reports: Within thirty (30) days of the granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall provide the city with a written progress
report detailing work completed to date and a schedule for completion of construction. Such report shall include a description of the progress in
applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the cable television administrator may deem necessary.
The content and format of the report will be determined by the cable television administrator and may be modified at the administrator's discretion.
B. Time Frame For Reports: Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the city on a bimonthly basis throughout the entire construction or rebuild
process. The cable television administrator may require more frequent reporting if the administrator determines it is necessary to better monitor the
grantee's progress.
C. Subscriber Information: Prior to the commencement of any major system construction, the grantee shall produce an informational document to be
distributed to all residents of the area to be under construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place. The informational document
shall be reviewed by the cable television administrator prior to its distribution. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-27: CHANNELS TO BE PROVIDED:
A. Leased Access Channel: The grantee shall maintain at least one specifically designated channel for leased access uses. In addition, other portions of
its nonbroadcast bandwidth, including unused portions of the specifically designated channels, shall be available for leased uses. On at least one of the
leased channels, priority shall be given to part time users.
B. Television Broadcast Signal Carriage: The grantee shall carry those television broadcast signals which are in accordance with part 76, section 76.63 of
the FCC rules and regulations as such rules are amended from time to time. The provision of additional television broadcast signals as provided for in
part 76, section 76.63(a) shall also be required as amended from time to time.
C. Basic Service: Channels to be included on the first tier of service not requiring a converter or other appurtenance shall include: All television signals
described in subsections A, B and D of this section. As the maximized use of the total channel capacity is of great interest to the city, applicants for a
franchise hereunder may submit proposals to utilize channels beyond the basic service. Such a proposal may include the use of convertors at no
additional charge to subscribers.
D. Access Channels: Grantee shall provide the public, educational and governmental access channels as specified in the franchise. The entities operating
access channels shall, in cooperation with the Iowa City telecommunications commission, develop rules for such channels. Such rules shall be placed
on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-28: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
A. Approval Of Proposed Construction: The grantee shall first obtain the approval of the city prior to commencing construction on the streets, alleys, public
grounds or places of the city as specified in the franchise.
B. Permits: A grantee shall obtain construction permits in conformance with all city rules and regulations.
C. Changes Required By Public Improvements: The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, or relocate in another public
place any property of the grantee when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change or
establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, city owned power or signal lines, and tracts or any other type of structure or
improvement by public agencies.
D. Use Of Existing Poles Or Conduits: Nothing in this chapter or any franchise granted hereunder shall authorize the grantee to erect and maintain in the
city new poles where existing poles are servicing the area. The grantee shall require permission from the city before erecting any new poles,
underground conduit or appurtenances where none exist at the time the grantee seeks to install its network.
E. Underground Installation: All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing either telephone or electric
service are underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are aboveground at the time of installation,
grantee may install its service aboveground, provided that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed underground by the city or are
placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services underground without additional cost to the city or to the individual subscribers so
served within the city. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter or the franchise, the grantee's system shall be located
underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided the excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner
making the request. All cable passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 212/715
F. Pedestals: When housing minihubs, switching or other equipment are to be utilized on the public right of way, such equipment must be completely
buried beneath streets or sidewalks. Any pedestals located in the public right of way shall comply with city ordinances or regulations. All such buried
equipment shall be shown in plan and cross section on the design plans for permits.
G. Facilities Not To Be Hazardous Or Interfere: All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed,
installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel upon the streets and public
places of the city. The grantee shall keep and maintain all its property in good condition, order and repair. The city reserves the right hereunder to
inspect and examine at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice, the property owned or used, in part or in whole, by the grantee. The grantee
shall keep accurate maps and records of all its facilities and furnish copies of such maps and records as requested by the city. A grantee shall not
place poles or other equipment where they will interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners or with any gas, electric
or telephone fixtures or with any water hydrants or mains. All poles or other fixtures placed in a street shall be placed in the right of way between the
roadway and the property, as specified by the city.
H. Method Of Installation: All wires, cables, amplifiers, and other property shall be constructed and installed in an orderly manner consistent with the trade.
All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric wires whenever possible. Multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in a parallel and bundled, with due respect for engineering and safety considerations. All installations shall be underground in those areas of
the city where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation. All underground installations of wires
and cable shall be buried at least twelve inches (12") belowground, and no trenching or other underground installation shall be commenced without
notice to the city forester. All underground installation shall be performed in compliance with city forester directions.
I. Protection Of Facilities: Nothing contained in this section shall relieve any person, company or corporation from liability arising out of the failure to
exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of
any street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system. Any person, company or corporation intending to
perform any of the above described work in an area where grantee's facilities are located shall notify grantee at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
performing said work.
J. Requests For Removal Or Change: The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires
to permit the moving of said building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the
same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) working days'
notice of any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes.
K. Authority To Trim Trees: The grantee may trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the city so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. No trimming shall be done except under the supervision
and direction of the city forester, upon the explicit prior written notification and approval of the city forester and at the expense of the grantee. The
grantee may contract for such services; however, any firm or individual so retained shall receive city forester approval prior to commencing such
activity.
L. Restoration Or Reimbursement: In the event of disturbance of any street or private property by the grantee, it shall, at its own expense and in a manner
approved by the city and the owner, replace and restore such street or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing such
disturbance was done. In the event the grantee fails to perform such replacement or restoration, the city or the owner shall have the right to do so at
the sole expense of the grantee. Payment to the city or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be immediate, upon demand, by the grantee.
All requests for replacement or restoring of such streets or private property as may have been disturbed must be in writing to the grantee.
M. Office And Records In City: The grantee shall, at all times, make and keep at an office maintained by the grantee in the city full and complete plans and
records showing the exact location of all cable television system equipment installed or in use in the streets or other public places of the city. The
grantee shall furnish the city complete maps upon request, compatible with the city's geographic information system, showing all of the cable television
system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city. Such maps shall be updated annually.
N. Emergency Removal Of Plant: If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the city, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the city to
cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances thereto of the grantee, such cutting or moving may be done and any
repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made by the grantee, at its sole expense, provided such repairs are not necessitated by negligent act of
the city, in which case, cost for repairs shall be borne by the city.
O. Alternate Routing Of Plant: In the event continued use of a street is denied to the grantee by the city for any reason, the grantee will make every
reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-29: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS:
A. Unauthorized Connections Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency, without
the expressed consent of the grantee, to make any connection, extension or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or
otherwise, with or to any segment of a franchised cable television system for any purpose whatsoever, except as provided in this chapter.
B. Removal Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency to wilfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of a franchised cable television system for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord.
05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-30: PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 213/715
A. Prohibited Employment Practices:
1. The grantee shall not commit any of the following employment practices and agrees to prohibit the following practices in any contracts or subcontract
entered into or effectuating the operation of the franchise:
a. To discharge from employment or refuse to hire any individual because of their race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, disability,
marital status or sexual orientation.
b. To discriminate against any individual in term, conditions or privileges of employment because of their race, color, religion, creed, sex, national
origin, age, disability, marital status or sexual orientation.
2. The grantee shall be an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer adhering to all federal, state or municipal laws and regulations. Pursuant to 47
CFR, section 76.311 and other applicable regulations of the FCC, grantee shall file an equal employment opportunity/affirmative action program with
the FCC and otherwise comply with all FCC regulations with respect to equal employment/affirmative action opportunities.
B. Employment Policy: Grantee shall take affirmative action to employ, during the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable communications
system minorities and females as set forth in the franchise. Upon request by the city, grantee shall submit to the city annual reports indicating such
compliance.
C. Procurement: For all services, materials or equipment purchased for the construction, operations or maintenance of the cable communications system,
grantee shall wherever possible, purchase from competitively priced and otherwise qualified minority owned, or female owned businesses located in
the city of Iowa City, as set forth in the franchise.
D. Local Employment And Procurement Practices: Whenever possible, all services, personnel, hardware and supplies for the construction, maintenance
and operation of the system shall be procured locally.
E. Services To Be Equally Available: The grantee shall not refuse cable television services to any person or organization who requests such service for
lawful purpose, nor shall a grantee refuse any person or organization the right to cablecast pursuant to provisions of this chapter. The grantee shall not,
as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any unreasonable preference or advantage, nor subject
any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. The grantee shall take affirmative steps to disseminate the information concerning the availability of its
services to all minority and other underrepresented groups. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate
subscription to the system or other legitimate uses thereof, nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classifications shall be entitled, provided such schedules have been filed with and
approved by the city as provided in this chapter.
F. Fairness Of Accessibility: The entire system of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility
of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for
the system. No one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of use of said facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of
regulatory agencies affecting the same, and where such rules or decisions are not effective to resolve a dispute between conflicting users or potential
users, the matter shall be submitted for resolution by the Iowa City telecommunications commission. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-31: INSTALLATIONS, CONNECTIONS AND OTHER SERVICES:
A. Standard Installations: Standard installation shall consist of a service not exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') from a single point or pedestal
attachment to the customer's residence. Service in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') and concealed wiring shall be charged at such cost as
exceeds normal installation costs. The desire of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence or commercial establishment and location of
pedestal shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due care in the
process of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be undertaken within
no more than ten (10) days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter.
B. Deposits: Any deposit required by grantee shall bear interest at the current lending rate.
C. Lockout Devices: The grantee shall provide to the potential subscriber, as part of its promotional literature, information concerning the availability of a
lockout device for use by a subscriber. The lockout device described herein shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it beginning on the
first day that any cable service is provided.
D. Reconnection: Grantee shall restore service to customers wishing restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous obligations
owed.
E. Free Disconnection: Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge. A refund of unused service charges shall be
paid to the customer within sixty (60) days from the date of termination of service.
F. Downgrade And Upgrade Fees: Any downgrade or upgrade fees shall conform with FCC rules. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-32: SERVICE CALLS AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
A. Business Office Staffing: Grantee shall provide all subscribers or users with at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of a change in business office
hours. The business office shall maintain a staff adequate to process complaints, requests for installation, service or repairs, and other business in a
timely and efficient manner. Grantee shall add additional telephone lines and service representatives when existing lines are substantially utilized or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 214/715
when a pattern of subscriber complaints reflect a need for additional service employees. Additional offices and payment stations provided by the
grantee shall be included in the franchise.
B. Telephone Service: The grantee shall have a listed, locally staffed telephone number for service calls available twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7)
days a week. Said number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. The grantee shall provide an unlisted locally staffed
telephone number to the city and utility companies to enable the city or utility companies to reach the grantee in case of emergency on a twenty four
(24) hour, seven (7) days a week basis.
C. Grantee Rules: The grantee shall prepare and file with the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries,
requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for
making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such
inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the city office responsible for the administration of the franchise,
including, but not limited to, the address and telephone number of said office.
D. Equipment Service: The grantee shall service or replace without charge all equipment provided by it to the subscriber, provided, however, that the
grantee may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any equipment damaged due to negligence of such subscriber.
E. Subscriber Solicitation: Grantee shall provide the city with a list of names and addresses of all representatives who will be soliciting within the city and
the area in and the dates within such solicitations shall take place. Each such representative and all other employees entering upon private property
shall be required to wear an employee identification card issued by grantee and bearing a picture of said representative. Grantee shall notify the
general public of its solicitation in a manner calculated to reach residents in the areas to be solicited in advance of such solicitation.
F. Sales Information: Grantee shall provide to all subscribers annually and all prospective subscribers or users with complete written information
concerning all services and rates provided by grantee upon solicitation of service and prior to consummation of any agreement for installation of
service. Such sales material shall clearly and conspicuously disclose the price and other information concerning grantee's least costly service. Such
information shall be written in plain English and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: all services, tiers, and rates; deposits if
applicable; installation costs; additional television set charges; service upgrade or downgrade charges; lockout devices; and information concerning the
utilization of videocassette recorders (VCRs) with cable service(s) and the cost for hooking up such VCRs so that they function as manufactured.
G. Billing Practices Information: Grantee shall inform all subscribers annually and all prospective subscribers or users of complete information respecting
billing and collection procedures, procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services, and refund policies, upon solicitation of service and
prior to the consummation of any agreement for installation of service. Such information shall be written in plain English.
H. Notice Of Complaint Procedures: Grantee shall periodically, and at various times of the day, present its business office address and publicly listed local
telephone number by means of alpha-numeric display on a local origination channel.
I. Investigation And Remedial Action: For recurrent complaints regarding service deficiencies (other than total or partial loss of service, such as ghosting,
weak audio signal, distortion, and the like), the cable television administrator may require the grantee to investigate and report to the causes and cures
thereof, and the cable television administrator may also conduct an investigation. Thereafter, the cable television administrator may order specified
remedial action to be taken within reasonably feasible time limits. If such action is not taken, or is ineffective, or if within thirty (30) days the grantee files
with the city a notice of objection to the order, the city may conduct a hearing and may, if the evidence warrants a finding of fault on the part of the
grantee, take appropriate action pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-33: TRANSFER:
A. Transfer Of Franchise: A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor
shall title to the cable system, legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent
of the city, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. Except that no consent shall be required for any sale, transfer, or assignment of ownership to
an affiliate under common control with grantee, provided that prior to such transfer, grantee provides to the city verifiable information to establish that
such transferee has the financial, legal and technical ability to fully perform all obligations of the franchise. No such consent shall be required, however,
for a transfer by mortgage to a federally licensed lending institution in order to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for
transfer, the franchising authority shall, in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, notify the grantee in writing of the information it requires to
determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the franchising authority has not taken action on the grantee's request for
transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such requested information, consent by the franchising authority shall be deemed given.
B. Transfer Of Ownership: The grantee shall not sell, transfer or dispose of thirty percent (30%) or greater ownership interest in the grantee or more at one
time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or thirty percent (30%) cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to a
corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert without the consent of the city. Every
sale, transfer, or disposition of thirty percent (30%) or greater ownership interest as specified above in the grantee shall make the franchise subject to
cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto.
C. Transfer Of Control: The grantee shall not change control of the grantee in whatever manner exercised without the prior written consent of the city.
D. City Approval: Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city
shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the city may
inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the
grantee shall provide the city with all required information. The city reserves the right to impose certain conditions on the transferee as a condition of
the franchise to ensure that the transferee is able to meet existing ordinance and franchise requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 215/715
E. Assumption Of Control: Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or
operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the city that it will take control and operate the cable television system. If the financial institution
takes possession of the cable communications system the city shall take no action to effect a termination of the franchise without first giving to the
financial institution written notice thereof and a period of six (6) months thereafter (unless otherwise provided herein below): 1) to allow the financial
institution or its agent(s) to continue operating as the grantee under the franchise; and 2) to request the city, and for the city to determine whether, to
consent to the assignment of the grantee's rights, title, interest and obligations under the franchise to a qualified operator. The city acknowledges that
in order for the financial institution to realize upon the collateral accorded to it by the loan documents, the financial institution must be entitled to a
reasonable period of time after taking possession of the franchise under the loan document to obtain the city's consent to an assignment of the
franchise to a qualified operator. The city agrees that such reasonable period of time is six (6) months after the financial institution takes possession of
the cable communication system and, further, agrees that the city shall use its best efforts to decide upon the assignment of the franchise to the new
operator proposed by the financial institution within such period of time. The financial institution shall be entitled to such possession and other rights
granted under this subsection until such time that the city determines whether to consent to such assignment (the extended time). If the city finds that
such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the city
will consent to the transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. During the six (6) month period or extended
time, the financial institution shall enjoy all the rights, benefits and privileges of the grantee under the franchise, and the city shall not disturb such
possession by the financial institution, provided the financial institution complies in all respects with the terms and provisions of the franchise and this
chapter. The various rights granted to the financial institution under this subsection are contingent upon the financial institution's continuous compliance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise during the entire aforementioned six (6) month period or extended time, if applicable.
For example, should an agent of the financial institution take possession of the cable communication system pursuant to rights granted to the financial
institution under this subsection, and such agent fails to comply with the level of service requirements set forth in this chapter or the franchise, the
rights granted to the financial institution under this chapter and the franchise shall automatically terminate.
F. No Waiver Of City Property Rights: The consent or approval of the city or any other public entity to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a
waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the public property or public rights of way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subordinate to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
G. Transfer Time Periods: In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to
construction or the completion of the rebuild of the system. Subject to the conditions of section 617 of the cable act, the city shall not approve a transfer
if the grantee has not held the franchise for a period of three (3) years.
H. Right To Review Purchase Price: Based upon public information, the city reserves the right to review the purchase price of any transfer or assignment
of the cable system.
I. Signatory Requirement: Any approval by the city of transfer of ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective party becoming a signatory
to the franchise agreement. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-34: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of the franchise ordinance as such publication is required by law. A bill for the publication costs shall be
presented to the grantee by the city upon the grantee's filing of acceptance and shall be paid at that time. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-35: ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-36: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-37: TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE TO THIS CHAPTER:
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed by the essence any
failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke an appropriate penalty including possible
revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-38: NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS:
No course of dealing between the grantee and the city nor any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate as a waiver of
any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of the grantee in contravention of rights except to the extent expressly waived by the city or
expressly provided for in the franchise. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
Division 2. Rate Regulations
12-4-39: RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 216/715
Any rate regulation proceedings conducted under this division shall be in accordance with FCC rate regulations.
A. 1. In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the city may request additional information from the cable operator that is reasonably necessary to
determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment charges. Any such additional information submitted to the city shall be
verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by
way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person's knowledge, information and belief
formed after reasonable inquiry. The city may request proprietary information, provided the city shall consider a timely request from the cable operator
that said proprietary information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with the procedures set forth in section 0.459 of the FCC
rules and regulations.
2. Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the
appropriate rate level submitted by the cable operator. The city may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable to administrative
proceedings under the laws of the state to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoena,
interrogatories, production of documents and depositions.
B. Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the city shall adopt and release a written decision whether the rates or proposed rate increase are
reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription and refunds.
C. The city may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC rules and regulations, for charging an
unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase. However, the city may impose fines or monetary forfeitures on a cable operator that
does not comply with a rate decision or refund order of the city, directed specifically at the cable operator, pursuant to the laws of the state and this
code.
D. Consistent with the FCC rules and regulations, the city's decision may be reviewed only by the FCC.
E. The city shall be authorized, at any time, to gather information as necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the laws of the state, the cable
act, and the FCC rules and regulations. Any information submitted to the city shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person's knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-40: CERTIFICATION:
The city shall file with the FCC the required certification as necessary. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-41: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES:
With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the cable act and the FCC rules and regulations, and over which the city is not
empowered to exercise rate regulation, the cable operator shall give notice to the city of any change in rates for the cable programming service tier or tiers,
any change in the charge for equipment required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the services provided, including the program
services included in the tier or tiers. Said notice shall be provided to the city at least thirty (30) business days prior to any change becoming effective. (Ord.
05-4169, 7-5-2005)
12-4-42: CABLE OFFICIAL:
The city may delegate its power to enforce this division to the Iowa City telecommunications commission or to employees or officers of the city, to be
known as the cable official. The cable official shall have authority to:
A. Administer oaths and affirmations;
B. Issue subpoenas;
C. Examine witnesses;
D. Rule upon questions of evidence;
E. Take or cause depositions to be taken;
F. Conduct proceedings in accordance with this division;
G. Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties; and
H. Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in conformity with this division. (Ord. 05-4169, 7-5-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 217/715
Chapter 5
FRANCHISE FEES
12-5-1: ELECTRIC FRANCHISE FEE:
Pursuant to section 12-1-16 of the city's franchise agreement with MidAmerican Energy Company (hereinafter "company"), there is hereby imposed upon
the company a franchise fee in an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts, derived from the
distribution, delivery and retail sale of electricity by the company to customers within the current or future corporate limits of the city, commencing with
gross revenue received on or after June 1, 2010. (Ord. 10-4382, 2-16-2010)
12-5-2: GAS FRANCHISE FEE:
Pursuant to section 12-2-13 of the city's franchise agreement with the company, there is hereby imposed upon the company a franchise fee in an amount
equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts, derived from the distribution, delivery and retail sale of
natural gas by the company or other natural gas providers utilizing the distribution system of the company, to customers within the current or future
corporate limits of the city, commencing with gross revenue received on or after June 1, 2010. (Ord. 10-4382, 2-16-2010)
12-5-3: AUDIT:
The city may, at its option, require that an audit of the calculation and basis for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted by an auditor of the city's
selection and the company will cooperate with such an audit. Said audit shall not be conducted more than once a year. The city shall pay the costs of the
audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of franchise fees by an amount equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in which event the
company shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 09-4374, 12-7-2009)
12-5-4: REVENUE PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The revenue collected from said franchise fees will be expended for any of the following purposes:
A. Inspecting, supervising and otherwise regulating the MidAmerican Energy Company's gas and electric franchises.
B. Public safety, including the equipping of fire, police and emergency services.
C. Public infrastructure to support commercial and industrial economic development. (Ord. 09-4374, 12-7-2009)
Title 13
AIRPORTS AND AVIATION1
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
AIRPORT COMMISSION
13-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as the "airport commission", to manage and control the Iowa City municipal airport,
together with any and all additions and improvements hereafter made. (1978 Code §4-16)
13-1-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM; VACANCIES:
The commission created by this chapter shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of the city
council. Commission members shall be residents of Iowa City. Upon expiration of the current six (6) year terms, all appointments shall be for terms of four
(4) years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments are made. At the request of the airport commission and upon approval of
the city council, the mayor may appoint a nonvoting, advisory commission member who resides outside the city boundaries. (Ord. 10-4381, 2-2-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 218/715
13-1-3: BOND:
Each member of the commission created by this chapter shall execute and furnish a bond in the amount set by the airport commission and filed with the
city clerk. The cost of such bond shall be paid from the general funds of the city. This bond shall not be required of any nonvoting advisory commission
member. (1978 Code §4-19; amd. 1994 Code)
13-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers: The airport commission shall elect from its own members a chairperson and a secretary/vice chairperson. These officers shall serve for such
terms as the commission shall determine. (1978 Code §4-22)
B. Rules And Regulations: The airport commission is authorized to adopt rules and regulations for the management and control of the Iowa City municipal
airport. (1978 Code §4-23)
13-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The airport commission shall have and exercise all the powers granted to cities under the code of Iowa, as amended, except the power to sell the
airport. The commission shall annually certify the amount of taxes, within the limitations of the statutes of the state, to be levied for airport purposes,
and upon such certification, the city council may include all or a portion of such amount in its budget.
B. All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall be under the full and absolute control of the commission for the purposes
prescribed by law, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from the acquisition and construction of airports and maintenance, operation and
extension thereof. Said funds shall be deposited with the city, to the credit of the airport commission and shall be dispersed only upon the written
warrants or orders of the airport commission. (1978 Code §4-20; amd. 1994 Code)
13-1-6: ANNUAL REPORT:
Immediately after the close of each city fiscal year, the airport commission shall file with the city its report of all money received and dispersed by the
airport commission during the prior fiscal year and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper. (1978 Code §4-21; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
13-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide regulations for operating the Iowa City municipal airport as a safe, efficient and effective public airport for Iowa City
and the surrounding areas. (1978 Code §4-1)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AIRCRAFT: A pilot controlled structure for flight in the air. Examples include, but are not limited to, an airplane, helicopter, glider or lighter than air aircraft.
AIRPORT: Any area on land or water that is used or intended to be used for landing and departure of aircraft. In this title, the reference is to the Iowa City
municipal airport.
AIRPORT COMMISSION: Iowa City airport commission.
CODE OF IOWA: Chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, that regulate aeronautics and aviation.
COMMERCIAL AVIATION: Any person or business who, for compensation or hire, engages in activity which relates to the operation of aircraft. Such
activity includes, but is not limited to, charter operations, pilot training, aircraft rental and sightseeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, aerial advertising
and surveying, air taxi operations, aircraft sales and services, sale of aviation petroleum products, repair and maintenance of aircraft and the sale of
aircraft parts.
DEADLINE: Point of access between the air side operations of the airport and the land side operations.
FAA (FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION): Federal aviation regulative branch of the United States department of transportation.
FBO (FIXED BASE OPERATOR): Airport based tenant who may supply a variety of aviation services.
PILOT: An individual who operates an aircraft any time the craft's engine is running or whenever the aircraft is in motion under its own power or guidance.
UNICOM RADIO: A nongovernmental communication facility operating on an assigned frequency for the purpose of providing airport information. (1978
Code §4-3; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 219/715
13-2-3: FAA AND IDOT REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
No person shall operate any aircraft, service, maintain or repair an aircraft on the airport or conduct any airport operations on or from the airport except in
conformity with the regulations of the code of federal regulations title 14, as amended. Said regulations are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this title as fully as if set forth herein. Chapters 328 (aeronautics), 329 (airport zoning), 330 (airports) and 330A (aviation authorities), code of Iowa, all as
amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title. (1978 Code §4-2)
13-2-4: FIRE PRECAUTIONS:
All persons using the airport or any of its facilities shall exercise the utmost care to guard against fire and injury to persons or property. All city, state and
federal fire code regulations shall be followed. (1978 Code §4-65)
13-2-5: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be a municipal infraction to violate or refuse to obey any of the rules or regulations of this title as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1978
Code §4-4; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Any person in violation of this title or refusing to comply therewith shall immediately vacate the airport property upon order of the airport manager or duly
authorized deputy and may be deprived further use of the airport and its facilities for such time as may be required to ensure the safety of the public
and the airport. (1978 Code §4-4)
Chapter 3
OPERATION REGULATIONS
13-3-1: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS:
A. Operation Within The City:
1. Aircraft Operation Regulations: No person operating any aircraft shall land or depart at any location within the city, except at a landing site approved
and/or certified by the federal aviation administration.
2. Exceptions:
a. An exception to subsection A1 of this section may be granted by the airport commission or designee when it can be determined that the landing or
departing aircraft will not interfere with the operations of any approved landing site, and the landing or departure can be conducted in a safe
manner.
b. This subsection shall be waived for hot air balloons operated by licensed, insured pilots if ballooning operations are conducted in a safe and
prudent manner, do not interfere with airport air traffic and are in accordance with applicable federal aviation administration regulations. No person
shall use any site in the city for ballooning operations, including departure or landing, without obtaining prior approval from the landowner. (1978
Code §4-33)
B. Ground Operation Of Aircraft: No person shall operate any aircraft on the airport in a reckless manner that endangers persons or property. (1978 Code
§4-34)
C. Landing, Departing And Taxiing:
1. Use Of Field: Landing and departing aircraft shall utilize the full effective landing area of the field. Landing and departing aircraft shall maintain as
much distance as possible from taxiing planes. Aircraft shall taxi as little as possible on the field, and aircraft landing or departing shall proceed to
and from the effective landing area with the least possible delay consistent with safety.
2. Taxiing Precautions: When landing on the airport, an operator shall first determine that there is no danger of collision with other departing, landing or
taxiing aircraft before taxiing to the line or other part of the airport.
3. Taxiing Speed Limit: All aircraft shall be taxied at a slow and reasonable speed not to exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour, particularly in the vicinity of
hangars and other buildings, and shall be brought to a full stop when in the vicinity of landing airplanes. (1978 Code §4-47)
D. Starting And Warming Up Engines:
1. General Requirements: Aircraft shall be started and warmed up only in the places designated for such purposes by the airport manager. At no time
shall any engine be operated in such a position that hangars or other buildings or any person in the observation areas shall be in the path of the
propeller stream. (1978 Code §4-52)
2. Blocks And Brakes: Blocks, equipped with ropes or other suitable means of pulling them, shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting
the engine unless the airplane is provided with a brake system. (1978 Code §4-49)
E. Pilot Or Mechanic Required At Controls: No aircraft engine shall be operated unless a licensed pilot, student pilot or licensed mechanic is in the cockpit
and attending the controls, or the aircraft is properly moored. (1978 Code §4-50)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 220/715
F. Suspension Of Operations By Airport Manager: Except in the case of scheduled operators or aircraft operated by the federal government or other public
authorities, the airport manager shall have authority to suspend flying operations on or from the airport when, in the manager's opinion, the condition of
the landing area and/or local meteorological conditions might make such operations unsafe. (1978 Code §4-46)
13-3-2: STUDENT PILOTS:
All persons instructing student pilots shall fully acquaint the students with the rules and regulations in effect at the airport, including the air regulations of
the federal aviation administration of the department of transportation. The instructor shall be responsible for the conduct of the students during instruction.
(1978 Code §4-35)
13-3-3: FLYING CLUBS:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the following definition shall apply:
FLYING CLUB: A nonprofit entity organized for the purpose of providing its members with aircraft for noncommercial use and enjoyment.
B. Restricted And Prohibited Conduct: A flying club shall not conduct charter, air taxi or aircraft rental operations, nor provide aircraft instruction except for
club members. Only club members shall operate a flying club aircraft.
C. Requirements For Use Of Airport:
1. To operate on the airport, a flying club shall:
a. File a copy of the club's charter and bylaws with the airport commission.
b. File with the airport commission a list of club members entitled or authorized by the club to operate the club's aircraft. The list shall identify the
names and current addresses of all members in good standing. (1978 Code §4-38)
c. Notify the airport commission, in writing, of any change in membership, charter or bylaws within thirty (30) calendar days of the change. (1978
Code §4-38; amd. 1994 Code)
2. All aircraft to be used by the flying club must be identified to the airport commission, and a valid certificate of insurance shall be filed with the airport
commission for each aircraft.
D. Penalties:
1. Any violation of this title by a club or club member shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. (1994 Code)
2. Flying clubs in violation of any provision of this title shall suspend all operations until such violations have been corrected. (1978 Code §4-38)
13-3-4: PARKING AND MOORING AREAS; DEADLINE:
A. Mooring Required; Liability: All unhoused aircraft shall be parked in the space designated for this purpose by the airport manager. Such aircraft shall be
firmly secured to the ground by ropes and stakes, or otherwise, when left unattended or when weather conditions indicate the need for a mooring.
Owners of unmoored aircraft shall be responsible for any damage resulting from failure to comply with this rule.
B. Deadlines: A deadline shall be designated by the airport manager.
1. No person shall cross the deadline, except:
a. A pilot or mechanic employed by the airport or by the owner of an aircraft located upon the airport.
b. A pilot or passenger preparing to participate in a flight. The person shall not cross the deadline toward an operating aircraft until the aircraft has
come to a full stop and the operator has signaled for pedestrian approach.
c. An officer or official authorized to enforce local, state or federal laws upon the airport.
d. The airport manager and staff.
2. A person crossing the deadline to leave the landing area shall use the shortest possible route.
3. The deadline will be indicated by a fence or other suitable markers and may be changed, from time to time, as conditions require.
C. Vehicle Parking Spaces: Automobiles and other vehicles, except vehicles regularly employed in the service of the airport, shall be parked in designated
areas. Unauthorized vehicles, as determined by the airport manager, may be towed at the expense of the vehicle owner. Hangar tenants may park
vehicles in or near their hangars while their aircraft is in use if the airport manager determines that such parking is safe and does not interfere with
routine use and maintenance of airport property. (1978 Code §4-36)
13-3-5: USE OF THE AIRPORT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 221/715
A. No person shall use the airport as a base or terminal for commercial aviation, except by a lease or agreement with the airport commission. For single
commercial events, written application must be made and approval received from the airport commission or airport manager.
B. None of the operating standards contained herein are intended to prevent any person operating aircraft on the airport from performing any services,
including but not limited to maintenance and repair, on the person's own aircraft nor for the purpose of excluding commercial competition.
C. Leases or agreements are required for, but not limited to, the following list of services:
1. Aircraft sales.
2. Airframe and/or power plant repair.
3. Aircraft rental.
4. Flight training.
5. Radio, instrument or propeller repair.
6. Air taxi, charter or casual passenger carrying for hire.
7. Aerial applicators. (1978 Code §4-37)
13-3-6: AIRCRAFT FUELING OPERATIONS:
A. A person wishing to operate an aircraft fueling service for the public at the airport shall provide, at a minimum, the following services:
1. Approved aviation and jet fuel storage and distribution equipment.
2. Sufficient land, by lease from the airport commission, for fueling aircraft and parking mobile fuel dispensing equipment.
B. All regulations in this title regarding safe fueling of aircraft and maintenance of underground storage tanks shall apply to persons operating an aircraft
fueling service. (1978 Code §4-39; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-7: UNICOM RADIO:
The fixed base operator (FBO) shall provide personnel to monitor and operate unicom radio equipment at the airport during all hours of normal operation
according to standards established by the airport commission. Hours of normal operation shall be approved by the airport commission. Should there be
more than one FBO located at the airport, the operation of the unicom radio shall be on a rotating schedule, agreed upon by the FBOs and approved by
the airport commission. If no agreement is made between the FBOs, the airport commission shall establish a rotation schedule. (1978 Code §4-40; amd.
1994 Code)
13-3-8: AIRCRAFT REPAIR; DISPOSAL OF WRECKED AIRCRAFT:
A. Aircraft Repair: All repairs to aircraft shall be made in areas designated for such purpose. (1978 Code §4-41)
B. Disposal Of Wrecked Aircraft: The aircraft owner, pilot or agent shall be responsible for promptly disposing of aircraft wreckage as directed by the
airport manager unless directed to delay removal pending investigation of an accident. (1978 Code §4-42)
13-3-9: ACCIDENTS:
Witnesses of and participants in accidents on or incidents near the airport shall make a full report, including their names, current addresses and phone
numbers, to the airport manager within seven (7) calendar days after the accident or incident and shall render further reports at a later date if required.
(1978 Code §4-43; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-10: DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
A. Unsafe Landing Areas To Be Marked: Any parts of the landing area temporarily unsafe for landing or which are not available for use shall be clearly
marked at all times. (1978 Code §4-44)
B. Alcoholic Liquors And Drugs: No person shall operate any aircraft on the airport while using or consuming any alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance as defined by the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §4-48; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-11: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION:
Any person who desires to construct a building on the airport shall be required to submit plans and specifications for the same to the airport commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 222/715
Commercial buildings shall satisfy all city and state building and fire codes and conform, in general, as to size and shape to existing airport buildings.
(1978 Code §4-54)
13-3-12: GROUND RENTAL; FEES:
Rent for buildings or businesses on the airport shall be determined by written agreement with the airport commission. All rents and fees shall be paid in
advance to the airport manager or designee. (1978 Code §4-54)
13-3-13: ASSUMPTION OF RISK; CITY NOT LIABLE:
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities and of landing upon and departing from the same shall be, at all times, conditioned upon the assumption
by the user of full responsibility and risk thereof. The user, including visitors to airport property, operators and their passengers, lessors and the employees
and agents of each of them, shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, the airport commission and the airport manager from any and all
responsibility for loss or damage, including attorney fees, to persons or property arising from the use of any portion or facility of the airport. (1978 Code §4-
45)
Chapter 4
SELF-FUELING OPERATIONS
13-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Persons operating noncommercial aircraft on the airport and intending to fuel their own aircraft must do so in accordance with the requirements of the safe
fueling standards of this title. (1978 Code §4-90; amd. 1994 Code)
13-4-2: FUELING AND VENDING OPERATIONS:
A. Aviation fuels shall be sold on airport property only by vendors meeting the standards set forth in this title.
B. Private users shall only fuel aircraft owned, rented or leased by them and shall be performed in compliance with this chapter. (1978 Code §4-91; amd.
1994 Code)
13-4-3: REFUELING AND DEFUELING AIRCRAFT:
The following general rules shall govern refueling, defueling, oil service and sumping of aircraft and placing fuels in storage tanks or dispensers:
A. Aircraft Not To Be Running Or In Enclosed Space: No aircraft shall be refueled, defueled or oil serviced while aircraft engines are running, when aircraft
is being warmed by application of heat or when aircraft is in a closed hangar or a congested or an enclosed space.
B. Smoking And Open Flames Prohibited: No person shall smoke or permit any open flame, except in designated areas.
C. Grounding Requirements:
1. Prior to fuel servicing, the aircraft and the fuel dispensing equipment shall be grounded to one or more points of zero electrical potential to prevent
the possibility of static ignition of volatile liquids. The refueling unit shall be grounded to aircraft. The following grounding sequence is preferred:
a. Aircraft to apron or ground.
b. Refueling unit to ground.
c. Refueling unit to aircraft.
d. Refueling nozzle to aircraft.
2. The foregoing procedure, modified as necessary, will apply to storage dumping and to filling dispensing equipment.
D. Damaged, Malfunctioning Refueling Equipment: If refueling equipment is found to be damaged or malfunctioning, refueling shall cease immediately,
and refueling shall not resume until the damage or malfunction is remedied. Damaged or malfunctioning refueling equipment of an aircraft being
serviced will be brought to the attention of the aircraft owner or operator immediately. (1978 Code §4-92)
E. Fuel Spills: Utmost caution to prevent spills of aviation fuels shall be exercised by any person fueling or defueling aircraft, filling dispensing equipment
or dumping fuel into storage. If a spill occurs, servicing shall cease, and the spill must be removed or absorbed with suitable material. The airport
manager shall be immediately notified of spills or overfills. (1978 Code §4-92; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 223/715
F. Maintenance Of Equipment:
1. Pumps, meters, hoses, nozzles, fire extinguishers and grounding devices shall be kept in operable condition.
2. Manufacturer equipped grounding devices on all hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in refueling and defueling operations shall be maintained in
good working condition.
G. Fire Extinguishers: During aircraft fuel handling operations, CO2 or approved dry chemical fire extinguishers (15 pounds or larger) shall be immediately
available for use.
H. Fuel Handling Vehicles:
1. During refueling or defueling, fuel handling vehicles shall be parked in a site and manner to permit rapid and direct emergency departure. No more
than one refueler shall be parked at each wing of an aircraft, and no more than two (2) refuelers shall serve the same aircraft at one time. When high
capacity aircraft are refueled, additional refuelers shall park only in areas designated for that purpose by the airport manager and shall not be parked
closer than one hundred feet (100') of the aircraft being refueled.
2. Each fuel handling vehicle shall be conspicuously marked, in letters of contrasting color, with the word "Flammable" on both sides and rear of the
cargo tank in letters at least six inches (6") high and with the wording "Emergency Shut Off" and other appropriate operating instructions in letters at
least two inches (2") high at the emergency operating devices on the vehicle. Each fuel handling vehicle will also be conspicuously marked on both
sides and rear with the type and grade of fuel it contains.
3. Each fuel handling vehicle shall meet all requirements of the uniform fire code, as amended, adopted by this city code regarding fueling on airports.
4. A fueling vehicle may be stored upon the airport only pursuant to written lease with the airport commission.
I. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. No refueling operation may be performed during an electrical storm.
2. No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or other electrical device during aircraft refueling or defueling.
3. No person shall use any material or equipment during refueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or ignition.
4. No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is any aircraft fuel on the ground below the aircraft.
5. No aircraft shall be refueled or defueled while passengers are on board the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin door of
the aircraft, the aircraft door is in the open position and a cabin attendant is present at or near the cabin door.
6. No airborne radar equipment shall be operated or ground tested in any area where the directional high intensity radar beam is within three hundred
feet (300') or the low intensity radar beam (less than 50 kilowatt output) is within one hundred feet (100') of another aircraft, an aircraft refueling
operation, an aircraft refueling truck or any flammable liquid storage facility. (1978 Code §4-92)
13-4-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OPERATIONS:
A. Cleaning, Painting And Refurbishing Operations:
1. No person shall use flammable, volatile liquids having a flash point of less than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) to clean aircraft, aircraft
engines, propellers, appliances or for any other purpose unless such operation is conducted in open air or in a room specifically set aside and
approved for that purpose. This room must be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus.
2. The procedures and precautions outlined in the criteria of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA pamphlet no. 401D, "Safeguarding Aircraft
Cleaning, Painting And Paint Removal", and NFPA pamphlet no. 410F, "Aircraft Cabin Cleaning And Refurbishing Operations"), including any
amendments thereto, shall be followed in all cleaning, painting and refurbishing operations. (1978 Code §4-90)
B. Cleaning Floors: Hangar and shop area floors shall be kept clean and free of oil. Volatile flammable solvents shall not be used to clean floors. (1978
Code §4-95)
C. Drip Pans: Drip pans shall be placed under aircraft engines when recommended or required by aircraft designers. The pans shall be cleaned regularly
and shall not be used or allowed to store flammable materials. (1978 Code §4-96)
13-4-5: LIQUID DISPOSAL PROHIBITED:
No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be dumped or disposed of in drains, ramp areas, catch basins, ditches or any other area of the airport.
(1978 Code §4-94)
13-4-6: UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS:
Persons operating aircraft on the airport may, pursuant to written lease with the airport commission, install underground storage tanks for aircraft fuel.
A. Land: The person ("lessee") shall execute a written lease with the airport commission for sufficient ground to accommodate such buildings, aircraft
parking, paved ramp area, fuel farm and motor vehicle parking as the parties deem necessary. Access to airport property from privately owned land,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 224/715
commonly referred to as "through-the-fence" operations, is strictly prohibited.
B. Personnel: At least one properly trained person shall be on duty during all hours of operations as provided for by the uniform fire code, as amended.
C. Services: The lessee may hangar, adjust, repair, refuel, clean and otherwise service the lessee's owner operated aircraft, provided it is done by lessee's
employees. This would not prevent lessee from hiring outside mechanical labor when adequate service cannot be obtained by existing lessees of the
airport commission.
D. Fuel Facilities: Metered, filter equipped dispensers for dispensing aviation fuels shall meet the requirements found in FAA advisory circular, FAA AC no.
150/5230-4, as amended, and the uniform fire code, as amended.
E. Fueling Aircraft: Only aircraft owned, rented, leased or operated by the lessee may be fueled from the lessee's fueling facilities.
F. Fuel Quality Control Program: All tanks and accessories shall be maintained and operated by the lessee in accordance with federal, state and local laws
regarding fuel storage and dispensing on airports, including but not limited to the uniform/national fire code, FAA advisory circular no. 150/5230-4, as
amended, and the uniform fire code, as amended.
G. Hours Of Operation: The operating hours shall be determined by the lessee.
H. Insurance Requirements:
1. Lessee shall maintain the insurance coverage requirements established by the city.
2. Lessee shall provide a certificate of insurance upon request of lessor.
I. Hold Harmless Clause: The land lease shall include a clause that holds the city and the airport commission harmless of any liability resulting from the
operation of the self-fueling facility. (1978 Code §4-98; amd. 1994 Code)
13-4-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
Title 14
ZONING CODE
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A. TITLE, APPLICABILITY, PURPOSE
14-1A-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and officially cited as the IOWA CITY ZONING CODE. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the city of Iowa City as provided by chapter 414, code of Iowa.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1A-3: PURPOSE:
A. Generally: The provisions of this title are intended to implement the city of Iowa City's comprehensive plan in a manner that promotes the health, safety,
order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of Iowa City.
B. Specifically: The provisions of this title are specifically intended to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 225/715
1. Conserve and protect the value of property throughout the city;
2. Encourage the most appropriate use of land and foster convenient, compatible and efficient relationship among land uses;
3. Provide the opportunity for a variety of housing types to meet the needs of the city's population;
4. Promote the economic stability of existing and future land uses that are consistent with the comprehensive plan and protect them from intrusions by
incompatible land uses;
5. Lessen congestion in the streets and promote safe and effective access to property;
6. Prevent the overcrowding of land;
7. Avoid undue concentration of population; and
8. Conserve open space and protect natural, scenic, and historic resources. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. INTERPRETATION AND SCOPE
14-1B-1: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare.
B. This title is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except if this title imposes
a greater restriction, this title shall control.
C. In case of any inconsistency between the text of this title and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
D. If the provisions of this title are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision will control to the extent
permitted by law.
E. If the provisions of this title are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances, resolutions, or
regulations of the city, the provision that is more specific to the situation will control. When regulations are equally specific or when it is unclear which
regulation to apply, the more restrictive provision will control.
F. Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition
of such regulation (as amended), resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
G. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that provision
shall be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-1B-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as "including", "such as", or similar language are intended to
provide examples, not to be exhaustive of all possibilities.
B. Words in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
C. The words "shall", "shall not", "must", "must not", "will", "will not", and "may not" are mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-1B-3: SCOPE:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the use of premises and structures in the city shall be in accordance with the minimum standards hereinafter
established:
A. No use shall be established nor shall any structure be installed, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, except in conformity with the
regulations and standards of this title.
B. No land shall be used or divided, and no structure shall be occupied, constructed, installed, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered until:
1. All applicable review and approval procedures have been followed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 226/715
2. All applicable approvals have been obtained; and
3. All required permits or authorizations to proceed have been issued.
C. The lot area required for one structure or use under this title cannot be used to meet the requirements for another structure or use.
D. Every use established or structure installed or structurally altered shall be located on a "lot" as defined in this title. The number of principal uses and
structures permitted on a lot shall be as follows:
1. In RS zones and the RNS-12 zone, there shall not be more than one principal use or building per lot, except as permitted through a board of
adjustment approval of a special exception to establish or expand an educational facility or religious/private group assembly use.
2. In all other zones, there may be more than one principal use, building or structure on a lot.
3. In the RR-1 zone, there shall not be more than one principal dwelling per lot.
E. Except as specifically allowed by this title, no use permitted as a special exception under this title shall be established or enlarged except as permitted
by the board of adjustment. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1B-4: ZONING MAP; DETERMINATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the various zoning districts, hereinafter referred to as "zones", are shown on the zoning map, said map made a part of this title by
reference and on file in the offices of the city clerk and the department of planning and community development. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of zones as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply.
A. Where the boundaries of the zones are along streets and alleys, they shall be construed to be along the centerlines of such streets and alleys.
B. Where boundaries of the zones are not clearly indicated on the map and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots,
the boundaries of the zones shall be construed to be the nearest lot lines.
C. Where the zones designated on the zoning map are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries of the
zones. The intent of this provision is that no lot shall be divided by a zone boundary.
D. In separate tracts not subdivided and for unsubdivided property, the zoning boundary lines on the map shall be determined by use of the scale on the
map.
E. Where boundaries cannot be determined using the subsections A through D of this section, the zoning code interpretation panel shall interpret the zone
boundaries. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 2
BASE ZONES
ARTICLE A. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
14-2A-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established single-family residential zones are listed in this section. When this title refers to the
single-family residential zones, it is referring to the zones listed in this section. When this title refers to residential zones, or R zones, it is referring to both
the single-family residential zones listed in this section and the multi-family residential zones listed in chapter 2, article B of this title.
A. Rural Residential Zone (RR-1): The rural residential zone (RR-1) is intended to provide a rural residential character for areas in the city that are not
projected to have the utilities necessary for urban development in the foreseeable future or for areas that have sensitive environmental features that
preclude development at urban densities.
B. Low Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-5): The low density single-family residential zone (RS-5) is primarily intended to provide housing
opportunities for individual households. The regulations are intended to create, maintain, and promote livable neighborhoods. The regulations allow for
some flexibility of dwelling types to provide housing opportunities for a variety of household types. This zone also allows for some nonresidential uses
that contribute to the livability of residential neighborhoods, such as parks, schools, religious institutions, and daycare facilities. Related nonresidential
uses and structures should be planned and designed to be compatible with the character, scale, and pattern of the residential development.
C. Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-8): The purpose of the medium density single-family residential zone (RS-8) is primarily to provide
for the development of small lot single-family dwellings. The regulations are intended to create, maintain, and promote livable neighborhoods. The
regulations allow for some flexibility of dwelling types to provide housing opportunities for a variety of household types. Special attention should be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 227/715
given to site design to ensure the development of quality neighborhoods. Nonresidential uses and structures permitted in this zone should be planned
and designed to be compatible with the character, scale, and pattern of the residential development.
D. High Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-12): The high density single-family residential zone (RS-12) is intended to provide for development of
single-family dwellings, duplexes and attached housing units at a higher density than in other single-family zones. Because this district represents a
relatively high density for single-family development, dwellings should be in close proximity to all city services and facilities, especially parks, schools
and recreational facilities. Special attention should be given to site design to ensure the development of quality neighborhoods. Nonresidential uses
and structures permitted in this zone should be planned and designed to be compatible with the character, scale, and pattern of the residential
development.
E. Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone (RNS-12): The purpose of the neighborhood stabilization residential zone (RNS-12) is to stabilize certain
existing residential neighborhoods by preserving the predominantly single-family residential character of these neighborhoods. Provisions in this zone
prevent the conversion or redevelopment of single-family uses to multi-family uses. However, existing conforming multi-family uses retain their
conforming status when rezoned to RNS-12. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2A-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. Table 2A-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by
special exception (S) in a particular single-family residential zone. A number in superscript indicates that a special provision applies. See table notes
for more information.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups listed in the table. For example, a church is classified as religious/private group
assembly. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title, along with specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
B. Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2A-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Single-Family Residential Zones
Residential Uses
Household living uses Detached single-family dwellings P P P P P
Detached zero lot line dwellings PR PR PR PR
Attached single-family dwellings PR2 PR PR
Two-family uses (duplexes) PR2 PR PR PR
Group households PR PR PR PR PR
Multi-family uses 1
Group living uses Assisted group living
Independent group living 1
Fraternal group living 1
Commercial Uses
Animal related commercial uses General PR
Intensive PR
Institutional And Civic Uses
Daycare uses S S S S S
Educational facilities General PR S S S S
Specialized
Parks and open space uses PR PR PR PR PR
Religious/private group assembly uses3 PR S S S S
Other Uses
USE CATEGORIES SUBGROUPS RR-1 RS-5 RS-8 RS-12 RNS-12
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 228/715
Agricultural uses Plant related P
Animal related
Communication transmission facility uses PR PR PR PR PR
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
Notes to table 2A-1:
1. Multi-family and group living uses in the RNS-12 zone must comply with the special provisions contained in section 14-2A-7 of this article.
2. Special provision may apply to existing two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings located on interior lots in the RS-8 zone. See
subsection 14-2A-7D of this article.
3. Any establishment that is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth in
subsection 14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009)
14-2A-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions of chapter 3 of this
title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
2. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
3. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3. Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
4. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A of this title.
2. Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title.
5. Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this title.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title.
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title.
11. Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2A-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the single-family residential zones are stated in table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Each of the following
subsections describes in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by
USE CATEGORIES SUBGROUPS RR-1 RS-5 RS-8 RS-12 RNS-12
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 229/715
special exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the
planned development (see chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title) or through the historic preservation exception as
outlined in section 14-2A-7, "Special Provisions", of this article.
A. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development.
2. Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for the various single-family residential zones and for specific residential uses are
stated in table 2A-2, located at the end of this section.
3. Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
a. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not specified in table 2A-2, located at the end of
this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
b. If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special exception, that
use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot, even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as permitted under
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
1. Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
a. Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
c. Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in the city's neighborhoods;
d. Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings and between residences; and
e. Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible with buildings in the vicinity.
2. General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required setbacks for principal buildings in residential zones are stated in table 2A-2,
located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal buildings are not
allowed, except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
3. Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
a. Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
(1) On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot (40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial street or
future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map, located in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot is located along an arterial street that is substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way as specified in title 15, "Land
Subdivisions", of this code, then the minimum forty foot (40') front setback along said street is increased by the number of additional feet that will
be required for future upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots platted prior to December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement. In
addition, setback averaging may apply in certain circumstances. (See subsection B3e of this section.)
b. Lots With Multiple Frontages:
(1) On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth in chapter
5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback must be
provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front setback for purposes of this title.
c. Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on the lot must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10'). Proximity of
building walls will be subject to all current building code fire protection requirements.
d. Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development, or in
the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to chapter 3, article B of this title and also the applicable setback provisions in the Iowa City historic preservation
handbook. For a property located in a planned development overlay zone, refer to the approved planned development overlay plan for the subject
property. For two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located on property in the central planning district,
refer to the applicable setback provisions in section 14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this chapter. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
(1) Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a frontage have been developed and all of these developed lots are occupied by principal
buildings that are located at least five feet (5') further from the street than the required front setback, the required front setback along the
frontage is increased to the equivalent of the setback of the building closest to the street. However, this averaging provision does not apply to
frontages that contain three (3) or fewer lots. (Ord. 12-4488, 8-21-2012)
Figure 2A.1 - Setback Averaging (1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 230/715
(2) Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located closer to the street than the
required front setback, the front setback may be reduced to the average of the respective setbacks on the abutting lots. Only the setbacks on the
lots that abut each side of the subject property along the same street may be used to calculate the average. Setbacks across the street or along
a different street frontage may not be used. When one abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is based on the setback
of the nonvacant lot and the required setback for the zone in which the lot is located. (See figure 2A.2 of this section.) Figure 2A.2 - Setback
Averaging (2)
4. Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The following building features may extend into the required principal building setback
area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
a. Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses, buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features that extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet (6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay windows,
and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet (2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal
building must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
b. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building setbacks
of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area. Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non-habitable space) may extend up
to fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered
decks and patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered
patios that are attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
c. Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not extend more than three feet (3') into any side setback.
d. Stairways that function as the principal means of access to dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not extend into
any required setback. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 231/715
e. Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback, provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested
according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
5. Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce principal building setback requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board
of Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception
approval criteria and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The subject building will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property line abuts a
public right-of-way or permanent open space.
C. Building Bulk Standards:
1. Maximum Height:
a. Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options for light,
air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate other buildings in the vicinity.
b. Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for structures in single-family residential zones are stated in table 2A-2, located at the end of
this section. Height standards for accessory buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
c. Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures or parts thereof are exempt from the height limitations set forth in the zones
indicated, provided an increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title:
(1) Chimneys or flues.
(2) Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
(3) Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
(4) Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
(5) Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the roof,
whichever is less.
(6) Parapet or fire walls extending not more than three feet (3') above the limiting height of the building.
(7) Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility use, such as street lights and utility poles.
(8) If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations placed by the Board of Adjustment.
(9) Roof structures, including elevator bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary mechanical and electrical
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building.
(10) Television antennas and similar apparatus.
d. Adjustment Of Height Standards:
(1) The maximum height for a principal building may be increased; provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet (2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
(2) A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Minimum Building Width:
a. Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
b. Standards: The minimum building width requirements for principal structures in single-family residential zones are stated in table 2A-2, located at
the end of this section. A principal building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least seventy five percent (75%)
of the building's length. (See figure 2A.3 below.)
Figure 2A.3 - Minimum Building Width
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 232/715
D. Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
1. Total Building Coverage:
a. Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the character of single-family residential zones by limiting the land area that can be
covered by buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built
up a neighborhood appears.
b. Standards: The total building coverage standards for the various single-family residential zones are stated in table 2A-2, located at the end of this
section. The maximum building coverage standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be covered by buildings. The total
building area of all buildings on the property, including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the building coverage.
2. Front Setback Coverage:
a. Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a certain portion of the front setback area remains free of impervious surface, which
helps to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along neighborhood streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing
excessive front yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the principal dwelling and the main entrance from view of the street. In
addition, this standard helps to prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front yard pavement, particularly along frontages with narrow
residential lots.
b. Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the single-family residential zones is stated in table 2A-2, located at the end of this
section. The table lists the maximum percentage of the required front setback that may be covered by impervious surface, including driveways,
walkways, patios, decks, and other paved areas. Front setback coverage may not exceed the percentage indicated in said table 2A-2.
c. Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the allowed front setback coverage. The Board of Adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria set forth
in chapter 4, article B of this title, and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback coverage
standard.
(2) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the front
setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing
alternative means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage
standard may not be increased.
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the front setback coverage regulations.
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent practical. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Minimum Open Space Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support
the health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
2. Minimum Requirements:
a. On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses, usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square feet per
bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet (15').
b. On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located in
the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
c. On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 233/715
d. On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than
twelve feet (12').
3. Standards:
a. For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall meet the standards as set forth in subsections 14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this
chapter.
b. For single family uses and two family uses open space shall be located behind the principal dwelling in an area visible and easily accessible from
the principal dwelling and shall consist of open planted green space, which may include trees, planters, gardens, and other amenities that support
passive recreation or leisure activities. Paved areas shall not be counted toward usable open space. For attached single family uses, rooftop or
upper floor open air terraces or rear yard-facing porches, including screened-in porches (non-habitable space only) may count toward the open
space requirement.
4. Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according to the provisions and approval criteria of section 14-4B-1, "Minor
Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances, provided the
additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the allowed
occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code):
a. In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces (surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2) off-street
parking spaces; or
b. If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that there is
practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
c. The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
d. The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
e. Approval criteria:
(1) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new
buildings or additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property; and
(2) The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
(3) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent possible.
Table 2A-2: Dimensional Requirements In The Single-Family Residential Zones
Zone/Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Maximum Lot
Coverage Maximum
Number
Of
Bedrooms
Per Unit11
Mini
Op
Sp
(Sq.
Lot
Size
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot
Width
(Ft.)
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
Minimum
Building
Width
(Ft.)
Total
Building
Coverage
Front
Setback
Coverage
RR-1
Detached
singlefamily,
including
zero lot
line
40,000
40,000 80 50 156 5+22
20 35 203 40% 50% n/a 50
Other
uses1
40,000
n/a 80 50 20 5+22
20 35 203 40% 50% n/a n/
RS-5
Detached
singlefamily,
including
zero lot
line
8,0008
8,000 608 458 156 5+22
20 35 203 45% 50% n/a 50
Duplexes
12,000
6,000 80 80 156 5+22
20 35 203 45% 50% 4 300/
Attached
singlefamily
6,000 6,000 40 40 156 0 or
105
20 35 203 45% 50% 4 15
Other
uses1
8,000 n/a 60 45 20 5+22
20 35 203 45% 50% n/a n/
RS-8
Detached
singlefamily,
including
5,0008
5,000 458 408 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 45% 50% n/a 50
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 234/715
zero lot
line
Duplex 8,700 4,350 70 70 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 45% 50% 4 300/
Attached
singlefamily
4,350 4,350 35 35 156 0 or
105
20 35 203 45% 50% 4 15
Other
uses1
5,000 n/a 45 40 20 5+22
20 35 203 45% 50% n/a n/
RS-
12
Detached
singlefamily,
including
zero lot
line
5,0008
5,000 458 408 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 50% 50% n/a 50
Duplex 6,000 3,000 55 40 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 50% 50% 4 300/
Attached
singlefamily
3,000 3,000 20/287
20 156 0 or
105
20 35 183 50% 50% 4 15
Other
uses1
5,000 n/a 45 40 20 5+22
20 35 203 50% 50% n/a n/
RNS-
12
Detached
singlefamily
5,000 5,000 45 25 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 40% 50% n/a 50
Duplex 6,000 3,000 45 25 156 5+22
See
note
9
35 203 40% 50% 4 300/
Multifamily
uses
5,000 Existing4
45 25 156 5+22
20 35 203 40% 50% 3 10/be
but no
than 4
Other
uses1
5,000 n/a 45 25 20 5+22
20 35 203 40% 50% n/a n/
n/a = not applicable
Notes:
1. Other uses must comply with the standards listed in this table unless specified otherwise in chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories plus 2 feet for each additional story. Detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the
applicable side setback standards in chapter 4, article B of this title.
3. A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
4. See the special provisions of this article regarding multi-family uses.
5. See applicable side setbacks for attached single-family as provided in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
6. The principal dwelling must be set back at least 15 feet, except on lots located around the bulb of a cul-de-sac; on such lots the principal dwelling must
be set back at least 25 feet. On all lots, garages, both attached and detached, must be set back as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
7. Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and 28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are attached, lots
must be 28 feet wide.
8. If the single family density bonus options have been applied, the minimum lot area, lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements may be
reduced accordingly. (See section 14-2A-7 of this article.)
9. The principal building rear setback is 20 feet, except in the Central Planning District and Downtown Planning District, where the rear setback is
dependent on the depth of the lot. For lots equal to or less than 100 feet in depth: minimum rear setback = 20 feet. For lots greater than 100 feet in depth:
minimum rear setback = lot depth less 80 feet. For purposes of this provision, garages located in the rear yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a
(non-habitable) breezeway (8 feet or narrower in width) will be considered detached accessory buildings and, therefore, are subject to the setback
requirements for detached accessory buildings, rather than principal building setback requirements. Similarly, subject breezeways shall be treated as
detached accessory structures/buildings.
10. Open space must meet standards set forth in subsection 14-2A-4E of this section.
11. Any bedroom within a multi-family, attached single family or duplex that exceeds 225 square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than
16 feet shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of
title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
(Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2A-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 235/715
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this
Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection 17-5-
18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2A-6: SINGLE-FAMILY SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The single-family site development standards are intended to:
1. Ensure that parking areas are located so as to prevent drainage onto adjoining properties, to prevent vehicles from blocking sidewalks and to ensure
that front yard areas remain free of large parking areas that will detract from the residential character of the neighborhood.
2. Enhance public safety for residents and visitors by lining streets with active living spaces, ensuring that there is a physical and visual connection
between the living area of the residence and the street.
3. Enhance the pedestrian oriented character of the neighborhood by preventing blank facades and large expanses of concrete along the street.
B. Applicability:
1. The standards of this section apply to all single-family and two-family uses located in any zone.
2. Multi-family dwellings, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located in a single-family zone are subject to the multi-family site development
standards specified in chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family Residential Zones", of this title.
C. Garage, Driveway And Parking Location Standards:
1. For single-family uses and two-family uses, a required parking space may be located behind another parking space on a regularly constructed aisle,
provided the spaces are not stacked more than two (2) spaces deep, counting the space within a garage. (See figure 2A.4 below.) Figure 2A.4 -
Stacked Parking Spaces
2. Parking for single-family uses and two-family uses may be designed to allow cars to exit by backing into a street, except if street access is restricted
or alley access is required.
3. Parking is not permitted in the front principal dwelling setback, except in the following situations:
a. For single-family uses, one of the required parking space(s) may be provided in the front principal dwelling setback on a regularly constructed
aisle, provided not less than fifty percent (50%) of the front principal dwelling setback area remains open space, free of impervious surface.
b. For two-family uses and group households, two (2) of the required parking spaces may be provided in the front principal dwelling setback on a
regularly constructed aisle, provided not less than fifty percent (50%) of the front principal dwelling setback area remains open space, free of
impervious surface.
c. For single-family uses, two-family uses, and group households, up to three (3) nonrequired parking spaces may be provided in the front principal
dwelling setback, provided any such space is located on a regularly constructed aisle that leads directly to a parking space that is not located in
the front principal dwelling setback, and provided that not less than fifty percent (50%) of the front principal dwelling setback area remains open
space, free of buildings and impervious surfaces. (See figure 2A.5 of this section.)
Figure 2A.5 - Nonrequired Parking Within The Front Setback Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 236/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Garages and carports must be located so as to provide a driveway, at least twenty five feet (25') in length, between the entrance to the garage or
carport and the street right of way line. Garages and carports accessed from an alley must be located so as to provide a driveway at least five feet
(5') in length between the entrance to the garage or carport and the alley right of way line. In cases where the configuration of the lot, the topography,
and/or other physical characteristic of the property makes the application of this standard impractical, a minor modification may be requested to
reduce the driveway length, provided that the following approval criteria are met in addition to the general minor modification standards set forth in
subsection 14-4B-1B of this title:
a. There will be at least twenty five feet (25') of driveway length between the entrance to the garage or carport and any existing public sidewalk. In
cases where there is no public sidewalk, but where a public sidewalk is likely to be built in the future, there must be at least twenty five feet (25') of
driveway length between the entrance of the garage or carport and the likely location of a future public sidewalk, as determined by the city.
b. The resulting garage or carport location and driveway length will not compromise public safety along the fronting street or alley. (Ord. 11-4451, 10-
18-2011)
5. A nonhard surfaced drive or aisle may not be located closer than three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of access with a street, alley, or
private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives must be set back at least three feet (3') from any side or rear lot line, except under the following
circumstances:
a. The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
b. A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff; or
c. Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot; or
d. At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane.
6. On lots less than sixty feet (60') in width, the length of any garage wall that faces a street-side lot line may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total
length of the building facade that faces the same street-side lot line. On corner lots, only the garage wall(s) containing a garage door must meet this
standard. For two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings, additional vehicular access standards may apply. See applicable standards in
section 14-4B-4, "Specific Approval Criteria For Provisional Uses And Special Exceptions", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2A-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Single-Family Density Bonus Options: For detached single-family dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings, the following density bonuses are
allowed in the following zones and under the following conditions:
1. RS-5 zone: If vehicular access to garages and off street parking spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the following modifications
to dimensional requirements are allowed:
a. The minimum lot width may be reduced to fifty feet (50') and the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to thirty feet (30');
b. The minimum lot size may be reduced to six thousand (6,000) square feet; and
c. The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first floor
elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent public sidewalk.
2. RS-8 zone: If vehicular access to garages and off street parking spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the following modifications
to dimensional requirements are allowed:
a. The minimum lot width may be reduced to forty feet (40') and the minimum frontage to twenty five feet (25');
b. The minimum lot size may be reduced to four thousand (4,000) square feet; and
c. The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first floor
elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent public sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 237/715
3. RS-12 zone: If vehicular access to garages and off street parking spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the following modifications
to dimensional requirements are allowed:
a. The minimum lot width may be reduced to thirty feet (30') and the minimum frontage to twenty feet (20');
b. The minimum lot size may be reduced to three thousand (3,000) square feet; and
c. The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first floor
elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent public sidewalk.
B. Historic Preservation Exceptions:
1. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or in
chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property designated as
an Iowa City landmark or registered on the national register of historic places. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title, the following approval criteria must be met:
a. The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property;
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission.
2. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a property designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the national
register of historic places to be adapted and reused as a community service use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail use. In
addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following criteria in
order for the board to grant this exception:
a. The exception is necessary to preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission.
C. Special Provisions In Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone:
1. At the time a property is rezoned to neighborhood stabilization residential (RNS-12), any uses that were conforming with regard to use and minimum
lot area per unit requirements under the previous zoning designation shall be considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per
unit requirements under the neighborhood stabilization residential zone. Any building containing a conforming use may be torn down and rebuilt to its
present density or to the allowed density in the neighborhood stabilization residential zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title.
2. The special provision described in subsection C1 of this section does not exempt a property from compliance with other relevant dimensional
standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any subsequent amendments to this title that pertain to the property.
D. Two-Family Uses And Attached Single-Family Dwellings In RS-8 Zone: Existing two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings located on interior
lots in the RS-8 zone that were conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per unit requirements as of December 27, 2005, shall be
considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per unit requirements regardless of location. Any building containing a conforming use
may be torn down and rebuilt to its present density or to the allowed density in the RS-8 zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title. This provision does not exempt a property from compliance with other dimensional standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any
subsequent amendments to this title that pertain to the property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
14-2B-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established multi-family residential zones are listed below. When this title refers to the multi-family
residential zones, it is referring to the zones listed below. When this title refers to residential zones, or R zones, it is referring to both the single-family
residential zones listed chapter 2, article A of this title and the multi-family residential zones listed below.
A. Low Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-12): The purpose of the low density multi-family residential zone (RM-12) is to provide for the
development of high density, single-family housing and low density, multi-family housing. This zone is intended to provide a diverse variety of housing
options in neighborhoods throughout the city. Careful attention to site and building design is important to ensure that the various housing types in any
one location are compatible with one another.
B. Medium Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-20): The purpose of the medium density multi-family residential zone (RM-20) is to provide for the
development of medium density multi-family housing. This zone is particularly well suited to locations adjacent to commercial areas and in areas with
good access to all city services and facilities. This zone allows a mix of detached and attached single-family housing, duplexes, and multi-family
housing. Careful attention to site and building design is important to ensure that the various housing types in any one location are compatible with one
another.
C. Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone (RNS-20): The purpose of the neighborhood stabilization residential zone (RNS-20) is to stabilize and
preserve the character of older neighborhoods that contain a mix of single-family housing, duplexes, single-family structures that have been converted
to multi-family housing, and properties that have been redeveloped with multi-family housing. Higher density multi-family uses that were conforming
prior to rezoning to RNS-20 remain conforming when rezoned to RNS-20. Conversions and redevelopment may occur up to the density allowed in this
zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 238/715
D. High Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-44): The purpose of the high density multi-family residential zone (RM-44) is to establish areas for the
development of high density, multi-family dwellings and group living quarters. Properties zoned RM-44 should be located with good access to all city
services and facilities, including public transportation services. Vehicular access and parking should be designed carefully to ensure efficient traffic and
pedestrian circulation on adjacent streets. Due to the high density permitted in this zone, careful attention to site design is expected to ensure that
buildings are compatible with surrounding land uses and that a quality living environment will be maintained over time.
E. Planned High Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (PRM): The purpose of the planned high density multi-family residential zone (PRM) is to provide
for development of high density multi-family housing in close proximity to centrally located employment, educational, and commercial uses. Because of
the high density of development anticipated in this zone, special consideration of building and site design is required. Density bonuses may be granted
when additional amenities are provided. Establishing a pleasant, safe and efficient pedestrian environment is important, since many of the city's
primary destinations are within walking distance of properties zoned PRM. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2B-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. Table 2B-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by
special exception (S) in a particular multi-family residential zone.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups listed in the table. For example, a rooming house is classified as independent
group living. To find out how a specific land use is categorized see chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The approval criteria for special exceptions
are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title.
B. Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2B-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Multi-Family Residential Zones
Residential uses:
Household living uses Detached single-family dwellings P P P
Detached zero lot line dwellings PR PR PR
Attached single-family dwellings PR PR PR
Duplexes PR PR PR
Group households PR PR PR PR PR
Multi-family dwellings P P P P P
Group living uses Assisted group living S PR PR PR PR
Independent group living PR PR PR
Fraternal group living PR S PR PR
Commercial uses:
Eating and drinking establishments
Office uses General office
Medical/dental office
Retail uses Sales oriented
Personal service oriented S
Alcohol sales oriented
Repair oriented
Hospitality oriented retail PR PR
Outdoor storage and display oriented
Institutional and civic uses:
Community service uses General community service S S S S S
Community service - shelter S S S S S
Use Categories Subgroups RM-12 RM-20 RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 239/715
Daycare uses PR PR PR PR PR
Educational facilities General PR PR PR PR PR
Specialized PR
Parks and open space uses PR PR PR PR PR
Religious/private group assembly uses1 PR PR PR PR PR
Other uses:
Communication transmission facility uses PR PR PR PR PR
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
Note:
1. Any establishment that is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth in
subsection 14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013)
14-2B-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter 3
of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
2. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3, article B of this title.
3. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3. Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
4. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A of this title.
2. Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title.
5. Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this title.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title.
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title.
11. Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2B-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Use Categories Subgroups RM-12 RM-20 RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 240/715
The dimensional requirements for the multi-family residential zones are stated in table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Each of the following
subsections describes in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by
special exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the
planned development process (see chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title) or through the historic preservation
exception as outlined in section 14-2B-8, "Special Provisions", of this article.
A. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development.
2. Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for the various multi-family residential zones and for specific residential uses are
stated in table 2B-2, located at the end of this section.
3. Minimum Lot Requirements For Specific Land Uses:
a. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not specified in table 2B-2, located at the end of
this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special exception, that
use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot, even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as permitted under
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
c. The single-family density bonus options for the RS-12 zone, as specified in section 14-2A-7 of this title, may be applied to detached single-family
dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings located in the RM-12 and RM-20 zones. If the single-family density bonus options have been
applied, the minimum lot area, lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements may be reduced accordingly.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
1. Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
a. Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
c. Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in the city's neighborhoods;
d. Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings; and
e. Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible with buildings in the vicinity.
2. General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required setbacks for principal buildings in multi-family residential zones are stated in table
2B-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal buildings
are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
3. Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain principal building setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
a. Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
(1) On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot (40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial street or
future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map, located in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot is located along an arterial street that is substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way as specified in title 15, "Land
Subdivisions", of this code, then the minimum forty foot (40') front setback along said street is increased by the number of additional feet that will
be required for future upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots platted prior to December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement. In
addition, setback averaging may apply in certain circumstances. (See subsection B3e of this section.)
b. Lots With Multiple Frontages:
(1) On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth in chapter
5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback must be
provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front setback for purposes of this title.
c. Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10'). Buildings
containing residential uses must be designed to preserve privacy. This can be achieved by placement of windows to prevent direct views into the
windows of adjacent residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air conditioning units may not be located along a building wall that is
within twenty feet (20') of a building wall of an adjacent principal building on the same lot, if the wall of the adjacent building contains window or
door openings into dwelling units. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire protection requirements.
d. Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development, or in
the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to chapter 3, article B of this title and also the applicable setback provisions in the Iowa City historic preservation
handbook. For a property located in a planned development overlay zone, refer to the approved planned development overlay plan for the subject
property. For two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located on property in the central planning district,
refer to the applicable setback provisions in section 14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 241/715
e. Setback Averaging:
(1) Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a frontage have been developed and all of these developed lots are occupied by principal
buildings that are located at least five feet (5') further from the street than the required front setback, the required front setback along the
frontage is increased to the equivalent of the setback of the building closest to the street. However, this averaging provision does not apply to
frontages that contain three (3) or fewer lots. (Ord. 12-4488, 8-21-2012)
Figure 2B.1 - Setback Averaging (1)
(2) Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located closer to the street than the
required front setback, the front setback may be reduced to the average of the respective setbacks on the abutting lots. Only the setbacks on the
lots that abut each side of the subject property along the same street may be used to calculate the average. Setbacks across the street or along
a different street frontage may not be used. When one abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is based on the setback
of the principal building on the nonvacant lot and the required setback for the zone in which the lot is located. (See figure 2B.2 below.)
Figure 2B.2 - Setback Averaging (2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 242/715
4. Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The following building features may extend into the required principal building setback
area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
a. Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses, buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features that extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet (6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay windows,
and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet (2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal
building must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
b. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building setbacks
of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area. Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non-habitable space) may extend up
to fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered
decks and patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered
patios that are attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
c. Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not extend more than three feet (3') into any side setback.
d. Stairways that function as the principal means of access to dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not extend into
any required setback. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
e. Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback, provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested
according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
5. Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce principal building setback requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board
of Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception
approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The subject building will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property line abuts a
public right of way or permanent open space.
C. Building Bulk Standards:
1. Maximum Height:
a. Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options for light,
air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate other buildings in the vicinity.
b. General Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for structures in multi-family residential zones are stated in table 2B-2, located at
the end of this section. Height standards for accessory buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
c. Specific Standards:
(1) In the multi-family zones, if any portion of a building is within fifteen feet (15') of a single-family residential zone boundary, then the portion of
the building located within fifteen feet (15') of said zone may not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories in height.
(2) In the RM-12, RM-20, and RNS-20 zones, if any portion of a two-family use, multi-family use, group living use, or nonresidential use is located
within fifteen feet (15') of a property that contains an existing single-family use, then the portion of the building located within fifteen feet (15') of
said property may not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories in height.
d. Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures or parts thereof are exempt from the height limitations set forth in the zones
indicated, provided an increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
(1) Chimneys or flues.
(2) Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
(3) Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
(4) Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
(5) Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the roof,
whichever is less.
(6) Parapet or fire walls.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 243/715
(7) Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility use, such as street lights and utility poles.
(8) If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations placed by the board of adjustment.
(9) Roof structures, including elevator bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary mechanical and electrical
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building.
(10) Television antennas and similar apparatus.
e. Adjustment Of Height Standards:
(1) The maximum height for a principal building may be increased; provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet (2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
(2) A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Minimum Building Width:
a. Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
b. Standards: The minimum building width requirements for principal structures in multi-family residential zones are stated in table 2B-2, located at
the end of this section. A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
building's length. (See figure 2B.3 below.)
Figure 2B.3 - Minimum Building Width
D. Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
1. Total Building Coverage:
a. Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the character of multi-family residential zones by limiting the land area that can be
covered by buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built
up a neighborhood appears.
b. Standards: The total building coverage standards for the various multi-family residential zones are stated in table 2B-2, located at the end of this
section. The maximum building coverage standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be covered by buildings. The total
building area of all buildings on the property, including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the building coverage.
2. Front Setback Coverage:
a. Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a certain portion of the front setback remains free of impervious surface, which helps
to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along neighborhood streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing excessive
front yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the principal dwelling and the main entrance from view of the street. In addition, this
standard helps to prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front yard pavement, particularly along frontages with narrow residential
lots.
b. Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the multi-family residential zones is stated in table 2B-2, located at the end of this
section. The table lists the maximum percentage of the required front setback that may be covered by impervious surface, including driveways,
walkways, patios, decks, and other paved areas. Front setback coverage may not exceed the percentage indicated in table 2B-2, located at the
end of this section.
c. Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the allowed front setback coverage. The board of adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and the
following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 244/715
(1) The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback coverage
standard.
(2) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the front
setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing
alternative means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage
standard may not be increased.
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the front setback coverage regulations.
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent practical. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Minimum Open Space Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support
the health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
2. Minimum Requirements:
a. On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses, usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square feet per
bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet (15').
b. On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located in
the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
c. On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
d. On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than
twelve feet (12').
3. Standards:
a. For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall meet the standards as set forth in subsections 14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this
chapter.
b. For single family uses and two family uses open space shall be located behind the principal dwelling in an area visible and easily accessible from
the principal dwelling and shall consist of open planted green space, which may include trees, planters, gardens, and other amenities that support
passive recreation or leisure activities. Paved areas shall not be counted toward usable open space. For attached single family uses, rooftop or
upper floor open air terraces or rear yard-facing porches, including screened-in porches (non-habitable space only) may count toward the open
space requirement.
4. Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according to the provisions and approval criteria of section 14-4B-1, "Minor
Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances, provided the
additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the allowed
occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code):
a. In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces (surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2) off-street
parking spaces; or
b. If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that there is
practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
c. The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
d. The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
e. Approval criteria:
(1) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new
buildings or additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property; and
(2) The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
(3) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent possible.
Table 2B-2: Dimensional Requirements For Multi-Family Residential Zones
Zone/Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Maximum Lot
Coverage Maximum
Number
Of
Bedrooms
Per Unit13
Minim
Ope
Space
(Sq. Ft
Total
Area
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Height
(Ft.)
Minimum
Building
Width
Total
Building
Coverage
Front
Setback
Coverage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 245/715
RM-
12
Detached
singlefamily
and
detached
zero lot
line
5,0007
5,0007 557 407 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 50% 50% n/a 500
Duplex 6,000
3,000 55 40 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 50% 50% 4 300/un
Attached
singlefamily
3,000
3,000 20/286
20 155 0/104
20 358 n/a 50% 50% 4 150
Multi-family
8,175
See table
2B-3 of
this
section
60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% 3 10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Group
living
8,175
See
chapter 4,
article B
of this
title
60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% See
chapter 4,
article B of
this title
10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Nonresidential1
5,000
5,000 60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% n/a n/a
RM-
20
Detached
singlefamily
and
detached
zero lot
line
5,0007
5,0007 557 407 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 50% 50% n/a 500
Duplex 3,600
1,800 45 35 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 50% 50% 4 300/un
Attached
singlefamily
1,800
1,800 20/286
20 155 0/104
20 358 n/a 50% 50% 4 150
Multi-family
5,000
See table
2B-3 of
this
section
60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% 3 10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Group
living
5,000
See
chapter 4,
article B
of this
title
60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% See
chapter 4,
article B of
this title
10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Nonresidential1
5,000
n/a 60 40 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% n/a n/a
RNS-
20
Detached
singlefamily
and
detached
zero lot
line
5,0007
5,0007 407 257 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 45% 50% n/a 500
Duplex 5,000
2,500 40 25 155 5+22
See
note
10
358 203 45% 50% 4 300/un
Attached
singlefamily
2,500
2,500 20/286
20 155 0/104
20 358 n/a 45% 50% 4 150
Zone/Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Maximum Lot
Coverage Maximum
Number
Of
Bedrooms
Per Unit13
Minim
Ope
Space
(Sq. Ft
Total
Area
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Height
(Ft.)
Minimum
Building
Width
Total
Building
Coverage
Front
Setback
Coverage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 246/715
Multi-family
5,000
See table
2B-3 of
this
section
and note
9
40 25 20 10 20 358 203 45% 50% 3 10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Group
living
5,000
See
chapter 4,
article B9
of this
title
40 25 20 10 20 358 203 45% 50% See
chapter 4,
article B of
this title
10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Nonresidential1
5,000
n/a 40 25 20 10 20 358 203 45% 50% n/a n/a
RM-
44
Multi-family
5,000
See table
2B-3 of
this
section
None 35 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% 3 10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Group
living
5,000
See
chapter 4,
article B
of this
title
None 35 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% See
chapter 4,
article B of
this title
10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Nonresidential1
5,000
n/a None 35 20 10 20 358 203 50% 50% n/a n/a
PRM
Multi-family
5,000
See table
2B-3 of
this
section
None 35 20 10 1011
358 203 50% 50% 3 10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Group
living
5,000
See
chapter 4,
article B
of this
title
None 35 20 10 1011
358 203 50% 50% See
chapter 4,
article B of
this title
10/bed
room,
no less
than 40
Nonresidential1
5,000
n/a None 35 20 10 1011
358 203 50% 50% n/a n/a
n/a = not applicable
Notes:
1. Non-residential uses must comply with the standards listed in this table unless specified otherwise in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
2. Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories plus 2 feet for each additional story. Detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the
applicable side setback standards in chapter 4, article B of this title.
3. A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
4. See applicable side setbacks for attached single-family as provided in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
5. The principal dwelling must be set back at least 15 feet, except on lots located around the bulb of a cul-de-sac; on such lots the principal dwelling must
be set back at least 25 feet. On all lots, garages, both attached and detached, must be set back as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
6. Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and 28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are attached, lots
must be 28 feet wide.
7. If the single family density bonus options have been applied, the minimum lot area, lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements may be
reduced accordingly. (See subsection 14-2B-4A, "Minimum Lot Requirements", of this section.)
8. Additional height restrictions may apply on properties adjacent to single family zones or single family uses. (See subsection 14-2B-4C, "Building Bulk
Standards", of this section.)
9. See the special provisions of this article regarding minimum lot area per unit requirements in the RNS-20 Zone.
10. The principal building rear setback is 20 feet, except in the Central Planning District and Downtown Planning District, where the rear setback is
dependent on the depth of the lot. For lots equal to or less than 100 feet in depth: minimum rear setback = 20 feet. For lots greater than 100 feet in depth:
minimum rear setback = lot depth less 80 feet. For purposes of this provision, garages located in the rear yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a
(non-habitable) breezeway (8 feet or narrower in width) will be considered detached accessory buildings and, therefore, are subject to the setback
Zone/Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Maximum Lot
Coverage Maximum
Number
Of
Bedrooms
Per Unit13
Minim
Ope
Space
(Sq. Ft
Total
Area
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Height
(Ft.)
Minimum
Building
Width
Total
Building
Coverage
Front
Setback
Coverage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 247/715
requirements for detached accessory buildings, rather than principal building setback requirements. Similarly, subject breezeways shall be treated as
detached accessory structures/buildings.
11. May be reduced to 5 feet if rear lot line abuts an alley.
12. Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection 14-2B-4E of this section.
13. Any bedroom within a multi-family, attached single family, or duplex that exceeds 225 square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than
16 feet shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of
the title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
Table 2B-3: Maximum Density Standards
For Multi-Family Dwellings In Multi-Family Zone
Minimum lot area per unit (in square feet):
Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit 2,725 1,800 500 435
2-bedroom unit 2,725 1,800 1,000 875
3-bedroom unit 2,725 2,700 1,500 1,315
Maximum number of bedrooms per multi-family dwelling unit 3 3 3 3
Minimum bedroom size1 (square feet) 100 100 100 100
Note:
1. New bedrooms must be a minimum of 100 square feet in size. However, for purposes of the provisions within this table, any existing habitable room that
is larger than 70 square feet in size with a horizontal dimension of at least 7 feet, that meets the egress requirements as specified in the Building Code,
and is not a typical shared living space, such as a living room, dining area, kitchen, or bathroom will be considered a bedroom. Bedrooms that exceed 225
square feet in size or have any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum
number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
(Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2B-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this
Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection 17-5-
18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2B-6: MULTI-FAMILY SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The multi-family site development standards promote safe, attractive, pedestrian friendly neighborhoods by preventing expanses of concrete,
blank walls and parking lots along street frontages; controlling the building bulk; screening unsightly features; ensuring that pedestrian entrances are
visible and clearly identifiable from the street; and minimizing potential conflicts between pedestrians and automobiles.
B. Applicability:
1. The standards of this section apply to all multi-family uses, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located in residential zones and in the
Central Planning District. (See Central Planning District map of this section.)
2. Single-family uses and two-family uses located in a multi-family zone must comply with the single-family site development standards specified in
chapter 2, article A, "Single-Family Residential Zones", of this title. Two-family uses located in the Central Planning District must also comply with the
provisions of subsection I, "Additional Standards In Central Planning District", of this section, which will be administered through the design review
process, as set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
3. For properties located in the RM-12, RNS-20, RM-20, and RM-44 Zones outside the Central Planning District, the standards in this section will be
administered through the site plan review process, as set forth in title 18 of this Code. For properties located in the Central Planning District and the
PRM Zone, the regulations of this section will be administered through the design review process as set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative
Approval Procedures", of this title.
4. For properties located in a Historic or Conservation District Overlay Zone, the standards of this section will be administered concurrently with review
of the proposed development by the Historic Preservation Commission. If the provisions of the Historic or Conservation District Overlay Zone conflict
with the provisions of this section, the provisions of the Historic or Conservation District Overlay Zone will supersede the provisions of this section.
Zone
RM-12
RM-20 And
RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 248/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005) Map 2B.1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 249/715
(Ord. 12-4483, 5-15-2012)
C. Location And Design Standards For Surface Parking And Detached Garages:
1. Location: Surface parking, parking within accessory structures, and loading areas must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from
view of fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located directly between a principal building and the street or within the required side
setback area. Any portion of a parking or loading area that is not completely concealed from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2
standard. (See figures 2B.4 and 2B.5 below.) (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Figure 2B.4 - Location Of Surface Parking
For Properties With A Single Building
Figure 2B.5 - Location Of Parking
For Properties With Multiple Buildings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 250/715
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 251/715
2. Aisles And Drives: Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of the parking area are
considered part of the parking area and must meet the location standards for parking areas as stated in subsection C1 of this section, and the
landscape buffering standard as stated in subsection C3 of this section. A nonhard surfaced drive or aisle that is external to a parking area may not
be located closer than three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of access with a street, alley, or private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives that are
external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet (3') from any side or rear lot line, except under the following circumstances:
a. The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
b. A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle storm water runoff; or
c. Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot; or
d. At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
3. Landscape Buffering:
a. A buffer area at least ten feet (10') in width and landscaped to at least the S2 standard must be provided between any parking area and adjacent
properties and between any parking area and street rights of way. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The
city may exempt from this requirement any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an
abutting lot. The city may also waive the landscape screening requirement where the view from adjacent properties is or will be blocked by a
significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade features, such that the screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is
met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
b. A buffer area at least five feet (5') in width and landscaped to the S1 standard must be provided between any parking area containing more than
eight (8) parking spaces and an adjacent alley.
c. No parking area or drive shall be closer than ten feet (10') to any portion of a building other than a garage entrance or loading area apron. This ten
foot (10') area must be used for walkways and landscaping consisting of at least fifty percent (50%) vegetative coverage. If parking spaces are
located where headlights of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground level windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the
windows to at least the S2 standard.
D. Building Entrances For Multi-Family And Group Living Uses:
1. For residential uses, buildings must have at least one door on the exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units within the
building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage.
2. When a lot contains one principal building, the building must be oriented such that at least one facade faces a public or private street. The street
facing facade must have at least one main entrance to the building, or may contain separate main entrances to ground level dwelling units. If the
building is located on a corner lot, only one wall must meet this requirement.
3. When a lot contains two (2) or more principal buildings, the buildings must be oriented towards a public street, private street, or interior courtyard.
Any building with a street facing facade must have at least one main entrance oriented toward the street. Buildings located interior to a lot must have
main entrances that are clearly visible from interior private streets/drives or surface parking areas.
4. Main entrances to a building, including main entrances to ground level individual dwelling units, must be clearly demarcated by one of the following
means: (See figure 2B.6, located at the end of this subsection D4.)
a. Covered porch or canopy.
b. Transom and sidelight windows.
c. Pilasters and pediment.
d. Other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does not meet this standard.
Figure 2B.6 - Main Entrances
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 252/715
5. Patio style doors, such as sliding glass doors, may not be used for main entrance doors. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6. To provide for the safety of residents, access to entrance doors of any individual dwelling units located above the ground level must be provided from
an enclosed lobby or corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways may not be used as the primary means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground level floor of the building. This provision does not preclude the use of fire egress structures. (Ord. 06-4220,
7-18-2006)
7. (Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
8. A pedestrian circulation system must be provided that connects residential entrances to adjacent public rights of way, and to parking areas and other
on site facilities. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4534, 6-4-2013)
E. Building Scale:
1. RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, And PRM Zones Outside Central Planning District: Street-facing walls that are greater than fifty feet (50') in length
must be articulated with bays, projections, or recesses (see figure 2B.7 of this section) according to the following standards:
a. Bays and projections must be at least six feet (6') in width and at least sixteen inches (16") but not more than six feet (6') in depth. Recesses must
be at least six feet (6') in width and have a depth of at least sixteen inches (16").
b. The bays, projections, and recesses must have corresponding changes in the roofline or, alternatively, must be distinguished by a corresponding
change in some other architectural element(s) of the building, such as a change in exterior wall materials, a change in window pattern, the addition
of balconies, variation in the building and/or parapet height; or variation in architectural details, such as decorative banding, reveals, stone or tile
accents.
Figure 2B.7 - Building Articulation
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Central Planning District: The width of the front facade of new buildings must be no more than forty feet (40'). Buildings may exceed this limitation if
the horizontal plane of any street-facing facade of the building is broken into modules that give the appearance of smaller, individual buildings. (See
figure 2B.8, located at the end of this subsection E2.) Each module must meet the following standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 253/715
a. Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no less than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent modules by
a variation in the wall plane of at least sixteen inches (16") in depth. For buildings that are three (3) or more stories in height, the width of the
module may be increased to forty feet (40').
b. Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
c. Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least one of the following means:
(1) Variation in material colors, types or textures;
(2) Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
(3) Variation in the architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
(4) Variation in window pattern;
(5) Variation in the use of balconies and recesses.
Figure 2B.8 - Building Modules That
Break Up The Horizontal Plane
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
F. Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors, And Lifts: For purposes of this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead to
floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the first or
ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways, exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
1. Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are prohibited in the PRM zone; however, the city may allow exterior fire egress structures on
existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a building
that faces a street. In other zones, exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts must be covered with a roof similar in design and materials
to the roof over the rest of the structure. Said roof should be incorporated into the overall roof plan of the structure. Alternatively, such features may
be recessed into the facade of the building. Exterior corridors may not be located on a street facing wall of the building or within twenty feet (20') of a
street facing wall.
2. Unenclosed or partially enclosed stairways may not be used as the primary means of access to dwelling units located above the ground level floor of
the building (see subsection 14-2B-6D6 of this section).
3. Balconies, exterior stairways, exterior lifts and exterior corridors may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property that is
zoned single-family residential or that contains an existing single-family use. Buildings that are set back at least forty feet (40') from any such
property are exempt from this standard.
4. The design of any balcony, exterior stairway, exterior lift and exterior corridor must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings that are
designed and constructed of materials that are similar or complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building. (Ord. 06-4220,
7-18-2006)
Figure 2B.9 - Balconies, Exterior Corridors
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 254/715
G. Building Materials:
1. In the central planning district, the exterior wall material of a building must consist of clapboard style siding, wall shingles, brick, stone, or stucco.
2. In the PRM zone, the exterior walls of the ground level floor of a building must be constructed with a masonry finish, such as fired brick, stone, or
similar material, not including concrete blocks and undressed poured concrete. Masonry may include stucco or like material when used in
combination with other masonry finish.
3. In the central planning district and in the PRM zone, buildings not constructed of masonry or stucco must have the following trim elements
incorporated into the exterior design and construction of the building:
a. Window and door trim that is not less than three inches (3") wide.
b. Corner boards that are not less than three inches (3") wide, unless wood clapboards are used and mitered at the corners.
c. Frieze boards, not less than five inches (5") wide, located below the eaves.
Figure 2B.10 - Building Materials
4. Any portion of a building that is clearly visible from the street must be constructed using similar materials and design as the front facade.
5. Exterior walls of buildings that are not predominantly masonry or stucco must have a durable base consisting of masonry, stucco, or dressed
concrete that extends at least two feet (2') in height above grade. If the base consists of concrete, it must have a decorative face.
6. Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any facade that faces a street-side lot line.
7. Where an exterior wall material changes along the horizontal plane of a building, the change must occur on an inside corner of the building.
8. For buildings where the exterior wall material used on the side of a building is a different material than what is used on the street facing wall, the
street facing wall material must wrap around the corners to the sides of the building for at least three feet (3').
9. Where an exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a belt
course, soldier course, band board or other trim to provide a transition from one material to the other.
Figure 2B.11 - Changes In Exterior Wall Materials
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 255/715
H. Mechanical Equipment/Utility Meters: In no case shall mechanical equipment or utility meters be located along the street side of a building. Mechanical
structures must be set back and screened according to the applicable provisions set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
I. Additional Standards In Central Planning District:
1. Front Setbacks: The front setback for new buildings must not deviate more than five feet (5') from the average setback of existing principal buildings
along the same frontage. Alternatively, for frontages that contain more than six (6) lots, the average may be calculated based on the principal
building setbacks on the four (4) closest lots along the same frontage to the lot containing the new building. However, a new building shall not be
located closer to the street than the existing principal building that is closest to the street along the same frontage. This setback standard supersedes
the setback standards of the base zone. Frontages that contain three (3) or fewer lots are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. (Ord. 12-
4488, 8-21-2012)
2. Windows And Fenestration: Individual window units that are visible from a public or private street and that are located in primary living spaces, such
as living rooms, dining areas, and bedrooms, must have a height that is at least one and one-half (1.5) times greater than the width of the window
unit. Individual window units may be located side by side in a wider window opening. Bathroom, kitchen, skylights, and decorative windows, such as
stained glass and ocular windows, are not required to meet this standard.
Figure 2B.12 - Windows
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. Architectural Style: The purpose of requiring an architectural style is to ensure that the mass, roof form, window style and configuration, and the
basic architectural details of a building are generally compatible with the historic character of the central planning district. New buildings should
appear similar to a large house or a small historic apartment building.
a. Any building elevation that is within public view (see definition of "public view, within" in section 14-9A-1 of this title), must be designed in a manner
that is consistent with a historic architectural style typical of residential buildings in the central planning district. However, building facades that are
visible only from public alleys are not subject to these standards. The applicable architectural styles are as follows: Italianate; Queen Anne;
colonial revival; craftsman; craftsman bungalow; American foursquare; prairie school; period revival; and eclectic. The applicant must indicate in
detail how each of the following architectural elements in the proposed building are consistent with one of these architectural styles as described in
the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended:
(1) Form and mass of the building;
(2) Roof configuration and pitch;
(3) Style and placement of windows and doors;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 256/715
(4) Window and door trim, eave boards, frieze boards, and other trim;
(5) Porch and entrance features;
(6) Building details and ornamentation.
b. Detailed information regarding historic residential building styles is available in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook". The design review
committee and the historic preservation commission will use this information as a means to evaluate new buildings in the central planning district.
c. Alternative designs that have been prepared by a licensed architect may be acceptable and will be reviewed on a case by case basis. (Ord. 06-
4245, 12-12-2006)
J. Minor Modifications: A minor modification to adjust specific provisions of this section may be requested in either of the qualifying situations listed below.
Such requests will be reviewed by the design review committee, the director of planning and community development, and the building official
according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following approval criteria. The
following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval criteria listed in section 14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title:
1. Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard impractical.
In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard of this section impractical. Examples of situations that may qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped
lots, and steeply sloping lots.
b. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative design is not contrary to the intent of the multi-family site development standards.
c. The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
d. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
e. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
f. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
2. Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely designed to fit the site and the surrounding neighborhood. In such a situation, the
applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
b. The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood such that it equally
or better meets the purpose of the multi-family site development standards.
c. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
d. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
e. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
14-2B-7: PRM ZONE BONUS PROVISIONS:
A. Purpose: The PRM zone bonus provisions provide an incentive for developments to incorporate features that provide a public benefit and also
encourage excellence in architectural design.
B. Application: The bonus provisions will be administered through the design review process as set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title. Bonuses include allowance of dwelling units in excess of the density otherwise achievable under the provisions of the base
zone, additional building bulk, and/or reductions of the required setback area. Bonuses are based on a point system. Points may be awarded for public
benefit features that the design review committee determines are appropriate in design and location. Bonuses will not be granted for site development
features or standards already required by this title. Decisions of the committee may be appealed to the board of adjustment. The number of points
allowed for public benefit features and the number of points required per bonus item are set forth below:
1. Public Benefit Features:
a. Materials: Masonry finish on all nonfenestrated areas of walls visible from a public street. For purposes of this provision, "masonry" is defined as
fired brick, stone or similar such materials, not including concrete blocks and undressed poured concrete. "Masonry" may include stucco or like
material when used in combination with other masonry finish. Points allowed: 5
b. Open Space: The provision of usable open space of a size and at a grade that, at a minimum, allows passive recreational uses and is accessible
to all residential occupants of the building. Such space may include yards, other than required setback areas, terraces and rooftop gardens
designed and approved for outdoor activities. Balconies serving individual dwelling units are not eligible for this bonus. Points allowed: 1 per 250
square feet
c. Historic Buildings: Rehabilitation of a historically significant building as determined by the survey of the historic and architectural resources for the
vicinity. Points allowed: 7
d. Assisted Housing: Dwelling units committed to the city's assisted housing program or some other affordable housing program approved by the city,
provided such units do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total units contained within a building. Points allowed: 3 per unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 257/715
e. Streetscape Amenities: The provision of funds for all street furniture, lighting and landscaping improvements along adjacent street rights of way in
accordance with an approved city streetscape plan. Points allowed: 5
f. Landscaping: The provision of additional landscaped areas that are visible from a public street. Required setback areas and required landscape
buffers do not qualify for bonus points. Points allowed: 1 per 250 square feet
g. Windows: Installing individual window units that have a height that is at least one and one-half (1.5) times greater than the width of the window unit
in all primary living spaces, such as living rooms, dining rooms and bedrooms. Individual window units may be located side by side in a wider
window opening. Skylights, windows in bathrooms and kitchens, and decorative windows, such as stained glass and ocular windows, are not
required to meet this standard for the building to qualify for bonus points. Points allowed: 3
2. Bonus Menu:
a. Setback Reduction: The front setback may be reduced by a maximum of fifty percent (50%). When determining the appropriateness of such a
reduction, the character of adjacent development and setbacks will be considered. Points required: 7
b. Height Increase: The maximum allowed building height may be increased from thirty five feet (35') up to a maximum of sixty five feet (65'),
provided the portion of building exceeding thirty five feet (35') is stepped back a minimum of five feet (5') for each story located above thirty five
feet (35') to reduce the appearance of the bulk of the building. Points required: 7
c. Density Bonus:
(1) For efficiency apartments, the minimum lot area per unit may be reduced to five hundred (500) square feet. Points required: 7
(2) For one bedroom apartments, the minimum lot area per unit may be reduced to seven hundred (700) square feet. Points required: 7
(3) For efficiency apartments, the minimum lot area per unit may be reduced to four hundred twenty (420) square feet. Points required: 12
(4) For one bedroom apartments, the minimum lot area per unit may be reduced to four hundred fifty (450) square feet. Points required: 12
d. Building Coverage Increase: The maximum building coverage may be increased to sixty five percent (65%). Points required: 7 (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-2B-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Historic Preservation Exceptions:
1. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or in
chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property designated as
an Iowa City landmark or registered on the national register of historic places. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title, the following approval criteria must be met:
a. The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property;
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission.
2. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a property designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the national
register of historic places to be adapted and reused as a community service use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail use. In
addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following criteria in
order for the board to grant this exception:
a. The exception will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property;
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission.
B. Special Provisions In Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone:
1. At the time a property is rezoned to neighborhood stabilization residential (RNS-20), any uses that were conforming with regard to use and minimum
lot area per unit requirements under the previous zoning designation shall be considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per
unit requirements under the neighborhood stabilization residential zone. Any building containing a conforming use may be torn down and rebuilt to its
present density or to the allowed density in the neighborhood stabilization residential zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title.
2. The special provision described in subsection B1 of this section does not exempt a property from compliance with other relevant dimensional
standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any subsequent amendments to this title that pertain to the property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
C. Elder Apartment Housing Density Bonus Option:
1. In the RM-12, RM-20, RM-44 or PRM zones, "elder apartment housing", as defined in this title, may be granted a density bonus not to exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the maximum number of units otherwise permitted in the applicable zone, provided that:
a. The development is intended for use and occupancy by elders and/or persons with disabilities;
b. All individual dwelling units and any communal space must be handicap accessible, as defined in the Iowa administrative code section 661-
302.20;
c. No more than ten percent (10%) of all individual dwelling units can contain more than two (2) bedrooms;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 258/715
d. Prior to issuance of the building permit, the owner must submit an affidavit to the city that all individual dwelling units will be reserved for and
occupied by elders and/or persons with disabilities; and
e. Owners shall maintain a valid rental permit, unless the use is licensed by the state of Iowa.
2. The city reserves the right to inspect the elder apartment housing to verify compliance with these provisions. (Ord. 11-4456, 11-22-2011)
ARTICLE C. COMMERCIAL ZONES
14-2C-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF COMMERCIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established commercial zones are listed below. When this title refers to the commercial zones, it is
referring to the zones listed below:
A. Mixed Use Zone (MU): The purpose of the mixed use zone (MU) is to provide a transition from commercial and employment centers to less intensive
residential zones. The MU zone permits a mix of uses, including lower scale retail and office uses, and a variety of residential uses. This mix of uses
requires special consideration of building and site design.
B. Commercial Office Zone (CO-1): The purpose of the commercial office zone (CO-1) is to provide specific areas where office functions, compatible
businesses, apartments and certain public and semipublic uses may be developed in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The CO-1 zone can
serve as a buffer between residential and more intensive commercial or industrial areas.
C. Neighborhood Commercial Zone (CN-1): The purpose of the neighborhood commercial zone (CN-1) is to promote a unified grouping of small scale
retail sales and personal service uses in a neighborhood shopping area; encourage neighborhood shopping areas that are conveniently located and
that primarily serve nearby residential neighborhoods; promote pedestrian oriented development at an intensity level that is compatible with
surrounding residential areas; and promote principles of site design, building articulation, scale and proportion that are typical of traditional main street
design. Allowed uses are restricted in size to promote smaller, neighborhood serving businesses and to limit adverse impacts on nearby residential
areas. CN-1 zones are generally located with direct access to an arterial street.
D. Highway Commercial Zone (CH-1): The purpose of the highway commercial zone (CH-1) is to permit development of service uses relating to
expressways or along arterial roadways. At certain access points, food, lodging, motor vehicle service and fuel can be made conveniently available to
the thoroughfare user.
E. Intensive Commercial Zone (CI-1): The purpose of the intensive commercial zone (CI-1) is to provide areas for those sales and service functions and
businesses whose operations are typically characterized by outdoor display and storage of merchandise, by repair and sales of large equipment or
motor vehicles, by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational activities or by activities or operations conducted in buildings or structures not
completely enclosed. The types of retail trade in this zone are limited in order to provide opportunities for more land intensive commercial operations
and also to prevent conflicts between retail and industrial truck traffic. Special attention must be directed toward buffering the negative aspects of
allowed uses from adjacent residential zones.
F. Community Commercial Zone (CC-2): The purpose of the community commercial zone (CC-2) is to provide for major business districts to serve a
significant segment of the total community population. In addition to a variety of retail goods and services, these centers may typically feature a number
of large traffic generators requiring access from major thoroughfares. While these centers are usually characterized by indoor operations, uses may
have limited outdoor activities; provided, that outdoor operations are screened or buffered to remain compatible with surrounding uses.
G. Central Business Service Zone (CB-2): The central business service zone (CB-2) is intended to allow for the orderly expansion of the central business
district of Iowa City, to serve as a transition between the intense land uses located in the central business district and adjoining areas, to enhance the
pedestrian orientation of the central area of the city, and to provide suitable, peripheral locations for auto oriented commercial and service uses. This
zone is intended to accommodate mixed land uses but at a lower intensity than permitted in the other central business zones.
H. Central Business Support Zone (CB-5): The purpose of the central business support zone (CB-5) is to allow for the orderly expansion of the central
business district in accordance with the comprehensive plan; to serve as a transition between the intense land uses located in the central business
district and adjoining areas; and to enhance the pedestrian orientation of the central area of the city. This zone is intended to accommodate mixed land
uses, but at a lower intensity than permitted in the CB-10 district. The mixture of land uses permitted in this zone requires special consideration of
building and site design. To control traffic and provide for the most efficient use of land and parking facilities, special consideration of the amount and
location of parking areas is also required. To encourage developments that contain features providing a public benefit, a bonus in floor area ratio or
dwelling unit density may be granted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
I. Central Business Zone (CB-10): The purpose of the central business zone (CB-10) is to be the high density, compact, pedestrian oriented shopping,
office, service and entertainment area in Iowa City. Development and redevelopment in this zone should occur in compact groupings, in order to
intensify the density of usable commercial spaces, while increasing the availability of open spaces, plazas or pedestrianways. This zone is intended to
accommodate a wide range of retail, service, office and residential uses. Auto oriented uses are not permitted, except as specifically provided.
Consolidated off street loading and service facilities should be provided wherever practical with access provided from public service alleys or courts.
Private, off street parking is strictly regulated in order to preserve valuable land for active building uses and to maintain a pedestrian oriented
streetscape. To support a healthy and vibrant commercial core, development of mixed use buildings with residential uses located above storefront
commercial uses is encouraged. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
14-2C-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 259/715
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. Table 2C-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by
special exception (S) in a particular commercial zone. A number in superscript indicates that a special provision applies. See table notes for more
information.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups listed in the table. For example, a florist shop is classified as a sales oriented retail
use. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title, along with specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
B. Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005) Table 2C-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Commercial Zones
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (see chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and special exceptions)
Residential uses:
Group living uses Assisted group living PR S PR
Fraternal group living
Independent group living
Household living uses Attached single-family dwellings PR
Detached single-family dwellings P
Detached zero lot line dwellings PR
Duplexes PR
Group households PR PR PR PR PR PR PR
Multi-family dwellings PR PR S PR PR PR/S P
Commercial uses:
Adult business uses PR
Animal related commercial uses General S PR PR PR PR PR
Intensive PR
Building trade uses P PR
Commercial parking uses PR PR PR
Commercial recreational uses1 Indoor PR/S
PR P P P P P P
Outdoor P P S
Drinking establishments1 PR/S
PR PR PR PR PR PR
Eating establishments1 S PR/S
P P P P P P S
Office uses General office P PR P P P P P P P
Medical/dental office P PR P P P P P P P
Quick vehicle servicing uses1 S PR PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
Retail uses1 Alcohol sales oriented retail PR PR P P PR PR PR PR
Use Categories Subgroups
CO-1
CN-1
CH-1
CI-1
CC-2
CB-2
CB-5
CB-10
MU
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 260/715
Delayed deposit service uses PR
Hospitality oriented retail PR PR P P P P P P PR
Outdoor storage and display
oriented
P PR
Personal service oriented P PR P P P P P PR
Repair oriented P P P P P
Sales oriented PR PR P P P P P PR
Surface passenger service uses P P P P P
Vehicle repair uses PR PR S PR
Industrial uses:
Industrial service uses P
Manufacturing and production uses
General manufacturing See note
2
PR PR PR PR PR
Heavy manufacturing S
Technical/light manufacturing PR PR PR PR PR
Salvage operations
Self-service storage uses P
Warehouse and freight movement
uses
P
Waste related uses
Wholesale sales uses P PR PR PR PR
Institutional and civic uses:
Basic utility uses PR/S
PR/S
PR/S PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
Community service uses Community service - long term
housing
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR PR
Community service - shelter S S S PR PR S S
General community service P S S P P P P S
Daycare uses PR PR PR PR PR PR PR PR PR
Detention facilities S
Educational facilities General PR S P P P PR
Specialized P PR S P P P P PR
Hospitals PR
Parks and open space uses PR PR PR PR PR PR PR
Religious/private group assembly
uses1
PR P P P P P PR
Other uses:
Communication transmission facility
uses
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S
PR/S PR
Notes:
1. Any establishment that is licensed by the State to sell alcohol or alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth in
subsection 14-4A-2G of this title.
2. Special provisions apply to dairy products processing and packaging facilities established in the Highway Commercial Zone prior to January 1983. See
subsection 14-2C-11B of this article.
Use Categories Subgroups
CO-1
CN-1
CH-1
CI-1
CC-2
CB-2
CB-5
CB-10
MU
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 261/715
(Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
14-2C-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title, and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter 3
of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
2. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3, article B of this title.
3. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3. Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
4. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A of this title.
2. Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title.
5. Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this title.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title.
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title.
11. Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2C-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2(a) and 2C-2(b) of this section. The following subsections describe in
more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the tables. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific dimensional requirements not specified in tables 2C-2(a) and 2C-2(b) of this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4,
article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the planned development process (see
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title) or through the historic preservation exception as outlined in section 14-2C-
11, "Special Provisions", of this article.
A. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for the various commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2(a) and 2C-2(b) of this
section. Most commercial zones do not have minimum lot size or width requirements. However, for mixed commercial/residential buildings, the
number of dwelling units allowed is based on the residential density formulas as stated in table 2C-2(c) of this section. (Ord. 12-4482, 5-15-2012)
3. Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
a. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not specified in tables 2C-2(a) and 2C-2(b) of this
section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional
Uses", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 262/715
b. If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special exception, that
use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot, even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as permitted under
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
1. Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
a. Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
c. Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in the city's neighborhoods and commercial areas;
d. Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings and between residences; and
e. Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible with buildings in the vicinity.
2. General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required setbacks for principal buildings in commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2(a)
and 2C-2(b) of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal buildings are not
allowed, except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
3. Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain setback requirements that apply in specific situations: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
a. Side And Rear Setbacks: (Rep. by Ord. 11-4449, 10-18-2011)
b. Lots With Multiple Frontages:
(1) On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth in chapter
5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback must be
provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front setback for purposes of this title.
c. Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10'). Buildings
containing residential uses must be designed to preserve privacy. This can be achieved by placement of windows to prevent direct views into the
windows of adjacent residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air conditioning units may not be located along a building wall that is
within twenty feet (20') of a building wall of an adjacent principal building on the same lot, if the wall of the adjacent building contains window or
door openings into dwelling units. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire protection requirements.
d. Lots Adjacent To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot line for a lot in a commercial zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at least equal to
the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary.
e. Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development, or in
the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to chapter 3, article B of this title and also the applicable setback provisions in the Iowa City historic preservation
handbook. For a property located in a planned development overlay zone, refer to the approved planned development overlay plan for the subject
property. For two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located on property in the central planning district,
refer to the applicable setback provisions in section 14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this chapter.
f. Setback Averaging: Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located at least five
feet (5') closer to the street than the required front setback, the front setback may be reduced to the average of the respective setbacks on the
abutting lots. Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the subject property along the same street may be used to calculate the average.
Setbacks across the street or along a different street frontage may not be used. When one abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then the
average is based on the setback of the principal building on the nonvacant lot and the required front setback for the zone in which the lot is
located. (See figure 2C.1 of this section.) Figure 2C.1 - Setback Averaging
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 263/715
4. Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The following building features may extend into the required principal building setback
area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
a. Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses, buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features that extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet (6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay windows,
and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet (2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal
building must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
b. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building setbacks
of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area. Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non-habitable space) may extend up
to fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered
decks and patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered
patios that are attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
c. Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback.
d. Stairways that function as the principal means of access to dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not extend into
any required setback. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
e. Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback, provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested
according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
5. Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce principal building setback requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board
of Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception
approval criteria and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 264/715
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The subject building will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property line abuts a
public right of way or permanent open space.
C. Building Bulk Standards:
1. Height Standards:
a. Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options for light,
air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate other buildings in the vicinity. In the central business zones, there is a minimum
height standard that ensures that buildings are compatible in scale and that land is used efficiently.
b. Standards: Generally, the maximum and minimum height standards for principal structures in commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2(a) and
2C-2(b), located at the end of this section. Height standards for accessory buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
c. Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standards, provided an
increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title:
(1) Chimneys or flues.
(2) Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
(3) Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
(4) Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
(5) Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the roof,
whichever is less.
(6) Grain elevators.
(7) Parapet or fire walls.
(8) Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
(9) If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations set forth in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
(10) Roof structures, including elevator bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary mechanical and electrical
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building.
(11) Stacks.
(12) Storage tanks and water towers.
(13) Television antennas and similar apparatus.
d. Adjustment Of Maximum Height Standards:
(1) The maximum height for a principal building may be increased; provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet (2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
(2) In the CO-1 zone, principal buildings on lots across the street from RM, C, or I zones may be increased in height according to subsection
C1d(1) of this section; except, that an additional front setback need not be provided. The requirement for additional side and rear setbacks
apply. However, the minimum separation between the building and the front lot line of the lot across the street must be two feet (2') for each foot
of height.
(3) A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
(4) In the CO-1 zone, hospitals are exempt from the FAR limit and may exceed the height limit up to a maximum of sixty five feet (65'), provided
that along lot lines that abut or are across the street from a single-family residential zone, building facades above the third story shall be stepped
back at least twenty feet (20') from the third story facade. This required upper story facade stepback may be established at a lower story,
provided that it is established at least twenty five feet (25') in height above grade. (Ord. 15-4626, 6-16-2015)
2. Maximum Floor Area Ratio:
a. Purpose: The floor area ratio or FAR regulates how intensely a site may be used. The FAR provides a means to match the potential amount of use
with the desired character of the area and the provision of public services. The FAR, along with the height and setback standards, control the
overall bulk of development on a site.
b. Standards: The floor area ratio or FAR listed in table 2C-2(a) of this section, is the amount of floor area within the building or buildings on a lot in
relation to the amount of lot area, expressed in square feet. For example, if the maximum FAR is 2, then a lot may contain up to two (2) square feet
of building floor area for every one square foot of lot area. Basement and cellar floor area is not included in this calculation.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
1. Total Building Coverage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 265/715
a. Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the character of the mixed use zone by limiting the land area that can be covered by
buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built up a
neighborhood appears.
b. Standard: The total building coverage standard for the MU zone is stated in table 2C-2(b) of this section. The maximum building coverage
standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be covered by buildings. The total building area of all buildings on the
property, including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the building coverage.
2. Front Setback Coverage:
a. Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a certain portion of the front setback remains free of impervious surface, which helps
to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along neighborhood streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing excessive
front yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the principal dwelling and the main entrance from view of the street. In addition, this
standard helps to prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front yard pavement, particularly along frontages with narrow residential
lots.
b. Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the mixed use zone is stated in table 2C-2(b) of this section. The standard applies
only to residential uses in the MU zone. The table lists the maximum percentage of the required front setback that may be covered by impervious
surface, including driveways, patios, decks, and other paved areas. Front setback coverage may not exceed the percentage indicated in table 2C-
2(b) of this section.
c. Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the allowed front setback coverage. The board of adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and the
following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback coverage
standard.
(2) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the front
setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing
alternative means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage
standard may not be increased.
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the front setback coverage regulations.
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent practical. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Minimum Open Space Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support
the health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
2. Minimum Requirements:
a. On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses, usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square feet per
bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet (15').
b. On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located in
the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
c. On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
d. On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than
twelve feet (12').
3. Standards:
a. For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall meet the standards as set forth in subsections 14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this
chapter.
b. For single family uses and two family uses open space shall be located behind the principal dwelling in an area visible and easily accessible from
the principal dwelling and shall consist of open planted green space, which may include trees, planters, gardens, and other amenities that support
passive recreation or leisure activities. Paved areas shall not be counted toward usable open space. For attached single family uses, rooftop or
upper floor open air terraces or rear yard-facing porches, including screened-in porches (non-habitable space only) may count toward the open
space requirement.
4. Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according to the provisions and approval criteria of section 14-4B-1, "Minor
Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances, provided the
additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the allowed
occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code):
a. In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces (surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2) off-street
parking spaces; or
b. If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that there is
practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
c. The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 266/715
d. The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
e. Approval criteria:
(1) The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new
buildings or additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property; and
(2) The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
(3) Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception are mitigated to the extent possible. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
Table 2C-2(a): Dimensional Requirements For All Commercial Zones, Except The MU Zone9
CO-
1
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 10 01 01 None 258 None 1 or
33
CN-1
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 5 01 01 See subsection 14-2C-7E of
this article
22 or 352
18 1
CH-1
None n/a 100 None 10 01 01 None None None 1
CI-1
None n/a None
None 10 01 01 None 35 None 1
CC-2
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 10 01 01 None 35 None 2
CB-2
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 0 01 01 12 45 None 27
CB-5
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 0 or
104
01 01 12 75 25 35
CB-
10
None See table 2C-2(c) of this
section
None
None 0 or
104
01 01 12 None 25 106
n/a = Not applicable
Notes:
1. A side setback or rear setback is not required where the side lot line or rear lot line abuts a nonresidential zone. However, where a side lot line
or rear lot line abuts a residential zone, a setback at least equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the
residential zone boundary.
2. Maximum height is 22 feet for one-story buildings, with the following exception: One-story buildings may exceed 22 feet in height if there are
clerestory windows facing the street that give the appearance of second floor space. The maximum height for all other buildings is 35 feet.
3. Maximum FAR is 3, except for lots that abut or are across the street from a single-family residential zone, in which case the maximum FAR is 1.
Hospitals are exempt from the FAR limit in the CO-1 Zone.
4. A front setback is not required, except for buildings that front on Burlington Street. Buildings must be set back at least 10 feet from the Burlington
Street right-of-way. Building columns supporting upper stories may be located within this 10 foot setback, provided an adequate pedestrian
passageway is maintained.
5. Maximum FAR is 3, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For lots with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a
maximum of 5.
6. Maximum FAR is 10, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For lots with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a
maximum of 15.
7. Maximum FAR is 2, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For lots with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a
maximum of 3.
8. Additional height is allowed under certain circumstances. See subsection C1d(2) of this section.
9. Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection 14-2C-4E of this section.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4479, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4482, 5-15-2012; Ord.
15-4626, 6-16-2015; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
Table 2C-2(b): Dimensional Requirements For The Mixed Use Zone (MU)7
Zone
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Setbacks
Maximum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Total
Area
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/
Dwelling Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
Minimum
Height
(Ft.)
FAR
Zone
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 267/715
MU
Detached single-family and
detached zero lot line
3,000
3,000 30 20 5/156
5+22
20 35 50% 50%
Two-family (duplex) 3,600
1,800 45 20 5/156
5+22
20 355 50% 50%
Attached single-family 1,800
1,800 20/284
20 5/156
0/103
20 35 50% 50%
Multi-family 5,000
See table 2C-2(c) of
this section
45 20 5/156
5+22
5+22
355 50% 50%
Group living 5,000
See chapter 4, article
B of this title
45 20 5/156
5+22
5+22
355 50% 50%
Nonresidential1 None
n/a None 20 5/156
5+22
5+22
355 50% n/a
n/a = Not applicable
Notes:
1. Nonresidential uses must comply with the standards listed in this table unless specified otherwise in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
2. Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories, plus 2 feet for each additional story. For detached zero lot line dwellings, see applicable setback
regulations in chapter 4, article B of this title.
3. See applicable setback requirements in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and 28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are attached, lots
must be 28 feet wide.
5. Maximum height is 35 feet. However, if any portion of a two-family use, multi-family use, group living use, or a nonresidential use is located within 15
feet of a property that contains an existing single-family use or within 15 feet of a single-family zone boundary, then the portion of the building located
within 15 feet of said property or boundary may not exceed 21/2 stories in height.
6. Minimum principal building setback is 5 feet. Maximum principal building setback is 15 feet. See subsection 14-2C-9D, "Maximum Setback", of this
article.
7. Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection 14-2C-4E of this section.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 12-4482, 5-15-2012; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
Table 2C-2(c): Maximum Density Standards
For Multi-Family Dwellings In Commercial Zones
Zone
CO-1, CC-2,
CN-1 And MU
CB-2
CB-5
And
CB-10
Minimum lot area per unit (in
square feet):
Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit
2,725 435 There is no minimum lot area per unit standard. However, the number of 3-
bedroom units per lot may not exceed 30% of the total number of units on the
lot
2-bedroom unit 2,725 875
3-bedroom unit 2,725 1,315
Maximum number of bedrooms
per multi-family dwelling unit
3 3 3
Minimum bedroom size1
(square feet)
100 100 100
Note:
1. New bedrooms must be a minimum of 100 square feet in size. However, for purposes of the provisions within this table, any existing habitable room that
is larger than 70 square feet in size with a horizontal dimension of at least 7 feet, that meets the egress requirements as specified in the Building Code,
and is not a typical shared living space, such as a living room, dining area, kitchen, or bathroom will be considered a bedroom. Bedrooms that exceed 225
square feet in size or have any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum
number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
(Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
Zone
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum
Setbacks Building Bulk
Total
Area
(Sq.
TFot.t)a l
Area
(Sq.
Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Area/Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Height
(Ft.)
Height
(Ft.)
Total
Building
Coverage
To tal
Building
Coverage
Front
Setback
Coverage
Fro nt
Setback
Coverage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 268/715
14-2C-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this
Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection 17-5-
18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2C-6: COMMERCIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The commercial site development standards ensure that commercial development is compatible in scale and intensity to the surrounding
development, unsightly elements are screened from public view, and that safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation is established. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
B. Applicability:
1. The standards of this section apply to all development in the CO-1, CC-2, CI-1, and CH-1 Zones, unless specifically exempted. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-
18-2011)
2. Development in the CN-1 Zone is subject to the CN-1 site development standards specified in section 14-2C-7 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
3. Development in the CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 Zones is subject to the Central Business site development standards specified in section 14-2C-8 of this
article. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
4. Development in the MU Zone is subject to the MU Zone site development standards specified in section 14-2C-9 of this article.
C. Site Plan Review Procedure: Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this section will occur as a part of the site plan review
process. (See title 18 of this Code.)
D. Surface Parking Lot Setback Requirements:
1. Front Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street-side lot lines. However, any
loading area, parking spaces or aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the
front or street-side lot line.
2. Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet-side) side or rear lot
line. However, parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a property zoned residential.
The City may exempt from these setback regulations any specific locations along a lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an
abutting lot.
3. Drives:
a. Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part of
the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least
three feet (3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water
onto adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff. Any specific locations along
a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these standards.
b. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
E. Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are regulated as an accessory use and are only allowed in certain zones according to the provisions
specified for drive-through facilities in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
F. Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation: The site must be designed to promote safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation
according to the following standards:
1. Pedestrian walkways must be provided between principal buildings and abutting rights-of-way. The walkways provided on site must connect to
adjacent public sidewalks and trails.
2. On commercial sites with multiple buildings, sidewalks or other approved pedestrian routes must be provided between the principal buildings on the
site. The City may exempt commercial sites where pedestrian traffic between buildings is rare or unlikely.
3. Pedestrian routes must be provided on site that connect parking areas to building entrances. Pedestrian routes from and through parking areas to
principal building entrances must be identified on the site plan and integrated into the parking lot design.
4. Pedestrian routes must be continuous, clear of obstructions, and easily identifiable as protected pedestrian routes. Landscaping, curbing, raised
paving, bollards, distinctive paving materials, and other similar means may be used to separate and protect pedestrian routes from vehicular traffic.
5. Bicycle parking facilities must be located in areas convenient to building entrances, but must be located so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
G. Landscaping And Screening:
1. All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking, vehicular and pedestrian use areas, sidewalk cafes and plazas must be landscaped with
trees and/or plant materials. A landscaping plan must be submitted for site plan review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 269/715
2. Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
3. Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening
is required for properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting
property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking or loading area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot.
4. Where a lot occupied by a commercial or industrial use abuts or is across a street or railroad right of way from a residential zone, daycare use,
educational facility, parks and open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking and loading areas and outdoor work and storage areas must be
located behind buildings or screened from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3 standard. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
5. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that the screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245,
12-12-2006)
H. Mechanical Structures: All mechanical structures must be set back and screened from public view according to the applicable provisions set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
I. Outdoor Storage And Display:
1. CO-1 And CC-2 Zones: Outdoor storage and display of materials is not permitted in the CO-1 or CC-2 zone, except for the following: (Ord. 11-4450,
10-18-2011)
a. Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in areas immediately adjacent to a principal building. However, the display area
may not be located along any building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of a public street and may not be located in a manner that obstructs
building entrances and exits, sidewalks, bicycle parking areas, pedestrian routes, or vehicular use areas.
b. An approved temporary use. A temporary use permit is required. (See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
c. In the CC-2 zone, an approved outdoor storage and display oriented retail use.
2. CH-1 And CI-1 Zones:
a. Outdoor storage of materials in the CH-1 and CI-1 zones is permitted, provided it is concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it is not
feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right of way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering
Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built around the storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and the public right
of way.
b. All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the
required screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
c. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence
that a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built
to the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
d. Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in the CH-1 and CI-1 zones, provided it is set back at least ten feet (10') from
public rights of way and landscaped to at least the S1 standard.
e. Any outdoor display area located along a side or rear lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet (10') from
said lot line and screened from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. If the display area is adjacent to a residential zone
boundary, it has to be screened to the S3 standard.
f. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor display may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
g. Screening for outdoor storage and display areas may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change
in grade or by natural or humanmade features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by
the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
3. All Commercial Zones: The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5,
article H, "Performance Standards", of this title, and the international fire code, as amended.
J. Balconies:
1. Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
2. The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4') from a side lot line.
3. The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted.
K. Standards For Large Retail Uses:
1. Applicability: The provisions of this subsection apply to retail uses over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in size. The intent of these standards is to
facilitate adaptive reuse of large retail commercial structures, to moderate scale of large buildings, and to ensure consistent appearance with other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 270/715
shopping center developments.
2. Facades And Exterior Walls:
a. Facades over one hundred feet (100') in length that are visible from public streets and/or include public entrances shall incorporate wall
projections or recesses a minimum of three feet (3') in depth for a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous feet within each one hundred feet (100') of
facade length. Such recesses and/or projections shall extend over a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the length of the facade, and no
uninterrupted facade may exceed one hundred feet (100') in length.
b. For facades that face public streets or include public entrances, features that provide visual interest such as arcades, storefront windows that allow
views into the interior of the building, display windows that are set into the building wall, entry areas, awnings or similar features must be
incorporated along at least sixty percent (60%) of the facade. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. Building Details: Buildings must include details and features that provide visual interest, reduce the perception of the mass of the building, and
provide a cohesive pattern to the building. Any building facade that faces a public street or includes a public entrance shall include no less than three
(3) of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall occur along the vertical plane of the building. An example of a change that
occurs on the vertical plane would be a change from stone on the lower portion of the building to stucco on the upper portion. All elements that occur
along the horizontal plane of the building shall repeat at intervals of no more than fifty feet (50'). These visual patterns must be cohesive with the
articulation of the facade.
a. Color change.
b. Texture change.
c. Material module change.
d. Expression of an architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twelve inches (12") in width, such as an offset, reveal or
projection. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
4. Roof Details:
a. Flat roofs must incorporate parapets that conceal rooftop equipment such as HVAC units from public view. The average height of such parapets
shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the height of the supporting wall and at no point shall exceed one-third (1/3) of the height of the
supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature a three-dimensional cornice treatment.
b. Sloping roofs must not exceed the average height of the supporting walls and must include overhanging eaves that extend no less than three feet
(3') past the supporting walls.
c. The roof of the building must be designed with three (3) or more roof slope planes. It is encouraged that changes in the roof correspond with
articulation of the building facade. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
5. Building Materials:
a. The building materials shall be predominantly quality exterior building materials, including brick, masonry, stone, stucco, or textured concrete
masonry units. Concrete panels with a veneer of brick or masonry may be approved provided the material gives the appearance of one or more of
the high quality building materials listed above. Stamped concrete panels will only be considered if they are finished with patterns and colors such
that they appear to be brick or masonry. "Predominantly" is defined as at least seventy five percent (75%) of the exterior of the entire building, but
not necessarily of each building wall. For example, use of such materials should be concentrated along building walls that are visible from public
streets or that contain public entrances.
b. Use of smooth faced concrete block, unadorned tilt-up concrete panels, prefabricated steel or vinyl panels or sheets should be minimized. If used,
these materials may cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the exterior of the entire building and should be reserved for building walls
that are less visible to the public. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
6. Entryways: Each principal building shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with no less than three (3) of the features listed
below. Where additional stores are located within the principal building, each store shall have at least one exterior customer entrance with no less
than three (3) of the following features:
a. Canopy or portico.
b. Overhang.
c. Recess/projection.
d. Arcade.
e. Raised cornice parapet over the door.
f. Archway.
g. Outdoor patio.
h. Display windows.
i. Storefront windows that allow views into the interior of the store.
j. Tile work and moldings that are integrated into the building structure and design.
k. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2C-7: CN-1 ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 271/715
A. Purpose: The CN-1 zone site development standards ensure that commercial development is compatible in scale and intensity to the surrounding
residential neighborhoods. These standards also ensure that neighborhood commercial areas are carefully designed to be inviting for pedestrians by
requiring buildings to be located close to and oriented toward streets or pedestrian plazas; ensuring that pedestrian routes are clearly separated from
driveways and parking areas; requiring that buildings be constructed with street level storefront windows and clearly demarcated pedestrian entrances;
and by requiring that parking be located away from the street in well landscaped areas.
B. Applicability:
1. The standards of this section apply to all new development in a CN-1 zone.
2. Exceptions to the standards and requirements of this section may be approved during the site plan review process in CN-1 zones that were in
existence and at least partially developed by June 7, 2002, if the city determines that compliance with the subject standard or requirement is not
feasible. However, all proposed development must meet the standards of this section to the extent possible.
3. Alternative design solutions may be approved during the site plan review process if it is demonstrated that the alternative design solution meets the
intent of this section.
C. CN-1 Site Plan Review Procedure:
1. Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning and
community development or designee to discuss the application of the CN-1 zone site development standards to the subject property.
2. Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
D. Rezoning To CN-1:
1. A CN-1 zoning district may not exceed ten (10) acres in size.
2. A plan showing the general design of the proposed development must be submitted with any CN-1 rezoning application. The plan must include
provisions for landscaping, screening and buffering between the proposed commercial development and adjacent residential zones.
E. Build-To Line: The required build-to line in the CN-1 zone is an imaginary line running parallel to and located five feet (5') back from the street-side lot
line along the subject lot's primary street frontage. The primary street frontage is the frontage to which the street address is assigned.
1. Requirement: All new buildings must be located such that at least sixty five percent (65%) of the primary street frontage of the subject lot contains
buildings set back no further than the build-to line.
2. Exceptions: Exceptions to the build-to line requirement may be approved during the site plan review process for the following site elements:
a. Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the articulation standard in subsection M of this section.
b. Building entrances, including stoops, stairways, and ramps.
c. Trees and landscaping.
d. Pedestrian plazas.
e. Arcades.
f. Public art.
g. Sidewalk cafes.
F. Location Of Parking, Loading, Drives, And Aisles:
1. No more than thirty five percent (35%) of the street frontage of a lot may be comprised of off street parking spaces, drives, and aisles located in front
of a building. Loading areas are not permitted in front of the building. For purposes of this provision, "in front of the building" means between the
street right of way line and the building.
2. On corner lots, no off street parking spaces may be located in front of a building within one hundred feet (100') of the point of intersection of street
right of way lines.
3. Parking and loading areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any street-side lot line and at least five feet (5') from any nonstreet-side or
rear lot line, unless the lot abuts a residential zone. Parking areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any rear or side lot line that abuts a
residential zone.
4. Loading spaces must be located so that trucks or vans loading or unloading do not back onto or out of a street.
5. Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part of the
parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet
(3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto
adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle storm water runoff. Any specific locations along a side
or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these standards.
6. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
G. Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are regulated as an accessory use and are only allowed according to the provisions specified for drivethrough
facilities in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 272/715
H. Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation:
1. Pedestrian access must be provided to adjacent residential areas and to abutting rights of way. The sidewalks provided on site must connect to
adjacent public sidewalks and trails.
2. Each commercial tenant space must be accessible from other tenant spaces by sidewalks or other approved pedestrian routes. Pedestrian routes
must be continuous, clear of obstructions, and easily identifiable as a protected pedestrian route.
3. Pedestrian routes must be separated from parking and vehicular use areas by curbs, landscaping or other physical barriers. When pedestrian paths
cross drives, aisles, and vehicle travel lanes, they must be clearly identified with materials such as textured or brick paving, and must be integrated
into the wider network of pedestrian walkways. Pavement textures are encouraged elsewhere in the parking lot as surface materials or as accents.
4. Parking lot layout and design must promote safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Protected pedestrian walkways, leading to
sidewalks that abut store entrances, must be provided within parking lots.
5. Bicycle parking facilities must be located in convenient areas of the development and must be located so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
I. Landscaping And Screening:
1. All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking, vehicular and pedestrian access, sidewalk cafes and plazas must be landscaped with
trees and plant materials. A landscaping plan must be submitted for site plan review.
2. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
3. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening is
required for properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting
property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
J. Mechanical Structures: All mechanical structures must be set back and screened from public view according to the applicable provisions set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
K. Outdoor Storage And Display:
1. Outdoor storage of materials is not permitted in the CN-1 zone.
2. Outdoor display of materials is not permitted, except in the following situations:
a. Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in areas immediately adjacent to a principal building. However, the display area
may not be located along any building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of a public street and may not be located in a manner that obstructs
building entrances and exits, sidewalks, bicycle parking areas, pedestrian routes, or vehicular use areas.
b. A temporary use permit is required. (See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
3. The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H, "Performance
Standards", of this title and according to the international fire code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
L. Street Level Windows: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the building facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height from the adjacent exterior
grade must be comprised of clear and highly transparent windows and doors. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Such windows
must allow views into the interior space or be storefront display windows that are set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside building wall
do not qualify. The bottom of such windows must be no more than four feet (4') above the level of the adjacent sidewalk (see figure 2C.2 of this
section). (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
Figure 2C.2 - Storefront Window Example
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 273/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
M. Building Bulk And Articulation:
1. The maximum length of any building wall is two hundred seventy feet (270'). This standard applies whether the building contains a single business or
multiple businesses or storefronts.
2. For buildings greater than fifty feet (50') in width, the horizontal plane of any street-facing facade of the building must be broken into modules that
give the appearance of smaller, individual storefronts. These modules must meet the following standards:
a. Each module must be no greater than fifty feet (50') in width.
b. Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least three (3) of the following means:
(1) Variation in the wall plane by recessing a building module from the adjacent building module;
(2) Variation in material colors, types or textures;
(3) Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
(4) Variation in the architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
(5) Break or variation in window pattern;
(6) Variation in the use of upper floor balconies and recesses. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
3. For buildings that are fifty feet (50') or less in width, at least every twelve feet (12') in length of the street-facing wall must be articulated by a window,
doorway, perceptible change in the wall plane, setback, artwork, or a change in building material. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4253, 2-
20-2007)
N. Building Entrances:
1. Primary building entries must be distinguished by at least two (2) of the following means:
a. Canopies or awnings.
b. Recesses.
c. Raised cornice or similar architectural features.
d. Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings, that are integrated in the building structure and design. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
2. To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to storefronts and the ground level floor height should be no more than one foot (1')
above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust this requirement.
However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above the
level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than three feet (3')
above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
O. Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors And Lifts: For purposes of this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead to
floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the first or
ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways, exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
1. Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are prohibited. The city may allow exterior fire egress structures on existing buildings that
cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a building that faces a street.
2. Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
3. The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4') from a side lot line.
4. The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-
2006)
14-2C-8: CENTRAL BUSINESS SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The following site development standards are intended to help ensure that the city's central business district develops as an attractive,
compact urban area. The standards ensure that parking facilities are integrated into the design of developments so that streets are safe and attractive
for pedestrians. Particular attention is focused on street level building facades in order to prevent fortresslike facades, monotonous streetscapes, and
to enhance public safety by providing opportunities for surveillance of the street from the interior of buildings. Excellence in design is encouraged in
order to enhance and maintain economic development opportunities in the downtown area. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B. Applicability And Procedure: The standards of this section apply to all development in the CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones, unless otherwise noted herein.
C. Site Plan Review Procedure:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 274/715
1. Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning and
community development or designee to discuss the application of the central business site development standards to the subject property. (Ord. 11-
4450, 10-18-2011)
2. Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
3. Alternative design solutions may be approved if it is demonstrated that the alternatives meet the intent of this section.
D. Minimum Setback:
1. A setback is not required, except for buildings that abut Burlington Street.
2. The first story of buildings that abut Burlington Street must be set back ten feet (10') from the right of way line. Building columns supporting upper
stories may be located within this ten foot (10') setback; provided, that an adequate pedestrian passageway is maintained.
3. Doorways adjacent to a right of way must be set back so that doors do not swing into a right of way. Similarly, stairways and ramps must not be
located in a right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Maximum Setback:
1. No portion of the first story of a building shall be set back more than twelve feet (12') from a front or street-side lot line, or a lot line that abuts City
Plaza. If a setback is provided, the setback area must be used for one or more of the following purposes: (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
a. Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the articulation standard in subsection O of this section.
b. Building entrances, including stoops, stairways and ramps.
c. Trees and landscaping.
d. Pedestrian plazas.
e. Arcades.
f. Public art.
g. Sidewalk cafes. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
2. In the CB-10 zone, to prevent unsafe, unkempt spaces between buildings, the first two (2) stories of a building must be built to the side lot line,
unless the subject building wall abuts an alley or usable outdoor space, such as a plaza, green, courtyard, or midblock pedestrian passage. Minor
adjustments to this standard may be approved by the building official to account for irregular lot lines or to accommodate structural requirements,
such as installing footings or foundations, or to maintain the structural integrity of an adjacent building, as long as the intent of this standard is
achieved. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
F. Parking In CB-10 Zone: Off street parking is strictly regulated in the CB-10 zone according to the procedures and standards listed in chapter 5, article A,
"Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
G. Surface Parking Location Standards In The CB-2 And CB-5 Zones: If surface parking and loading areas are provided on the street level, they must be
subordinate to a principal use allowed in the zone. Therefore, the following standards apply: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
1. Location:
a. Parking and loading are not permitted for the first thirty feet (30') of lot depth as measured from the front building line. Surface parking, parking
within accessory structures, and all loading and unloading facilities must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from view of
fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located between the building and the street or within any side setback area. (Ord. 11-4450,
10-18-2011)
b. Parking and loading areas must be set back at least five feet (5') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a nonresidential zone. Any specific
locations along a side or rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from this standard.
c. Parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any rear or side lot line that abuts a residential zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
2. Drives:
a. Vehicular access to parking should be located and designed to minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians and to preserve street
frontages for active building uses. If available, alley or rear lane access is preferred. If alley access is not feasible due to topographical limitations
or other unique circumstances, driveway access from a street may be allowed, but must be designed in a manner that will best meet the objectives
listed in this subsection G2a. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
b. Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area are considered part of the
parking area and must meet the location standards for parking areas as specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set
back at least three feet (3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the
flow of water onto adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff. Any specific
locations along a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these standards.
c. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
3. Landscape Screening:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 275/715
a. Any portion of a parking area that is not completely concealed from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of abutting
properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening is required for properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas, loading
areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from
this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
b. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-
12-2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
H. Landscaping: All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking, vehicular and pedestrian use areas, sidewalk cafes, and plazas, must be
landscaped with trees and/or plant materials. A landscaping plan for such areas must be submitted for site plan review.
I. Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are not permitted in the CB-5 and CB-10 zones.
J. Mechanical Equipment, Utility Meters, And Dumpsters:
1. In no case shall mechanical equipment or utility meters be located along the street side of a building. Mechanical equipment and meters must be
placed at the rear of the property whenever possible. If this cannot be achieved, such equipment may be located along the side of the building,
provided that the equipment is screened and set back according to the provisions for mechanical structures set forth in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
2. Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are not visible from public streets and may not be located in a right of way.
K. Outdoor Storage And Display:
1. Outdoor storage and display areas are not permitted in the CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones, except for approved temporary uses (see chapter 4, article
D of this title) and special exceptions (see chapter 4, article B of this title).
2. The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H, "Performance
Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire code, as amended.
L. Commercial Space:
1. On the ground level floor of a building, the floor to structural ceiling height must be at least fourteen feet (14').
2. In the CB-10 zone, on the second floor of a building, the floor to structural ceiling height must be at least eleven feet (11').
3. In the CB-2 and CB-5 zones, the first floor of a building must meet the building code specifications for commercial uses. In the CB-10 zone, for the
first two (2) floors of a building, construction must meet the building code specifications for commercial uses.
M. Building Entrances:
1. Primary building entries must be distinguished by at least two (2) of the following means:
a. Canopies or awnings;
b. Recesses;
c. Raised cornice or similar architectural features;
d. Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings that are integrated in the building structure and design.
2. To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to storefronts must be at grade and the ground level floor height should be no more
than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust
this requirement. However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one
foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more
than three feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
3. To provide safe access for residents within a mixed use building, any building containing a residential use must have at least one door located on the
exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to the dwelling units within the building. Said entrance must be located on a building wall that
faces a street, public sidewalk, or pedestrian plaza and is visible from and easily accessed from said street, sidewalk, or plaza. Access to dwelling
units must not be solely through a parking garage or from an alley. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
N. Minimum Fenestration:
1. Along any street-facing building facade and along any portion of a storefront facade that abuts a pedestrian plaza, a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
of the building facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height from the adjacent exterior grade must be comprised of clear and highly transparent
windows and doors. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Such windows must allow views into the interior space or be storefront
display windows that are set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside building wall do not qualify. Where possible, the bottom of such
storefront windows should be no more than two feet (2') above the level of the adjacent exterior grade. However, on sloping sites where it is difficult
to meet this two foot (2') standard, the height above grade may vary, but shall not exceed four feet (4') above the adjacent exterior grade (see section
14-2C-7, figure 2C.2 of this article). (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
2. In the CB-10 zone, to encourage office and other commercial uses on the second floor of a building, no less than thirty percent (30%) of any second
floor facade that faces a public street or pedestrian plaza shall be comprised of windows. Glazing shall not be reflective (mirrored).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 276/715
O. Building Articulation:
1. For buildings greater than fifty feet (50') in width, the horizontal plane of any street-facing facade of the building must be broken into modules that
give the appearance of smaller, individual storefronts. These modules must meet the following standards:
a. Each module must be no greater than fifty feet (50') in width.
b. Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least three (3) of the following means:
(1) Variation in the wall plane by recessing a building module from the adjacent building module;
(2) Variation in material colors, types or textures;
(3) Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
(4) Variation in the architectural details such as decorative pilasters, banding, reveals, stone or tile accents;
(5) Break or variation in window pattern;
(6) Variation in the use of upper floor balconies and recesses.
2. For buildings that are fifty feet (50') or less in width, at least every twelve feet (12') in length of the street-facing wall must be articulated by a window,
doorway, perceptible change in the wall plane, setback, artwork, or a change in building material. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
P. Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors, And Lifts: For purposes of this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead to
floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the first or
ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways, exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
1. Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are prohibited, with the following exceptions: The city will allow exterior lifts on existing
buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet accessibility requirements, provided the lift is not located on a wall of a building that faces a street
or the city plaza. The city may allow exterior fire egress structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements,
provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a building that faces a street or the city plaza.
2. Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
3. The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4') from a side lot line.
4. The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-
2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
Q. Bonus Provisions: The following bonus provisions are intended to provide an incentive for developments to incorporate features that provide a public
benefit and to encourage excellence in architectural design. Floor area in excess of that allowed by the permitted base floor area or dwelling units in
excess of the density otherwise achievable under the provisions of this article may be granted. The director of planning and community development
will determine whether the proposed features are appropriate in design and location. Decisions of the director may be appealed to the board of
adjustment. Bonuses allowed are enumerated in table 2C-4 of this section: (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
Table 2C-4: Bonus Provisions
CB-2 and CB-5 zones:
Masonry finish or architectural metal, not including metal siding, on all nonfenestrated areas of walls
visible from a public street. For purposes of this provision, "masonry" shall be defined as fired brick,
stone, or similar such material, not including concrete blocks and undressed poured concrete. Masonry
may include stucco or like material when used in combination with other masonry finish.
0.75 floor area ratio.
The provision of a theater. 5 square feet of floor area for every 1
square foot of theater area.
The provision of funds for all street furniture, lighting and landscaping improvements along adjacent
street right of way in accordance with any streetscape plan approved by the city.
0.25 floor area ratio.
Provision of pedestrian activity areas, such as sidewalk cafes, adjacent to but not in the public right of
way, provided such areas do not exceed a depth of 12 feet from the front lot line.
3 square feet of floor area for every 1
square foot of pedestrian activity area.
Usable open space of size and at a grade that, at a minimum, allows passive recreational uses and is
accessible to all residential occupants of a building. Such space may include areas such as yards,
courtyards, terraces, and rooftop gardens designed and improved for outdoor activities. Balconies
serving individual dwelling units and required setback areas are not eligible for this bonus.
2 square feet of floor area for every 1
square foot of usable open space.
Adaptive reuse of any property designated as an Iowa City landmark, eligible for landmark designation,
registered on the national register of historic places, or listed as a historically significant building as
determined by the survey and evaluation of the historic and architectural resources for the vicinity.
Up to 3 square feet of floor area for
every 1 square foot of floor area
reused. Additional floor area may be
constructed on the vacant portions of
the property that is being reused or on
abutting properties.
Public Benefit Bonus Allowed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 277/715
CB-10 zone:
Provision of an off street loading area that meets the requirements set forth in chapter 5, article A, "Off
Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
An additional 2.0 floor area ratio, not
to exceed 12.
Provision of class A office space on floors above the ground level floor of the building. To qualify for this
bonus, only nonresidential uses shall be allowed in the class A office space. As defined by the Building
Owners And Managers Association International (BOMA), class A office space is space that is of a
quality that is attractive for premier office users with rents above average for the area. Class A office
buildings have high quality standard finishes, state of the art systems, exceptional accessibility and a
definite market presence.
Up to 2 square feet of floor area for
every 1 square foot of class A office
space provided on floors above the
ground level floor of the building.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4479, 5-1-2012)
R. Alternative Dimensional And Site Development Standards For CB-2 Properties In The Riverfront Crossings District: As envisioned in the downtown and
riverfront crossings master plan, properties zoned CB-2 that are located in the riverfront crossings district shall be allowed additional building height
and floor area, and alternative minimum fenestration standards, building articulation standards, and lower parking requirements as set forth below:
1. Maximum building height: Six (6) stories, not to exceed eighty five feet (85').
2. Maximum FAR: Five (5).
3. Along any building facade that faces a primary street, as designated in the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings master plan, seventy percent
(70%) of the ground level building facade must be comprised of transparent windows and doors (with no more than 10 percent daylight reduction).
4. Along any building facade that faces a street that is not designated a primary street in the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings master plan, a
minimum of forty percent (40%) of the ground level building facade must be comprised of transparent windows and doors (with no more than 10
percent daylight reduction).
5. Alternative building articulation methods may be allowed by design review to accommodate midrise and high rise buildings that have a more
contemporary architectural style, provided the building is designed in a manner that provides a similar or greater level of visual interest or relief as
would be achieved under subsection O, "Building Articulation", of this section. Design review may consider elements that provide visual interest or
relief, such as variations in building materials, glazing or window patterns; extensive building transparency that allows for exceptional daylighting of
interior spaces and views into the interior of the building; canopies or awnings; entranceway features; unique signage, artwork, or other architectural
features.
6. Private, off street parking shall be required at the same ratios as required in the CB-10 zone, as specified in section 14-5A-4, table 5A-1 of this title.
(Ord. 13-4556, 10-1-2013)
14-2C-9: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN MU ZONE:
A. Purpose: The following site development standards help commercial and residential uses coexist in a mixed use zone by ensuring that buildings are
similar in scale and are designed in a manner that will allow buildings to be used for a variety of land uses over time. These standards ensure that
building sites are designed to be inviting for pedestrians by requiring buildings to be located close to and oriented toward streets or pedestrian plazas;
requiring that buildings be constructed with street level storefront windows and clearly demarcated pedestrian entrances; and by requiring that parking
be located away from the street and screened by landscaping.
B. Applicability And Procedure: The standards of this section apply to all development in the mixed use zone.
C. MU Zone Site Plan Review Procedure:
1. Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning and
community development or designee to discuss the application of the MU site development standards to the subject property.
2. Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
3. Alternative design solutions may be approved if it is demonstrated that the alternatives meet the intent of this section.
D. Maximum Setback: For new multi-family, group living, commercial, and civic/institutional buildings, no portion of the first story of a principal building shall
be set back more than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line. Buildings constructed prior to December 28, 2005, are exempt from this maximum. The
setback area must be used for one or more of the following purposes:
1. Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the building standard in subsection G of this section.
2. Building entrances, including stoops, stairways and ramps.
3. Trees and landscaping.
4. Pedestrian plazas.
5. Arcades.
6. Public art.
7. Sidewalk cafes.
Public Benefit Bonus Allowed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 278/715
E. Location And Design Standards For Surface Parking And Detached Garages For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Uses:
1. Location: Surface parking, parking within accessory structures, and loading areas must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from
view of fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located directly between a principal building and the street or within the required side
setback area. Any portion of a parking or loading area that is not completely concealed from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2
standard. (See figures 2C.3 and 2C.4 below.) (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Figure 2C.3 - Location Of Surface Parking
For Properties With A Single Building
Figure 2C.4 - Location Of Parking For Properties
With Multiple Buildings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 279/715
2. Aisles And Drives: Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of the parking area are
considered part of the parking area and must meet the location standards for parking areas as stated in subsection E1 of this section, and the
landscape buffering standard as stated in subsection E3 of this section. A nonhard surfaced drive or aisle that is external to a parking area may not
be located closer than three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of access with a street, alley, or private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives that are
external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet (3') from any side or rear lot line, except under the following circumstances:
a. The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
b. A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle storm water runoff; or
c. Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot; or
d. At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
3. Landscape Buffering:
a. A buffer area at least ten feet (10') in width and landscaped to at least the S2 standard must be provided between any parking area and adjacent
properties and between any parking area and street rights of way. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The
city may exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared
with an abutting lot.
b. A buffer area at least five feet (5') in width and landscaped to the S1 standard must be provided between any parking area containing more than
eight (8) parking spaces and an adjacent alley.
c. No parking area or drive shall be closer than ten feet (10') to any portion of a building other than a garage entrance or loading area apron. This ten
foot (10') area must be used for walkways and landscaping consisting of at least fifty percent (50%) vegetative coverage. If parking spaces are
located where headlights of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground level windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the
windows to at least the S2 standard. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
d. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-
12-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 280/715
F. Building Entrances For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Buildings:
1. For residential uses, buildings must have at least one door on the exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units within the
building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage.
2. When a lot contains one principal building, the building must be oriented such that at least one facade faces a public or private street. The streetfacing
facade must have at least one main entrance to the building, or may contain separate main entrances to ground level dwelling units. If the
building is located on a corner lot, only one wall must meet this requirement.
3. When a lot contains two (2) or more principal buildings, the buildings must be oriented towards a public street, private street, or interior courtyard.
Any building with a street-facing facade must have at least one main entrance oriented toward the street. Buildings located interior to a lot must have
main entrances that are clearly visible from interior private streets/drives or surface parking areas.
4. Main entrances to a building, including main entrances to ground level individual dwelling units, must be clearly demarcated by at least one of the
following means:
a. Recesses.
b. Raised cornice or similar architectural features.
c. Covered porch, canopy, or awning.
d. Transom and sidelight windows.
e. Pilasters and pediment.
f. Other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does not meet this standard.
5. Patio style doors, such as sliding glass doors, may not be used for main entrance doors. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6. To provide for the safety of residents, access to entrance doors of any individual dwelling units located above the ground level floor of a building
must be provided from an enclosed lobby or corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways may not be used as the
primary means of access to upper level units. This provision does not preclude the use of fire egress structures. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
7. A pedestrian circulation system must be provided that connects residential entrances to adjacent public rights of way, and to parking areas and other
on site facilities. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G. Building Scale For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Buildings: The width of the front facade of new buildings must be no
more than forty feet (40'). Buildings may exceed this limitation if the horizontal plane of any street-facing facade of the building is broken into modules
that give the appearance of smaller, individual buildings. Each module must meet the following standards:
1. Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no less than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent modules by a
variation in the wall plane of at least sixteen inches (16") in depth. For buildings that are three (3) or more stories in height, the width of the module
may be increased to forty feet (40').
2. Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
3. Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least one of the following means:
a. Variation in material colors, types or textures;
b. Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
c. Variation in the architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
d. Variation in window pattern;
e. Variation in the use of balconies and recesses. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
H. Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors And Lifts For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Buildings: For purposes of this
subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead to floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a building.
"Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the first or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways, exterior
corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
1. Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are prohibited, with the following exceptions: The city will allow exterior lifts on existing
buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet accessibility requirements, provided the lift is not located on a wall of a building that faces a street.
The city may allow exterior fire egress structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the fire
egress structure is not located on a wall of a building that faces a street.
2. Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential or that contains an
existing single-family use. Buildings that are set back at least forty feet (40') from any such property are exempt from this standard.
3. The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4') from a side lot line.
4. The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-
2006)
I. Building Materials For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Buildings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 281/715
1. Buildings not constructed of masonry or stucco must have the following trim elements incorporated into the exterior design and construction of the
building:
a. Window and door trim that is not less than three inches (3") wide.
b. Corner boards that are not less than three inches (3") wide, unless wood clapboards are used and mitered at the corners.
c. Frieze boards, not less than five inches (5") wide, located below the eaves.
Figure 2C.5 - Building Materials
2. Any portion of a building that is clearly visible from the street must be constructed using similar materials and design as the front facade.
3. Exterior walls of buildings that are not predominantly masonry or stucco must have a durable base consisting of masonry, stucco, or dressed
concrete that extends at least two feet (2') in height above grade. If the base consists of concrete, it must have a decorative face.
4. Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any facade that faces a street-side lot line.
5. Where an exterior wall material changes along the horizontal plane of a building, the change must occur on an inside corner of the building.
6. For buildings where the exterior wall material used on the side of a building is a different material than what is used on the street-facing wall, the
street-facing wall material must wrap around the corners to the sides of the building for at least three feet (3').
7. Where an exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a belt
course, soldier course, band board or other trim, to provide a transition from one material to the other.
Figure 2C.6 - Changes In Exterior Wall Materials
J. Mechanical Equipment/Utility Meters:
1. In no case shall mechanical equipment or utility meters be located along the street side of a building. Mechanical structures must be set back and
screened according to the applicable provisions set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
2. Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are not visible from public streets and may not be located in a right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 282/715
K. Ground Floor Commercial Space: The following provisions apply to new buildings constructed for multi-family, group living, or commercial uses. These
provisions provide the opportunity for ground level commercial uses by requiring buildings to be constructed in a way that is conducive for commercial
uses. These provisions do not apply to buildings that are constructed for single-family and two-family uses and are not intended to prevent buildings
constructed originally for single-family and two-family uses from being converted over time to other uses allowed in the MU zone.
1. On the ground level floor, the floor to ceiling height must be at least fourteen feet (14').
2. For the ground level floor of the building, construction must meet the building code specifications for commercial uses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the building facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height from the adjacent exterior grade must be
comprised of clear and highly transparent windows and doors. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Such windows must allow
views into the interior space or be storefront display windows that are set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside building wall do not
qualify. The bottom of such windows must be no more than four feet (4') above the level of the adjacent sidewalk (see section 14-2C-7, figure 2C.2 of
this article). (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
4. To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to the ground level floor of a building that fronts on a public street or pedestrian plaza
should be no more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. In addition, the ground level floor height for
buildings that front on a street should be no more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping building
sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust these requirements. However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of
any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the
ground level floor of the building must be no more than three feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point
along a street-facing building facade. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
L. Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are not permitted in the MU zone.
M. Outdoor Storage And Display:
1. Outdoor storage and display areas are not permitted in the MU zone, except for approved temporary uses. (See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
2. The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H, "Performance
Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire code, as amended.
N. Single-Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone: The following provisions apply to single-family uses and two-family uses in the MU zone. Two-family
uses and attached single-family dwellings are also subject to the applicable provisions contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title. If provisions of this subsection conflict with provisions in chapter 4, article B of this
title, the provisions of this subsection will apply.
1. Garage entrances and/or off street parking must be oriented toward and accessed from a rear alley or private rear lane, if available. If an alley or
private rear lane is not available, then driveway access is permitted from the street, provided the driveway does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width
and any street-facing garage entrance is set back at least twenty feet (20') further than the street-facing facade of the dwelling. The length of any
street-facing garage wall that is visible from the street may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the street-facing building facade, as
measured along the same street frontage. On corner lots, only one street-facing garage wall must meet this standard. (See figure 2C.7 of this section
for some examples of acceptable garage placement.)
Figure 2C.7 - Examples Of Garage Placement In The MU Zone
2. Each dwelling unit must have a main entrance that is visible from and oriented toward the street. To meet this standard, the main entrance must face
the street, be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street, or open onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an alley.
3. At least fifteen percent (15%) of any street-facing facade must be windows or pedestrian entryway doors. Windows in garage doors do not count
towards meeting this standard, but windows in a garage wall do count towards meeting this standard. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2C-10: MINOR MODIFICATIONS TO SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A minor modification to adjust specific provisions of section 14-2C-6, 14-2C-7, 14-2C-8, or 14-2C-9 of this article, may be requested in either of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 283/715
qualifying situations listed below. Such requests will be reviewed by the design review committee, the director of planning and community development,
and the building official according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following
approval criteria. The following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval criteria listed in section 14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of
this title:
A. Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard impractical. In
such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
1. The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and steeply
sloping lots.
2. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative design is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
3. The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
4. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
5. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
6. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
B. Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the applicant must
demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
1. The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
2. The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally or better
meets the purpose of the site development standards.
3. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
4. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
5. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
14-2C-11: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Historic Preservation Exception: The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or modify any dimensional or site development
standards listed in this article or in chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title that would prevent use or
occupancy of a property designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the National Register of Historic Places. In addition to the general
special exception approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, the following approval criteria must be met:
1. The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
2. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission.
B. Highway Commercial Zone Exemption:
1. Dairy products processing and packaging facilities established in the highway commercial zone prior to January 1983 are to be treated as a
conforming use and as such may continue. Such a facility must otherwise comply with all the requirements and regulations of the highway
commercial zone and other applicable regulations of this title.
2. If an existing dairy products processing and packaging facility, as described in subsection B1 of this section, is discontinued for a period of one year,
such facility will lose the conforming rights granted in said subsection B1 of this section and must be converted to a use that is allowed in the CH-1
zone according to section 14-2C-2, table 2C-1, of this article. The dairy products processing and packaging facility will be deemed "converted" when
the existing use is terminated and a new use commences and continues for a period of seven (7) consecutive days. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
C. Riverfront Crossings District:
FIGURE 2C.8
RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 284/715
(Ord. 13-4520, 4-9-2013)
ARTICLE D. INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONES
14-2D-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established industrial and research zones are listed below. When this title refers to industrial zones
it is referring to the general industrial zone (I-1) and the heavy industrial zone (I-2) listed below. When this title refers to the research zones, it is referring to
the research development park zone (RDP) and the office research park zone (ORP) listed below.
A. General Industrial Zone (I-1): The purpose of the general industrial zone (I-1) is to provide the opportunity for the development of most types of
industrial firms. Regulations are designed to protect adjacent development.
B. Heavy Industrial Zone (I-2): The purpose of the heavy industrial zone (I-2) is to provide for heavy or intense industries. The zone is designed primarily
for manufacturing and fabrication activities, including large scale or specialized operations having external effects that could impact adjacent less
intense commercial or industrial uses.
C. Research Development Park Zone (RDP): The purpose of the research development park zone (RDP) is to provide areas for the development of office,
research, production or assembly firms and other complementary uses. Office and research uses should predominate in the zone. The requirements of
this zone protect uses in this zone from adverse impacts of uses on adjacent land. Hotels, motels and similar uses should be located along the
periphery of the zone or in locations that do not adversely affect the setting and quality of other development for the uses permitted in the zone.
D. Office Research Park Zone (ORP): The purpose of the office and research park zone (ORP) is to provide areas for the development of large office and
research firms and other complementary uses. The requirements of this zone protect uses in the zone from adverse impact of uses on adjacent land
and protect adjacent more restrictive uses. Hotels, motels and similar uses should be located along the periphery of the zone or in such other locations
that do not adversely affect the setting and quality of development for the permitted uses of this zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2D-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 285/715
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. Table 2D-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by
special exception (S) in a particular industrial or research park zone. A number in superscript indicates that a special provision applies. See table
notes for more information.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups listed in the table. For example, a firm that specializes in developing computer
software is classified as technical/light manufacturing. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
B. Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2D-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Industrial And Research Zones
Commercial uses:
Building trade P P
Commercial recreational1 Outdoor
Indoor S S
Office General office P P
Medical/dental office P P
Retail Sales oriented
Personal service oriented
Alcohol sales oriented
Repair oriented
Hospitality oriented retail S S
Outdoor storage and display oriented
Industrial uses:
Industrial service P P
Manufacturing and production Technical/light manufacturing P P P P
General manufacturing PR P
Heavy manufacturing S P
Salvage operations S
Self-service storage P P
Warehouse and freight movement P P PR PR
Waste related PR PR
Wholesale sales P P PR PR
Institutional and civic uses:
Basic utility PR PR PR/S PR/S
Colleges and universities Public
Private S S
Community service General community service S
Community service - shelter
Daycare PR PR
Parks and open space PR PR
Other uses:
Use Categories Subgroups I-1 I-2 RDP ORP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 286/715
Aviation related Airports
Helicopter landing facilities S S S S
Extraction PR
Communication transmission facility PR PR PR/S PR/S
Consumer fireworks sales PR PR
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
Note:
1. Any establishment that is licensed by the State to sell alcohol or alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth in
subsection 14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
14-2D-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter 3
of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
2. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3, article B of this title.
3. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3. Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
4. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A of this title.
2. Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title.
5. Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this title.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title.
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title.
11. Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2D-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the industrial and research zones are stated in table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The following subsections
Use Categories Subgroups I-1 I-2 RDP ORP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 287/715
describe in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception
may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in table 2D-2, located at the end of this section.
A. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the other site development standards of this title can be met.
2. Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for the various industrial and research zones are stated in table 2D-2, located at the
end of this section. The industrial zones do not have minimum lot size, width, or frontage requirements in order to provide opportunities for industrial
businesses of all types and sizes to find appropriate locations within the city. The research zones have large minimum lot sizes in order to provide
the opportunity for land intensive industrial/research firms to locate within the city, and, in the case of the ORP zone, to preserve a campus like
setting.
3. Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
a. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not specified in table 2D-2, located at the end of
this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
b. If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular land use, whether permitted, provisional or a special exception, that use may not be
established on a smaller lot, even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as permitted under chapter 4, article E,
"Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
a. Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. Provide opportunities for privacy between buildings;
c. Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings; and
d. Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible with buildings in the vicinity.
2. General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required setbacks for principal buildings in the industrial and research zones are stated in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal
buildings are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
3. Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain setback requirements for the industrial and research zones that apply in specific
situations:
a. Side And Rear Setbacks: If a side or rear setback is provided where not required, the side or rear setback must be at least five feet (5'). Additional
setbacks may apply if the property is in proximity to a residential zone. See subsection B3d of this section.
b. Lots With Multiple Frontages:
(1) On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth in chapter
5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback must be
provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front setback for purposes of this title.
c. Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10'). Proximity of
building walls will be subject to all current building code fire protection requirements.
d. Lots In Proximity To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot line for a lot in an industrial zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at least equal
to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary. In addition, any building containing
an industrial use must be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from any residential zone boundary.
4. Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The following building features may extend into the required principal building setback
area specified, subject to the conditions indicated, and provided that location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
a. Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses, buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features that extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet (6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay windows,
and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet (2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal
building must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
b. Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building setbacks of
the base zone. The standards for uncovered decks and patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory
buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
c. Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
d. Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback, provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 288/715
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested
according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
5. Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce principal building setback requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The board
of adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception
approval criteria and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The subject building will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property line abuts a
public right of way or permanent open space.
C. Height Standards:
1. Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options for light,
air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate other buildings in the vicinity.
2. Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for principal structures in the industrial and research zones are stated in table 2D-2, located at
the end of this section. Height standards for accessory buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
3. Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standards, provided an
increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title:
a. Chimneys or flues.
b. Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
c. Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
d. Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
e. Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the roof,
whichever is less.
f. Grain elevators.
g. Parapet or fire walls.
h. Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
i. If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
j. Roof structures, including elevator bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary mechanical and electrical
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building.
k. Stacks.
l. Storage tanks and water towers.
m. Television antennas and similar apparatus.
4. Adjustment Of Maximum Height Standards:
a. The maximum height for a principal building may be increased; provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the front,
side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet (2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
b. A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
1. Purpose: The maximum lot coverage standard helps to define the character of zone by limiting the land area that can be covered by buildings. These
standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot requirements and height standards to determine how built up an area appears.
2. Standards: The maximum lot coverage standards for the industrial and research zones are stated in table 2D-2, located at the end of this section.
The maximum lot coverage standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be covered by buildings. The total footprint of all
buildings on the property, including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the lot coverage. Table 2D-2: Dimensional
Requirements For Industrial And Research Zones
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 289/715
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Setbacks
Maximum
Height
(ft.)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Zone Total Area (percent)
(s.f.)
Width
(ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(ft.)
Front
(ft.)
Side
(ft.)
Rear
(ft.)
I-1 none none none 201 01 01 45 none
I-2 none none none 100 01 01 45 none
RDP 1 acre none none 201 01 01 45 50
ORP 7 acres none none 150 100 100 none none
Note to table 2D-2:
1. A setback is not required where a side or rear lot line abuts a nonresidential zone. However, where a side or rear lot line abuts a residential zone,
a setback at least equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary. In addition,
any building containing an industrial use must be set back at least 100 feet from any residential zone boundary.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2D-5: INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The industrial and research zone site development standards ensure that industrial uses and parking areas are set back and screened from
view of dissimilar uses and that on site storage of materials is handled in a safe manner.
B. Applicability: The standards of this section apply to all development in the I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones, unless specifically exempted.
C. Site Plan Review Procedure: Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this section will occur as a part of the site plan review
process.
D. Setback Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
1. Front Setback Requirements:
a. In the ORP zone, parking and loading areas must be set back at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any front or street-side lot line. However,
up to ten percent (10%) of the required parking spaces may encroach within that setback, but may be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to a
street.
b. In the I-1, I-2, and RDP zones, parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street- side lot lines. However,
any parking spaces and aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any front
and street-side lot lines.
2. Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking areas and loading areas must be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet-side) side or rear
lot line. However, parking areas, loading areas, aisles and drives must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a
property zoned residential. The city may exempt from these setback regulations any specific locations along a lot line where a parking area, aisle or
drive is shared with an abutting lot.
3. Drives:
a. Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area are considered part of the
parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three
feet (3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto
adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle storm water runoff. Any specific locations along a
side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these standards.
b. Drives must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
E. Screening Requirements:
1. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view along arterial street rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
2. Where a lot occupied by a commercial or industrial use abuts or is across a street or railroad right of way from a residential zone, daycare use,
educational facility, parks and open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking and loading areas and outdoor work and storage areas must be
located behind buildings or screened from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3 standard.
3. Any aboveground storage tanks must be screened from public view to at least the S3 standard.
4. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a change in grade or by the natural or humanmade features
as determined by the building official.
5. Screening requirements may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be expected
to thrive in a particular location because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 290/715
shall not constitute convincing evidence. If a landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official because plantings cannot be
expected to survive, a fence or wall built to the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
F. Outdoor Storage:
1. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment is allowed in all industrial and research zones, provided it is concealed from public view to the extent
possible. If it is not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
public right of way, including public trails and open space, and screened from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening
And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built around the storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and the
public right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
3. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that
a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to
the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
4. The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 4, article H, "Performance
Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G. Minor Modifications To Site Development Standards: A minor modification to adjust specific provisions of this section may be requested in either of the
qualifying situations listed below. Such requests will be reviewed by the director of planning and community development and the building official
according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following approval criteria. The
following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval criteria listed in section 14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title:
1. Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard impractical.
In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and
steeply sloping lots.
b. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative design is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
c. The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
d. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
e. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
f. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
2. Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the applicant
must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
b. The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally or better
meets the purpose of the site development standards.
c. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
d. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
e. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
ARTICLE E. INTERIM DEVELOPMENT ZONES
14-2E-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF INTERIM DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established interim development zones are listed below. When this title refers to interim
development zones, it is referring the zones listed below.
A. Purpose: The purpose of the interim development zone (ID) is to provide for areas of managed growth in which agricultural and other nonurban uses of
land may continue until such time as the city is able to provide city services and urban development can occur. The interim development zone is the
default zoning district to which all undeveloped areas should be classified until city services are provided. Upon provision of city services, the city or the
property owner may initiate rezoning to zones consistent with the comprehensive plan, as amended.
B. Zone Designations: ID designations consist of interim development single-family residential (ID-RS), interim development multi-family residential (IDRM),
interim development commercial (ID-C), interim development industrial (ID-I) and interim development research park (ID-RP), to reflect the
intended future use of the property according to the comprehensive plan, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 291/715
14-2E-2: DETERMINING PRINCIPAL USES ALLOWED:
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. Table 2E-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by
special exception (S) in the interim development zones.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups listed in the table. For example, a kennel is classified as an intensive animal
related commercial use. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
B. Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Table
2E-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Interim Development Zones
Residential Uses
Household living uses Detached single-family dwellings PR PR PR PR PR
Commercial Uses
Animal related commercial uses General PR PR PR PR PR
Intensive PR PR PR PR PR
Commercial recreational uses Outdoor oriented S S S S S
Institutional And Civic Uses
Basic utility uses PR/S PR PR/S
Parks and open space uses PR PR PR PR PR
Religious/private group assembly uses S PR PR
Other Uses
Agricultural uses Plant related P P P P P
Animal related PR PR PR PR PR
Communication transmission facility uses PR/S PR/S PR/S PR PR/S
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-2009)
14-2E-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title, and if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter 3
of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3, article B of this title.
2. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3. Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
4. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
USE CATEGORIES SUBGROUPS ID-RS ID-RM ID-C ID-I ID-RP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 292/715
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A of this title.
2. Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title.
5. Landscaping and tree standards: Not applicable.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title.
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title.
11. Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2E-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the interim development zones are stated in table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. The following subsections
describe in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception
may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed
in chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the planned development
process (see chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title) or through the historic preservation exception as outlined in
section 14-2E-6, "Special Provisions", of this article.
A. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the other site development standards of this title can be met.
2. Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for the interim development zones are stated in table 2E-2, located at the end of
this section.
3. Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses: Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not
specified in table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements:
1. Purpose: The minimum setback requirements in the interim development zones are intended to ensure that any development that occurs in the
interim will be compatible with the setbacks for future development of the property once city services are provided and the property is rezoned
according to the comprehensive plan. The setback requirements also promote a reasonable physical relationship between development in the
interim development zone and other adjacent zones.
2. General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required setbacks for principal buildings in interim development zones are stated in table
2E-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal buildings
are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
3. Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
a. Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
(1) On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot (40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial street or
future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map, located in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot is located along an arterial street that is substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way, as specified in title 15 of this
code, then the minimum forty foot (40') front setback along said street is increased by the number of additional feet that will be required for future
upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots platted prior to December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement.
b. Side And Rear Setbacks In All Zones: In all interim development zones, if a side or rear setback is provided where not required, the side or rear
setback must be at least five feet (5').
c. Lots With Multiple Frontages:
(1) On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth in chapter
5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
(2) If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback must be
provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front setback for purposes of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 293/715
d. Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on the lot must be separated by a horizontal distance that is equal to the height of the highest
building. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire protection requirements.
e. Lots Adjacent To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot line for a lot in an interim development zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at
least equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary.
4. Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The following building features may extend into the required principal building setback
area specified, subject to the conditions indicated, and provided, that location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
a. Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses, buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features that extend
beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet (6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay windows,
and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet (2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal
building must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
b. Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building setbacks of
the base zone. The standards for uncovered decks and patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory
buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
c. Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback.
d. Stairways that function as the principal means of access to dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not extend into
any required setback. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
e. Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback, provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested
according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
5. Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce principal building setback requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The board
of adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the general special exception
approval criteria and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The subject building will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property line abuts a
public right-of-way or permanent open space.
C. Minimum Building Width:
1. Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
2. Standards: The minimum building width requirements for residential structures in the interim development zones are stated in table 2E-2 below. A
building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least seventy five percent (75%) of the building's length.
Table 2E-2: Dimensional Requirements For
The Interim Development Zones
Minimum Lot Requirements Minimum Setbacks Building Bulk Standards
Total Area
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Side
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Minimum Building Width
(Ft.)
10 acres1 80 40 25 5+22 20 203
Notes:
1. In areas designated ID-RS, detached single-family dwellings may be developed on minimum lot areas of 5 acres according to the applicable provisions
in chapter 4, article B of this title.
2. Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories, plus 2 feet for each additional story.
3. A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2E-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 294/715
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this
Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection 17-5-
18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-2E-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Water And Sewer Facilities: All uses must provide approved private water and sanitary sewer facilities until such time as the City extends services to
the area.
B. Historic Preservation Exceptions:
1. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or in
chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property designated as
an Iowa City landmark or registered on the National Register of Historic Places. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria set forth
in chapter 4, article B of this title, the following approval criteria must be met:
a. The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
2. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a property designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the National
Register of Historic Places to be adapted and reused as a community service use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail use. In
addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following criteria in
order for the board to grant this exception:
a. The exception will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
b. The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE F. PUBLIC ZONES
14-2F-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF PUBLIC ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established public zones are listed below. When this title refers to public zones, it is referring to the
zones listed below.
A. Purpose: The purpose of the public zones is to provide reference to public ownership and use of land. These zones serve a notice function to those
owning or buying land in proximity to publicly owned land.
B. Zone Designations:
1. Neighborhood Public Zone (P-1): Uses such as schools, parks, police and fire stations, and other civic buildings owned or otherwise controlled by
the county, the city, or the Iowa City community school district for such uses will be designated as P-1, neighborhood public zone. These uses are
subject to certain development standards in order to create a consonant transition between public and private uses.
2. Institutional Public Zone (P-2): The institutional public zone (P-2) provides reference to public uses of land owned or otherwise controlled by the state
or federal government, such as university campuses, regional medical facilities, post offices and other state and federally owned facilities. This
designation serves a notice function to those owning or buying land in proximity to publicly owned land that is not ordinarily subject to city
development regulations. While these public entities are not ordinarily subject to city regulations, the following standards serve as minimum
guidelines for state and federal government entities to use to help create a consonant transition between public and private uses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-2F-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
A. Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
1. The following subsections indicate whether a principal land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special exception (S) in
the public zone.
2. Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use
Categories", of this title.
3. Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
4. Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
5. Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B. Permitted Uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 295/715
1. Plant related agriculture.
2. Land, buildings or structures owned by the federal or state governments, or political subdivisions thereof, and used for public or governmental
purposes. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
C. Provisional Uses: Privately owned communication transmission facilities. (Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-2009)
D. Special Exceptions: Privately owned communication transmission facilities. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2F-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in the public zone, whether allowed as a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to certain
use regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
A. Overlay Zones:
1. Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3, article B of this title.
2. Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this title. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
3. Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
C. Site Development Standards:
1. Off street parking and loading standards: Section 14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title is applicable to uses within the public
zone. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
2. Sign regulations: Sections 14-5B-3 and 14-5B-4 of this title are applicable to uses within the public zones. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 09-
4352, 7-6-2009)
3. Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
4. Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-
2009)
5. Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this title.
6. Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this title. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
7. Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title; except, that uses in the public zone are exempt from section 14-5G-5, "Total Outdoor
Light Output Standards", of this title.
8. Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
9. Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this title.
10. Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4352,
7-6-2009)
14-2F-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setbacks For Lots Adjacent To A Residential Zone: Where a lot in a public zone abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, principal building
setbacks and setbacks for accessory uses, structures, and buildings at least equal to the required principal building setbacks and required setbacks for
accessory uses, structures, and buildings in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary.
B. Maximum Height Standard:
1. Standard: Where a lot in a public zone abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, the height for buildings and structures on the lot zoned
public must not exceed the maximum height standard specified for the abutting residential zone.
2. Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standard, provided an
increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
a. Chimneys, flues, and stacks.
b. Spires on religious and other institutional buildings.
c. Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 296/715
d. Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
e. Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the roof,
whichever is less.
f. Parapet and fire walls.
g. Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
h. If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations placed by the board of adjustment.
i. Roof structures, including elevator bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary mechanical and electrical
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building.
j. Television antennas and similar apparatus.
k. Grain elevators.
l. Storage tanks and water towers.
3. Adjustment Of Height Standards:
a. The maximum height for a principal building may be increased; provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the front,
side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet (2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
b. A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2F-5: PUBLIC ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Surface Parking Lot Setback Requirements:
1. Front Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street side lot line. However, any
loading area, parking spaces or aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
front and street side lot line.
2. Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet side) side or rear lot
line. However, parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a property zoned residential.
The city may exempt from these setback regulations any specific locations along a lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an
abutting lot.
3. Drives:
a. Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part of
the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least
three feet (3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water
onto adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff. Any specific locations along
a side or rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these standards.
b. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
B. Landscaping And Tree Requirements For Parking Areas: Parking areas that contain more than eighteen (18) parking spaces must be designed to
include trees and planting areas according to the provisions of chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
C. Screening Requirements:
1. Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
2. Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening
is required for properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting
property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking area, loading area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot.
3. Where a lot in a public zone abuts or is across a street or railroad right of way from a residential zone, daycare use, educational facility, parks and
open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking and loading areas and outdoor work and storage areas must be located behind buildings or screened
from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3 standard.
4. All ground level mechanical and utility equipment, such as heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps, must be screened
from public view to at least the S2 standard. If it is not feasible to use landscape screening, the mechanical equipment must be screened using wall
or fencing materials complementary to the principal structure.
5. Screening requirements may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be expected
to thrive in a particular location because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself,
shall not constitute convincing evidence. If a landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official because plantings cannot be
expected to survive, a fence or wall built to the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 297/715
6. Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a change in grade or by natural or humanmade features,
such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
D. Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
1. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment is allowed in all public zones, provided it is concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it is not
feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right of way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering
Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built around the storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and the public right of
way.
2. All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet (10')
from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the required
screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
3. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that
a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to
the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
4. The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H, "Performance
Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Minor Modifications To Site Development Standards: A minor modification to adjust specific provisions of this section may be requested in either of the
qualifying situations listed in the subsections below. Such requests will be reviewed by the director of planning and community development and the
building official according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following approval
criteria. The following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval criteria listed in section 14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this
title.
1. Qualifying situation one: The configuration of the lot or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard
impractical. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and
steeply sloping lots.
b. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative design is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
c. The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
d. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
e. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
f. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
2. Qualifying situation two: The proposed site or building is uniquely designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the applicant
must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
a. The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
b. The proposed site and building design is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally or
better meets the purpose of the site development standards.
c. The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
d. The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject property.
e. The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws, and regulations. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
14-2F-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. If any land zoned public is sold, conveyed, or transferred to anyone other than the government of the United States, the state, or a political subdivision
thereof, the buyer or transferee must submit an application requesting the city to rezone the land in accordance with the applicable procedures
contained in chapter 8, article D of this title.
B. Land acquired by the government of the United States, the state or a political subdivision thereof shall retain its existing zoning designation until such
time as the zoning map is amended to designate such land a public zone.
C. Before a leasehold interest in any land zoned public is conveyed to anyone for a use other than those allowed in the public zone and to anyone other
than the government of the United States, the state or a political subdivision thereof, the land must be rezoned to an appropriate zone in which the use
is allowed. The use shall be subject to all requirements of the new zone. Further, the zone shall be established as an overlay zone with the underlying
zone retaining its original public zone designation. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 298/715
ARTICLE G. RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS AND EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICTS
FORM BASED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
14-2G-1: INTENT, APPLICABILITY, AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Regulating Plan: The form based development standards in the following sections are intended to shape development and redevelopment in certain
districts of the City. The standards are designed to promote the creation of economically vital, mixed use, pedestrian friendly districts. The form based
standards describe required development patterns, building and frontage types, and parking locations and treatments. The standards are organized in
sections with each section defining building and site development conditions affecting the quality of the built environment and ensuring projects are
consistent with the goals, objectives, and guidelines in the downtown and riverfront crossings master plan and the central district plan.
B. Subdistricts:
1. The Riverfront Crossings District is divided into subdistricts, which are listed below with the corresponding zoning map symbol.
a. South Downtown Subdistrict (RFC-SD).
b. University Subdistrict (RFC-U).
c. Central Crossings Subdistrict (RFC-CX).
d. Gilbert Subdistrict (RFC-G).
e. Park Subdistrict (RFC-P).
f. South Gilbert Subdistrict (RFC-SG).
g. West Riverfront Subdistrict (RFC-WR). (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
h. Orchard Subdistrict (RFC-O). (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
2. The Eastside Mixed Use District, which is located in the Central Planning District is designated with the following zoning map symbol:
a. Eastside Mixed Use District (EMU).
C. Applicability: All development within the Riverfront Crossings District and Eastside Mixed Use District as designated on the zoning map shall be subject
to the provisions of this article and to the use regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title and, if applicable,
the overlay zone provision of chapter 3 of this title. In the case of any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this article, the provision that is
more specific to the situation will control. When regulations are equally specific or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the more restrictive
provision will control.
For purposes of this article, "grade" shall be defined as the average point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within
the area between the building and the streetside property line(s), or when the streetside property line is more than five feet (5') from the building,
between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building. Grade shall be calculated measuring the level of the surface of the ground at least every
twenty feet (20') along the entire frontage of the property. If due to unavoidable site conditions, the finished surface of the ground has been or is
proposed to be raised by adding fill, the slope of the fill within twenty feet (20') of the building shall not exceed four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) or
twenty five percent (25%). Any story that has more than three feet (3') of its floor to ceiling height above grade along one (1) or more frontages shall be
counted as a story for purposes of measuring height. Streetside property lines shall include those abutting approved pedestrian streets. (Ord. 16-4675,
9-20-2016)
D. Design Review: Any exterior alterations to, additions to, or new construction of buildings and structures, or alterations or additions to site development,
including, but not limited to, parking areas, landscaping, screening, lighting, and access on property zoned to a Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed
Use designation shall be subject to design review. Design review shall be conducted by the Form Based Code Committee (FBC Committee), as
designated by the City Manager. The FBC Committee shall review the proposed development for compliance with the applicable provisions of this
article and the goals and objectives of the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings master plan and central district plan. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016;
amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-2G-2: REGULATING PLAN:
A. Regulating Plan: The Riverfront Crossings District regulating plan (see figure 2G-1 of this section) and Eastside Mixed Use District regulating plan (see
figure 2G-1B of this section) indicate the location and extent of any subdistricts, primary street designations, required retail storefront locations, and
required Ralston Creek frontage locations. The regulating plan identifies public parks and open spaces as well as proposed green space within
subdistricts, which includes publicly accessible parks, plazas, and trails and open spaces along the Iowa River and Ralston Creek. Reference to the
regulating plan is required to determine the applicability of standards included in the subdistrict standards, frontage types, building types, parking types,
and general requirements. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
FIGURE 2G-1
REGULATING PLAN FOR THE
RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 299/715
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 300/715
FIGURE 2G-1B
REGULATING PLAN FOR THE
EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 301/715
B. Building Height Diagram: The building height diagram (see figure 2G-2 of this section) indicates the building heights permitted in the Riverfront
Crossings District. Specific building height standards can be found in section 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article. The diagram only
indicates the base heights allowed in the respective subdistrict standards, bonus height provisions may be applicable (see subsection 14-2G-7G,
"Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article). (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
FIGURE 2G-2
BUILDING HEIGHT DIAGRAM FOR
THE RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 302/715
(Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
14-2G-3: SUBDISTRICT STANDARDS:
A. South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, And University Subdistricts:
1. Intent: The South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University Subdistricts of the Riverfront Crossings District (shaded in dark in figure 2G-3 of
this section) are intended for high intensity mixed use development in buildings with active ground floor uses opening onto pedestrian friendly
streetscapes. Buildings are designed with facades aligned along public sidewalks with parking and service areas located behind buildings in rear lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 303/715
and midblock locations.
The University Subdistrict is intended for continued use by the University Of Iowa. While not subject to these standards, new and renovated
university facilities should adhere to the standards to the extent feasible. Properties within the University Subdistrict that are not owned by the
University of Iowa, however, must fully comply with all applicable standards below.
Figure 2G-3
Subdistrict Locator - South Downtown,
Park, South Gilbert, University
2. Uses: The principal uses allowed in the South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University Subdistricts are the same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone,
as specified in section 14-2C-2, table 2C-1 of this chapter, except as noted below. Provisions and special exception approval criteria that apply in the
CB-5 Zone also apply in the South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University Subdistricts, as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, except
as noted below. In addition, the following restrictions and allowances shall apply:
a. In the South Downtown and Park Subdistricts, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed on any frontage designated as a primary street
frontage, as specified on the regulating plan. In the South Gilbert Subdistrict, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed on any frontage
designated as a required retail storefront, as specified on the regulating plan. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
b. Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the
provisions in section 14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article, and therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is
limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. The residential
occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code. The maximum number of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 304/715
bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3). Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, in the South Downtown and University
Subdistricts for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling buildings and mixed use buildings the number of three bedroom units per lot may not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the total number of units on the lot. In the South Gilbert and Park Subdistricts for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling
buildings, and mixed use buildings, the number of three bedroom units per lot may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number of units on
the lot. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
c. Residential uses are not allowed within required retail storefronts, as specified on the applicable regulating plan, except in midblock locations
along South Gilbert Street, where storefront spaces may be configured as live-work units.
d. Independent and fraternal group living uses are allowed by special exception in the South Downtown and University Subdistricts according to the
approval criteria set forth in section 14-4B-4 of this title. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor
area, not including floor area within a garage or structured parking area. These uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in
section 14-2G-5 of this article.
e. Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is
limited to one roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within a garage or structured parking area.
f. In the Park and South Gilbert Subdistricts, drinking establishments are only allowed in required retail storefronts, as indicated on the regulating
plan, and must also meet the applicable drinking establishment spacing requirement.
3. Principal Building Placement And Form:
a. Building Types:
(1) Principal buildings shall comply with section 14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building types are permitted in the
South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University Subdistricts (see also section 14-2G-5, table 2G-6 of this article): Table 2G-1
Permitted Building Types - South Downtown,
Park, South Gilbert, University
Riverfront
Crossings
Subdistricts
Permitted Building Types
Cottage
Home
Row House
Townhouse
Apartment
Building
Multi-
Dwelling
Building
Live-Work
Townhouse
Commercial
Building
Mixed Use
Building
Liner
Building
Civic Or
Institutional
Building
South Downtown
X X X X X X
Park X X X X X X X X
South Gilbert X X X X X X X X
University X X X X X X X
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
b. Building Placement:
(1) Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in figure 2G-4 of this section, except as indicated below: (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
FIGURE 2G-4
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 305/715
(A) Primary (A) And Secondary (B) Street Setback: Two feet (2') minimum, eight feet (8') maximum (except as indicated below).
(B) Burlington Street Setback: Ten feet (10') minimum, sixteen feet (16') maximum. Along Burlington Street the minimum front setback area must
be reserved for pedestrian movement along the street frontage and, therefore, must be integrated with and maintained at the same grade as
the public sidewalk. To ensure safe pedestrian movement along the street frontage, at grade entrances are required and elevated terraces,
patios, stoops, porticoes, or similar may not encroach into the required minimum setback area. However, outdoor seating and merchandising
areas that are level with the sidewalk may encroach up to four feet (4') into the required minimum setback area.
(C) Lots Fronting On Pedestrian Streets: Five feet (5') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement. See
subsection 14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
(D) Ralston Creek Frontage Setback: Five feet (5') minimum from stream corridor buffer line. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(E) South Gilbert Subdistrict: In the south Gilbert subdistrict, for a lot with frontage on both Gilbert Street and Highway 6, the building facade that
faces Highway 6 may be aligned along a minimum ten foot (10') wide pedestrianway with abutting perpendicular parking spaces aligned along
an east-west drive aisle located between the building and Highway 6. Therefore, the maximum setback along the Highway 6 frontage may be
adjusted accordingly. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
(F) Side Setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0') if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment buildings
and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet (10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 306/715
back at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
(G) Rear Setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum or five feet (5') minimum if set back along public alley or private rear lane.
(H) Above Third Floor: Above the third floor (or above the second floor if the height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above grade) the
maximum setback does not apply.
(I) Forecourts: Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum setbacks stated above. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4696,
3-7-2017)
c. Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
(1) Principal building heights shall be regulated as provided below:
(A) In the south downtown subdistrict buildings shall be two (2) stories minimum and eight (8) stories maximum in height above grade.
(B) In the park, south Gilbert and university subdistricts, buildings shall be two (2) stories minimum and six (6) stories maximum in height above
grade. Single-story buildings may be permitted in midblock locations in the south Gilbert subdistrict.
(C) Additional building height may be granted through transfer of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection 14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
(D) Building heights may be further restricted by FAA regulations.
(2) Upper floor building facades facing and visible from streets, plazas, or parks shall step back ten feet (10') minimum from the lower floor facade
as follows:
(A) In the south downtown subdistrict above the fifth floor.
(B) In the park, south Gilbert, and university subdistricts above the fourth floor.
(C) At street corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one facade
bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
(D) The required facade step back may be established at a lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet (30') in
height above grade.
d. Building Projections:
(1) The following building features may project into setbacks as follows:
(A) Bay windows, eaves, cornices, belt courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
(B) Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6') into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on upper
floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an alley
or permanent open space.
(C) Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building entries, and similar elements as permitted in section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type
Standards", of this article.
(2) Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain permitted
signs may also project into public rights of way according to applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with utilities, street trees and other important right of way features.
(3) Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an attached
colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may project (cantilever) up to five feet (5') closer to the streetside
property line than the ground level building facade, provided that the upper floor facade does not project into the minimum setback, is at least
sixteen feet (16') clear above the level of the sidewalk, and does not include a supporting colonnade within any streetside setback area.
e. Building And Frontage Types:
(1) Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in compliance with sections 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and 14-2G-5,
"Building Type Standards", of this article.
f. Facade Continuity:
(1) To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes and create a mostly continuous frontage of buildings along primary streets, principal buildings shall
occupy a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot frontage. In the absence of a building along the remainder of the lot
frontage, a street screen shall be built in compliance with subsection 14-2G-7D of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 307/715
4. Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
a. Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section 14-2G-6,
"Parking Type Standards", of this article, and at the minimum ratios specified in section 14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
b. Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening: Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within and behind principal
buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in figure 2G-5 of this section:
FIGURE 2G-5
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
(1) Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service areas: Thirty feet (30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully enclosed,
occupied building space, except as allowed in subsection A4b(2)(B) of this section. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
(B) Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed, occupied
building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 308/715
(C) Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary street building facade.
(2) Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(B) In the South Gilbert Subdistrict, for a corner lot with frontage on both Gilbert Street and Highway 6, one (1) double loaded aisle of surface
parking is permitted within the private frontage area along the Highway 6 frontage. Surface parking must be set back a minimum of ten feet
(10') from the Highway 6 right-of-way and screened to the S2 standard. Said surface parking must be set back ten feet (10') minimum from the
Gilbert Street right-of-way and three feet (3') minimum from the primary street building facade on Gilbert Street and screened to the S2
standard. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
(C) Building/structured parking: Two feet (2') minimum and set back one foot (1') minimum from the secondary street building facade and
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-
5A-5F of this title.
(D) Underground parking: Two feet (2') minimum and set back zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
(3) Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings, or zero
feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property. Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
(B) Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be screened
from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this
title.
(C) Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
(4) Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
(5) Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten feet
(10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area must be
used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights
of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2
standard.
c. Access To Parking And Service Areas:
(1) All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed from public alleys, private rear lanes, or driveways on secondary streets consistent
with the riverfront crossings plan, except where permitted as specified in subsection A4c(2) of this section.
(2) If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions, configuration
of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street may be granted by the FBC Committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
d. Construction And Design Standards For Parking Areas:
(1) The following subsections of section 14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
A. Purpose.
B. Paving materials.
C. Parking and stacking space size.
D. Drainage.
E. Location.
F. Standards for structured parking.
H. Design and layout of surface parking areas.
I. Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
J. Screening and setback requirements.
K. Design of bicycle parking areas.
5. Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
a. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions contained in
the Riverfront Crossings Code are more specific or restrictive, said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title.
b. Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in compliance with the provisions of subsection A4, "Parking, Loading, And
Service Areas", of this section.
c. Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures must be located behind principal buildings according to the same setback
standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is consistent with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 309/715
the principal building. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
B. Central Crossings And Orchard Subdistricts And Eastside Mixed Use District:
1. Intent: The Central Crossings Subdistrict is intended for moderate intensity mixed use development in buildings with entries opening onto pedestrian
friendly public streets and streetscapes. The Eastside Mixed Use District is intended for lower intensity mixed use and residential development in
buildings with street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian friendly streetscapes that provide a transition between higher intensity mixed use areas
in downtown Iowa City and residential neighborhoods to the east. The Orchard Subdistrict is intended for lower intensity residential development in
buildings with street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian-friendly streetscapes that provide a transition between higher intensity mixed-use areas
along Riverside Drive and low-scale residential neighborhoods to the west. Buildings are designed with facades aligned along primary streets and
parking located within buildings behind active uses and in mid-block parking lots and structures.
2. Uses: The principal uses allowed in the Central Crossings Subdistrict, Orchard Subdistrict and Eastside Mixed Use District are the same as allowed
in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section 14-2C-2, table 2C-1 of this chapter, except as noted below. Provisions and special exception approval
criteria that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in these districts as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In addition, the
following restrictions and allowances shall apply: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
a. In the Orchard Subdistrict, commercial and industrial uses are not allowed, except in live-work townhouses, which may contain commercial uses
allowed in the CB-5 Zone, provided the building is constructed to accommodate such uses and provided the use is not prohibited in the list below.
Quick vehicle service uses are not allowed. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
b. In the Central Crossings Subdistrict, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed on any frontage designated as primary street or Ralston Creek
frontage, as specified in the Riverfront Crossings regulating plan. In the Eastside Mixed Use District, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed,
except by special exception on property at the corner of Burlington and Van Buren Streets. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
c. Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the
provisions in section 14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and, therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is
limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. The residential
occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this title. The maximum number of
bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3). Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, in the Central Crossings Subdistrict for
apartment buildings, multi-dwelling buildings and mixed use buildings the number of three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the total number of units on the lot, except for south of the Iowa-Interstate Rail Line, where the number of three-bedroom units for these
building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). In the Eastside Mixed Use District and Orchard Subdistrict, the number of three-bedroom
units for these building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
d. Residential uses are not allowed within required retail storefronts, as specified in the Riverfront Crossings regulating plan, except in the Central
Crossings Subdistrict for housing subsidized by a Federal or State program that requires at least sixty percent (60%) of the units to be rent
restricted and income restricted. (Ord. 18-4768, 9-18-2018)
e. Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is
limited to one roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within a garage or structured parking area.
f. Drinking establishments are not allowed.
g. Animal related commercial, repair oriented retail, and alcohol sales oriented retail uses are not allowed in the Eastside Mixed Use District and
Orchard Subdistrict.
h. In the Eastside Mixed Use District and Orchard Subdistrict, commercial recreational uses, eating establishments, sales oriented retail, and
personal service oriented retail uses shall not be open to the public between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.,
except if located in a storefront with frontage on Van Buren Street or Burlington Street.
3. Principal Building Placement And Form:
a. Building Types:
(1) Principal buildings shall comply with section 14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building types are permitted in the
Central Crossings Subdistrict, Orchard Subdistrict and the Eastside Mixed Use District (see also section 14-2G-5, table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-2
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - CENTRAL CROSSINGS, ORCHARD AND EASTSIDE MIXED USE
Subdistricts
Permitted Building Types
Cottage
Home
Rowhouse
Townhouse
Apartment
Building
Multi-
Dwelling
Building
Live-Work
Townhouse
Commercial
Building
Mixed-
Use
Building
Liner
Building
Civic Or
Institutional
Building
Central Crossings X X X X X X X X
Eastside Mixed Use
X X X X X X X1 X1 X
Orchard X X X X X X2 X
Notes:
1. Only allowed on properties with frontage on Van Buren Street or Burlington Street.
2. Only allowed in locations with frontage on Orchard Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 310/715
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
b. Building Placement:
(1) Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in figure 2G-7 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-7
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
(A) Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback:
(i) Central Crossings: Ten feet (10') minimum, sixteen feet (16') maximum.
(ii) Eastside Mixed Use:
(a) Primary (A): Twenty feet (20') minimum, thirty feet (30') maximum.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 311/715
(b) Secondary (B): Ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet (20') maximum. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(iii) Orchard: Six feet (6') minimum, twelve feet (12') maximum. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(B) Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right-of-way or access easement. See
subsection 14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
(C) Ralston Creek frontage setback: Five feet (5') minimum from stream corridor buffer line.
(D) Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0') if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment buildings
and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet (10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
(E) Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum or five feet (5') minimum if set back along public alley or private rear lane. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016)
(F) In the Central Crossings Subdistrict and Eastside Mixed Use District, the maximum setback does not apply above the second floor. In the
Orchard District, the maximum setback does not apply above the second floor and is increased to a maximum of twenty five feet (25') above
the first floor. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(G) Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum setbacks stated above. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(H) In the Orchard District, thirty feet (30') minimum from RS-8 Zone boundary. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
c. Building Height And Facade Stepbacks:
(1) Central Crossings: Except as provided below, principal buildings shall be four (4) stories maximum in height above grade.
(A) Additional building height may be granted through transfer of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection 14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
(B) Building heights may be further restricted by FAA regulations. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(2) Eastside Mixed Use and Orchard: Principal buildings shall be three (3) stories maximum in height above grade. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(3) In the Central Crossings Subdistrict above the third floor, building facades facing and visible from streets, plazas, or parks shall step back ten
feet (10') minimum from the lower floor facade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(A) At street corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one (1)
facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC Committee.
(B) The required facade step back may be established at a lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet (30') in
height above grade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(4) In the Orchard Subdistrict, above the second floor, building facades facing streets and RS-8 Zone boundaries shall step back ten feet (10')
minimum, twenty five feet (25') maximum from the lower floor facade. At street corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments
may be exempt from the stepback requirement for up to one (1) facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC Committee.
Alternatively, if approved by the FBC, the required facade stepback may be established above the first floor or may be tiered with the ten foot
(10') minimum stepback achieved with smaller stepbacks above both the first and second stories. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
d. Building Projections:
(1) The following building features may project into setbacks as follows:
(A) Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
(B) Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6') into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on upper
floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an alley
or permanent open space.
(C) Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building entries, and similar elements as permitted in section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type
Standards", of this article.
(2) Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights-of-way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain permitted
signs may also project into public rights-of-way according to applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
Projections into the right-of-way shall not interfere with utilities, street trees and other important right-of-way features.
(3) Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an attached
colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 312/715
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground
level building facade, except for building features noted above.
e. Building And Frontage Types:
(1) Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in compliance with sections 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and 14-2G-5,
"Building Type Standards", of this article. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
f. Facade Continuity:
(1) Central Crossings and Orchard: To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes and create a mostly continuous frontage of buildings along primary
streets, principal buildings shall occupy a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot frontage. Only in the Central Crossings
Subdistrict, in the absence of a building along the remainder of the lot frontage, a street screen shall be built in compliance with subsection 14-
2G-7D of this article. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(2) Eastside Mixed Use: To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes while maintaining a lower intensity development character along primary
streets, principal buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) and a maximum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot
frontage.
4. Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
a. Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section 14-2G-6,
"Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios specified in section 14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
b. Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening: Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within and behind principal
buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in figure 2G-8 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-8
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 313/715
(1) Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking and service areas: Thirty feet (30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully enclosed, occupied
building space. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(B) Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') min. from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed, occupied building
space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
(C) Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary street building facade.
(2) Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(B) Building/structured parking: One foot (1') minimum from the secondary street building facade and screened from public view by
architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this title. (Ord.
16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 314/715
(C) Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade.
(3) Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings, or zero
feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property. Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
(B) Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be screened
from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this
title.
(C) Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
(4) Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
(5) Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten feet
(10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area must be
used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights
of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2
standard.
c. Access To Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
(1) All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed from public alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets consistent
with the applicable regulating plan, except as allowed in subsection B4c(2) of this section.
(2) If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions, configuration
of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street may be granted by the FBC committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
d. Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
(1) The following subsections of section 14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
A. Purpose.
B. Paving materials.
C. Parking and stacking space size.
D. Drainage.
E. Location.
F. Standards for structured parking.
H. Design and layout of surface parking areas.
I. Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
J. Screening and setback requirements.
K. Design of bicycle parking areas.
5. Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
a. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions contained in
this article are more specific or restrictive, said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title.
b. Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in compliance with the provisions of subsection B4, "Parking, Loading, And
Service Areas", of this section.
c. Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures must be located behind principal buildings according to the same setback
standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is consistent with
the principal building.
C. Gilbert Subdistrict:
1. Intent: The Gilbert subdistrict (shaded in dark in figure 2G-9 of this section) is intended for lower intensity mixed use development in buildings with
street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian friendly streetscapes. Buildings are designed with facades aligned along primary streets, modest
setbacks, and parking located within buildings behind active uses and in midblock parking lots. This area is intended to create a transition between
higher intensity mixed use areas and lower to medium intensity residential areas.
Figure 2G-9
Subdistrict Locator - Gilbert
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 315/715
2. Uses: The principal uses allowed in the Gilbert Subdistrict are the same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section 14-2C-2, table 2C-1 of
this chapter. Provisions and special exception approval criteria that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in the Gilbert Subdistrict as set forth in chapter
4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In addition, the following restrictions and allowances shall apply: (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
a. Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the
provisions in section 14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and, therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is
limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. The residential
occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code. The maximum number of
bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3). Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling
buildings and mixed use buildings the number of three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of units on
the lot, except for south of the Iowa-Interstate Rail Line, where the number of three-bedroom units for these building types may not exceed twenty
percent (20%). (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
b. Residential uses are not allowed within required retail storefronts, as specified in the riverfront crossings regulating plan.
c. Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is
limited to one roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within a garage or structured parking area.
d. Building trade uses shall be allowed on properties located south of the Iowa-Interstate Railroad, provided all aspects of the operation are
conducted indoors and, except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor storage of materials and equipment is not allowed.
e. Drinking establishments are not allowed.
3. Principal Building Placement And Form:
a. Building Types:
(1) Principal buildings shall comply with section 14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building types are permitted in the
Gilbert Subdistrict (see also section 14-2G-5, table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 316/715
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - GILBERT
Riverfront
Crossings
Subdistricts
Permitted Building Types
Cottage
Home Row House Townhouse
Apartment
Building
Multi-
Dwelling
Building
Live-Work
Townhouse
Commercial
Building
Mixed Use
Building
Liner
Building
Civic Or
Institutional
Building
Gilbert X X X X X X X X X X
b. Building Placement:
(1) Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in figure 2G-10 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-10
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
(A) Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback: Ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet (20') maximum.
(B) Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement. See
subsection 14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 317/715
(C) Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0') if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment buildings,
multi-dwelling buildings, and cottage homes where the minimum is always ten feet (10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors
must be set back at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
(D) Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum.
(E) Above the third floor (or above the second floor if the height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above grade) the maximum setback does
not apply.
(F) Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum setbacks stated above.
c. Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
(1) Except as provided below, principal buildings shall be three (3) stories maximum in height above grade.
(A) Additional building height may be granted through transfer of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection 14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
(2) Above the third floor, building facades facing and visible from public streets, plazas, or parks shall step back ten feet (10') minimum from the
lower floor facade.
(A) At street corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one facade
bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
(B) The required facade step back may be established at a lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet (30') in
height above grade.
d. Building Projections:
(1) The following building features may project into setbacks as follows:
(A) Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
(B) Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6') into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on upper
floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an alley
or permanent open space.
(C) Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building entries, and similar elements as permitted in section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type
Standards", of this article.
(2) Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain permitted
signs may also project into public rights of way according to applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with utilities, street trees, and other important right of way features.
(3) Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an attached
colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground
level building facade, except for building features noted above.
e. Building And Frontage Types:
(1) Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in compliance with sections 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and 14-2G-5,
"Building Type Standards", of this article.
f. Facade Continuity:
(1) To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes while maintaining a lower intensity development character along primary streets, principal buildings
shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) and a maximum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot frontage.
4. Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
a. Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section 14-2G-6,
"Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios specified in section 14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
b. Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening: Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within, behind and to the side
of principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in figure 2G-11 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-11
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 318/715
(1) Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Thirty feet (30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully enclosed,
occupied building space.
(B) Surface parking located to the side of buildings: Ten feet (10') minimum from the streetside property line (E') and set back three feet (3')
minimum from the primary street building facade (E) and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard,
alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(C) Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed, occupied
building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
(D) Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary street building facade.
(2) Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10') minimum and located three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.
(B) Building/structured parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back one foot (1') minimum from the secondary street building facade and
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-
5F of this title.
(C) Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade.
(3) Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Five feet (5') minimum or zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property.
Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 319/715
(B) Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be screened
from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this
title.
(C) Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings.
(4) Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
(5) Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten feet
(10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area must be
used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights
of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2
standard.
c. Access To Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
(1) All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed from public alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets consistent
with the riverfront crossings plan, except as allowed in subsection C4c(2) of this section.
(2) If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions, configuration
of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street may be granted by the FBC Committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
d. Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
(1) The following subsections of section 14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
A. Purpose.
B. Paving materials.
C. Parking and stacking space size.
D. Drainage.
E. Location.
F. Standards for structured parking.
H. Design and layout of surface parking areas.
I. Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
J. Screening and setback requirements.
K. Design of bicycle parking areas.
5. Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
a. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions contained in
the riverfront crossings code are more specific or restrictive, said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title.
b. Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in compliance with the provisions of subsection C4, "Parking, Loading, And
Service Areas", of this section.
c. Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures must be located behind or to the side of principal buildings according to the same
setback standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is
consistent with the principal building.
D. West Riverfront Subdistrict:
1. Intent: The west riverfront subdistrict (shaded in dark in figure 2G-12 of this section) is intended for commercial and mixed use development in
buildings with street-facing entries opening onto streetscapes designed to provide a comfortable and attractive environment for pedestrians buffered
from vehicular traffic on Riverside Drive. Along the west side of Riverside Drive south of Benton Street, buildings are designed with facades fronting
onto a pedestrianway and perpendicular parking aligned along a continuous north-south travelway allowing cross parcel connections among
adjacent sites and a reduction in curb cuts along Riverside Drive. Along the Iowa River, buildings are located, oriented, and designed to take
advantage of river views. Along streets in this district, buildings are designed with facades aligned parallel to Riverside Drive, Benton Street, and
Sturgis Corner Drive, with parking located in midblock and side yard locations with front yard parking only along the west side of Riverside Drive
south of Benton Street, and along some portions of Orchard Street and Highway 6.
Figure 2G-12
Subdistrict Locator - West Riverfront
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 320/715
2. Uses: The principal uses allowed in the West Riverfront Subdistrict are the same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section 14-2C-2, table
2C-1 of this chapter. Provisions and special exception approval criteria that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in the West Riverfront Subdistrict, as
set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In addition, the following restrictions and allowances shall apply: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016)
a. Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the
provisions in section 14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and, therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is
limited to one "household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. The residential
occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code. The maximum number of
bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3). Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling
buildings and mixed use buildings the number of three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of units on
the lot; south of Benton Street, the number of three-bedroom units for these building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). (Ord. 18-4744,
4-2-2018)
b. Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted building types as specified in section 14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is
limited to one roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within a garage or structured parking area.
c. Residential uses are not allowed within required retail storefronts, as specified in the riverfront crossings regulating plan.
d. Outdoor commercial recreational uses shall be allowed by special exception. The Board of Adjustment may modify subdistrict standards as
appropriate for the specific use.
e. Building trade uses shall be allowed, provided all aspects of the operation are conducted indoors and, except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor
storage of materials and equipment is not allowed.
f. Drinking establishments must meet the applicable drinking establishment spacing requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 321/715
3. Principal Building Placement And Form:
a. Building Types:
(1) Principal buildings shall comply with section 14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building types are permitted in the
West Riverfront Subdistrict (see also section 14-2G-5, table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-4
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - WEST RIVERFRONT
Riverfront
Crossings
Subdistricts
Permitted Building Types
Cottage
Home Row House Townhouse
Apartment
Building
Multi-
Dwelling
Building
Live-Work
Townhouse
Commercial
Building
Mixed Use
Building
Liner
Building
Civic Or
Institutional
Building
West riverfront X X X X X X X X X
b. Building Placement:
(1) Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in figure 2G-13 of this section, except as allowed in subsections D3b(2), D3b(3), and D3b(4) of this section.
FIGURE 2G-13
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 322/715
(A) Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback: Ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet (20') maximum.
(B) Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement. Pedestrian
streets that provide frontage for buildings located along the riverfront shall provide a connection through the block between the riverfront trail
and the intersecting public street. See subsection 14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
(C) Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0') if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment buildings
and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet (10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
(D) Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum.
(E) Above the third floor (or above the second floor if the height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above grade) the maximum setback does
not apply.
(F) Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum setbacks stated above.
(2) Setbacks along the west side of South Riverside Drive south of Benton Street shall be as shown in the riverfront crossings district master plan.
Building facades shall be aligned along a pedestrianway with abutting perpendicular parking spaces aligned along a continuous north-south
drive aisle, which allows cross parcel connections among adjacent sites.
(3) On lots with double frontages on Sturgis Corner Drive and South Riverside Drive or Sturgis Corner Drive and Highway 6, Sturgis Corner Drive
shall be considered the primary street frontage. For these lots, there shall be no maximum building setback along the Riverside Drive and
Highway 6 frontages.
(4) For lots with double frontages on Orchard Street and Riverside Drive, there shall be no maximum building setback along the Orchard Street
frontage.
c. Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
(1) Except as provided below, principal buildings shall be four (4) stories maximum in height above grade.
(A) Principal buildings with frontage on the Iowa River may be eight (8) stories maximum in height before application of bonus provisions.
(B) Additional building height may be granted through transfer of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection 14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
(2) Above the third floor, building facades facing and visible from streets, plazas, parks, and single-family residential zones shall step back ten feet
(10') minimum from the lower floor facade.
(A) At street corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one facade
bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
(B) Buildings with frontage on the Iowa River shall be exempt from the step back requirement.
(C) The required facade step back may be established at a lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet (30') in
height above grade.
d. Building Projections:
(1) The following building features may project into setbacks as follows:
(A) Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
(B) Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6') into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on upper
floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an alley
or permanent open space.
(C) Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building entries, and similar elements as permitted in section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type
Standards", of this article.
(2) Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain permitted
signs may also project into public rights of way according to applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with utilities, street trees and other important right of way features.
(3) Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an attached
colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground
level building facade, except for building features noted above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 323/715
e. Building And Frontage Types:
(1) Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in compliance with sections 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and 14-2G-5,
"Building Type Standards", of this article.
f. Facade Continuity:
(1) To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes while maintaining a lower intensity development character along primary streets, principal buildings
shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the primary street lot frontage.
(2) To ensure public access and view corridors to the Iowa River, buildings located along the riverfront shall occupy no more than seventy five
percent (75%) of the width of the lot as measured along the riverside lot line.
(3) Any building that exceeds five (5) stories in height must be separated from any other building that exceeds five (5) stories in height by a
distance equal to the height of the taller building or one hundred feet (100'), whichever is less.
4. Parking And Service Areas:
a. Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section 14-2G-6,
"Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios specified in section 14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
b. Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening: Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within, behind and to the side
of principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in figure 2G-14 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-14
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
(1) Primary Street And Pedestrian Street Setback (E) And Screening:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 324/715
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service areas: Thirty feet (30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully enclosed,
occupied building space.
(B) Surface parking located to the side of buildings: Ten feet (10') minimum from the streetside property line (E') and set back three feet (3')
minimum from the primary street building facade (E) and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard,
alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.
(C) Along the west side of South Riverside Drive south of Benton Street, one (1) single loaded aisle of parking is permitted within the private
frontage area. The parking aisle shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the front property line and the area between the parking
aisle and the public sidewalk shall be landscaped to the S2 standard. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(D) Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed, occupied
building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
(E) Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary street building facade.
(2) Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service areas along Myrtle Avenue and Highway 1: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back three feet (3')
minimum from secondary street building facades and screened to the S2 standard.
(B) Surface parking, loading, and service areas along Orchard Street: Ten feet (10') minimum and screened to the S2 standard.
(C) Building/structured parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the
standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this title.
(D) Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facades.
(3) Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
(A) Surface parking, loading, and service area: Five feet (5') minimum or zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property.
Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
(B) Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be screened
from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection 14-5A-5F of this
title.
(C) Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
(4) Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
(5) Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten feet
(10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area must be
used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights
of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2
standard.
c. Access To Parking And Service Areas:
(1) All parking and service areas shall be accessed from public alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets consistent with the
riverfront crossings plan. Limited access to primary streets is allowed consistent with the riverfront crossings plan. However, in order to improve
traffic circulation upon redevelopment, the city may require closure of inappropriately located curb cuts in favor of shared access points along
the frontage.
(2) FBC committee approval is required for the placement of new driveway and curb cuts along primary streets. Any request for a curb cut on an
arterial street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this
title.
d. Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
(1) The following subsections of section 14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
A. Purpose.
B. Paving materials.
C. Parking and stacking space size.
D. Drainage.
E. Location.
F. Standards for structured parking.
H. Design and layout of surface parking areas.
I. Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 325/715
J. Screening and setback requirements.
K. Design of bicycle parking areas.
5. Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
a. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions contained in
the riverfront crossings code are more specific or restrictive, said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title.
b. Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in compliance with the provisions of subsection D4, "Parking And Service
Areas", of this section.
c. Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures must be located behind and to the side of principal buildings according to the same
setback standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is
consistent with the principal building. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-4: FRONTAGE TYPE STANDARDS:
A. Generally: A building's frontage condition, the transition from public to private space, from indoor to outdoor at the main entrance, the design treatment
of ground floor building facades, the configuration of facade projections, and the disposition of improvements within required setbacks, strongly
influences the quality and character of public streets and spaces.
All principal buildings in the form based zoning districts shall be designed with frontage types meeting the requirements of this section. The standards
recognize that different types of buildings, as defined in the building type standards in section 14-2G-5 of this article, may call for different frontage
conditions. Illustrations within this section are intended to demonstrate basic frontage type standards and are not intended to promote a particular
architectural style or represent the architectural detail necessary for high quality buildings.
Table 2G-5 of this section identifies which of the frontage types are permitted in conjunction with each of the building types: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
TABLE 2G-5
PERMITTED FRONTAGE TYPES
Storefront Urban Flex Terrace Stoop
Porch
And Yard Portico Forecourt
Cottage home X X
Row house X X X
Townhouse X X X
Apartment building X3 X3 X X1
Multi-dwelling building X3 X3 X X1
Live-work townhouse X X X
Commercial building X X X1
Mixed-use building X X X2,3 X2,3 X2 X1
Liner building X X X3 X3
Civic or institutional building X X X X X1
Notes:
1. Subordinate frontage type, to be used in conjunction with other permitted frontage type(s).
2. Frontage type may be allowed by the FBC for appropriate horizontal mixing of uses, e.g., for large mixed use buildings with multiple street
frontages.
3. Allowed for access to individual dwelling units or live-work units.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
B. Storefront:
1. Description: The storefront frontage is the primary frontage type for buildings with active commercial ground floor uses, such as retail, personal
services, and restaurants; see table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The frontage provides storefront facades that are
typically aligned close to the streetside property line, with large transparent windows and multiple building entries at the grade of the fronting
sidewalk. The regulating plan indicates locations where this frontage type is required.
FIGURE 2G-15
STOREFRONT
Building Types Permitted Frontage Types
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 326/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the public sidewalk and the building facade shall be designed for additional sidewalk width and other
pedestrian oriented uses, such as plaza space, outdoor patio space for restaurant and cafe seating, landscaping, public art, or recessed
entryways.
b. To encourage commercial activity at the street level, private frontage areas should be seamlessly integrated with and at the same level as the
public sidewalk to the extent possible. With approval of the FBC committee, on sloping sites in specific locations where there is a desire to provide
usable outdoor space the private frontage area may be slightly raised above sidewalk grade to create a level plaza or patio area. The elevation of
the raised area shall not exceed the elevation of the ground floor finished floor (see subsection B2d of this section). A transparent, decorative
wrought iron or similar metal railing may be located at the edge of the raised area if required for safety, but shall be limited to forty two inches (42")
maximum in height. Opaque railings, fences or walls shall not be permitted. Access to raised areas shall be provided directly from the sidewalk
through steps and/or ramps. The use of ramps and railings shall be minimized to maintain a seamless transition from sidewalk to storefront.
Transparent, decorative wrought iron or similar metal fencing/railings not to exceed forty two inches (42") are allowed for outdoor service areas
and sidewalk cafes for eating and drinking establishments, as approved by the city. Any such fencing/railings for outdoor service areas and
sidewalk cafes must include landscaped planters or planter boxes along at least fifty percent (50%) of its length.
c. A minimum seventy percent (70%) of the area of the ground floor facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height above adjacent ground level
shall consist of storefront windows and doors. Glazing shall be clear and highly transparent and individual lites for display windows should be as
large as possible to invite views into the interior space. Transom windows are encouraged above storefront display windows. Residential window
types, closely spaced mullions, and punched windows are not allowed for storefront frontages. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not
permitted. Low-E glazing will reduce transparency, so is discouraged for storefront windows, but if used, the glass chosen should have a high
visible light transmittance and low reflectivity. Such windows must allow views into the interior space. The bottom of storefront windows shall be no
more than two feet (2') above the adjacent ground level, except along sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to the extent possible so that
views into the interior are maximized and blank walls are avoided.
d. The ground floor finished floor elevation shall match the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk or publicly accessible plaza. On sloping sites the
FBC committee may adjust this requirement, provided that the height of the ground floor of the building is no more than three feet (3') above the
level of the abutting public sidewalk or public pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing facade.
e. The ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height shall be fourteen feet (14') minimum.
f. Ground floor building space shall be designed to meet building code requirements for commercial uses.
g. Entries to individual ground floor tenant spaces and entries to common lobbies accessing upper floor space shall open directly onto public
sidewalks or publicly accessible outdoor plazas. Thresholds at building entries shall match the grade of the adjacent sidewalk or plaza area.
h. Storefront entries shall be recessed a minimum of eighteen inches (18") and sheltered by awnings or canopies that project a minimum of six feet
(6') from the building facade. Entries must also be distinguished by facade design, materials, articulation, or other architectural details that provide
relief to the building facade and draw attention to the entrance.
i. Awnings or canopies designed to provide weather protection are required along at least sixty percent (60%) of the street-facing facade and shall
project four feet (4') minimum, eight feet (8') maximum from the front facade and shall be located eight feet (8') minimum above the adjacent
sidewalk.
C. Urban Flex:
1. Description: The urban flex frontage is a frontage type appropriate for buildings with ground floor commercial uses where more flexibility is desired
for nonretail uses, such as offices, institutional uses, building trade uses, and live-work uses, or along secondary frontages where views into the
interior of the building are not as critical, but where architecturally finished facades with elements that provide visual interest and comfort to
pedestrians are important. See table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The frontage provides ground floor storefront
conditions with high proportions of transparency, but to a lesser degree than the storefront frontage.
FIGURE 2G-16
URBAN FLEX
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 327/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the public sidewalk and the building facade shall be designed for pedestrian oriented uses, such as plaza
space, outdoor patio space for restaurant and cafe seating, landscaping, public art, or recessed entryways.
b. To encourage commercial activity at the street level, private frontage areas should be seamlessly integrated with and at the same level as the
public sidewalk to the extent possible. With approval of the FBC committee, on sloping sites in specific locations where there is a desire to provide
usable outdoor space the private frontage area may be slightly raised above sidewalk grade to create a level plaza or patio area. The elevation of
the raised area shall not exceed the elevation of the ground floor finished floor (see subsection C2d of this section). A transparent, decorative
wrought iron or similar metal railing may be located at the edge of the raised area if required for safety, but shall be limited to forty two inches (42")
maximum in height. Opaque railings, fences or walls shall not be permitted. Access to raised areas shall be provided directly from the sidewalk
through steps and/or ramps. The use of ramps and railings shall be minimized to maintain a seamless transition from sidewalk to storefront.
Transparent, decorative wrought iron or similar metal fencing/railings not to exceed forty two inches (42") are allowed for outdoor service areas
and sidewalk cafes for eating and drinking establishments, as approved by the city. Any such fencing/railings for outdoor service areas and
sidewalk cafes must include landscaped planters and/or planter boxes along at least fifty percent (50%) of its length.
c. A minimum fifty percent (50%) of the area of the ground floor facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height above adjacent ground level shall
consist of storefront windows and doors. Glazing shall be clear and highly transparent. Residential window types, closely spaced mullions, and
punched windows are not allowed for urban flex frontages. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Low-E glazing will reduce
transparency, so is discouraged for storefront windows, but if used, the glass chosen should have a high visible light transmittance and low
reflectivity. Such windows must allow views into the interior space. The bottom of storefront windows shall be no more than three feet (3') above
the adjacent ground level, except along sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to the extent possible so that views into the interior are
maximized and blank walls are avoided.
d. The ground floor finished floor elevation shall not exceed twelve inches (12") maximum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk or
publicly accessible plaza. On sloping sites the FBC committee may adjust this requirement, provided that at least a portion of the ground floor
finished floor elevation is located within twelve inches (12") of the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk or publicly accessible plaza, views into
storefronts are maximized to the extent possible, and blank walls are avoided.
e. The ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height shall be fourteen feet (14') minimum.
f. Ground floor building space shall be designed to meet building code requirements for commercial uses.
g. Entries to ground floor building space and common lobbies accessing upper floor space shall open directly onto public sidewalks or publicly
accessible outdoor plazas where present, or shall be directly connected to sidewalks by a paved walkway.
h. Thresholds at building entries shall match the grade of adjacent sidewalks, plaza areas, or paved walkways.
i. Building entries shall be recessed a minimum of eighteen inches (18") and sheltered by awnings or canopies that project a minimum of six feet (6')
from the building facade. Entries must also be distinguished by facade design, materials, articulation, or other architectural details that provide
relief to the building facade and draw attention to the entrance.
j. Awnings and canopies designed to provide weather protection along frontages are encouraged and may project eight feet (8') maximum from the
front facade and shall be located eight feet (8') minimum above the adjacent sidewalk.
D. Terrace:
1. Description: The terrace frontage provides for vertical separation of building space from sidewalk grade and creates semiprivate outdoor space for
individual dwelling units by elevating and partially enclosing a portion of the private frontage area. The terrace frontage is suited for ground floor
residential uses in urban settings and may be appropriate for live-work and institutional uses. See table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate
building types.
FIGURE 2G-17
TERRACE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 328/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building facade shall be designed as a raised terrace, which is elevated up to thirty six
inches (36") maximum above grade by a garden wall to provide a semiprivate outdoor space. The terrace may also be suitable for outdoor seating
for live-work uses.
b. A terrace shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum beyond the front facade. A terrace may extend along the front facade for the
width of the dwelling unit. The terrace frontage is only allowed for access to individual dwelling units, individual live-work units, or for institutional
uses. To enhance privacy, adjacent terrace frontages shall be separated by walls and/or railings, or by a minimum six feet (6') wide landscaped
area.
c. Terraces may be hardscaped or landscaped, or a combination of both. Wood or composite decking shall not be permitted. Where present, any
private frontage area between the terrace and the edge of sidewalk shall be landscaped, except for walkways leading to the terrace.
d. Terraces shall be enclosed by garden walls up to forty two inches (42") maximum in height above grade. The garden wall's design and materials
shall be of high quality and compatible with the building's architecture. A decorative, transparent railing or fence, constructed of metal and glass,
wrought iron, or metal faithfully imitating wrought iron, may be affixed atop the garden walls if additional height is necessary for safety. The railing
height shall not exceed forty two inches (42") maximum above the terrace grade. Steps or a ramp shall be provided for access to the terrace.
Steps and/or ramps may be perpendicular or parallel to the sidewalk.
e. To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished floor elevation of ground floor residential building space shall be elevated eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade and may be flush with
or slightly elevated above the terrace level.
f. Building entries shall be accessed directly from the terrace.
g. Landscaping of the terrace may include ground covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material shall be of a
variety that will not exceed forty two inches (42") in height at maturity (except trees) so as not to obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall
be selected to prevent encroachment of the public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted.
E. Stoop:
1. Description: The stoop frontage is a frontage type appropriate for certain buildings with ground floor residential or institutional use. See table 2G-5 of
this section to determine appropriate building types. The stoop frontage provides for vertical separation of building space from sidewalk grade and
modest projections of stoops and covered entries for individual dwelling units beyond building facades. The stoop frontage typically is used in
conjunction with shallow setbacks.
FIGURE 2G-18
STOOP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 329/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas
other than stoop, stair, accessible ramp, and paved walkway are not permitted.
b. To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen inches
(18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
c. Stoops shall be provided at the entries of individual units along front building facades and shall consist of an exterior floor area raised eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to generally match the
interior ground floor finished floor elevation. For buildings with multiple stoops, or a combination of stoops, porches, and porticoes, a six foot (6')
minimum landscaped area shall be provided between adjacent frontages.
d. Stoops shall project four feet (4') minimum, six feet (6') maximum beyond the front facade and extend five feet (5') minimum, eight feet (8')
maximum along the front facade.
e. The exterior stair of a stoop may be perpendicular or parallel to the sidewalk.
f. Landscaping on both sides of the stoop is required. Landscaping may be at grade or elevated, and may be demarcated by a garden wall up to
twenty four inches (24") in height or a maximum forty two inches (42") decorative, transparent fence constructed of wrought iron or metal that
faithfully imitates wrought iron. Plants may include ground covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material
(except trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent
encroachment of the public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the public sidewalk.
F. Porch And Yard:
1. Description: The porch and yard frontage is a frontage type appropriate for certain residential buildings. See table 2G-5 of this section to determine
appropriate building types. The porch and yard frontage provides for vertical separation of building space from sidewalk grade, projections of usable
porches beyond building facades, and is typically set back from the streetside property line to provide a front yard area. An optional fence may be
built at or close to the property line to delineate the front yard.
FIGURE 2G-19
PORCH AND YARD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 330/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas
other than porch, stair, accessible ramps, and paved walkway are not permitted.
b. To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen inches
(18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
c. Porches shall be provided at the entries of single- or two-family dwellings along front building facades and shall consist of an exterior floor area
raised eighteen inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to
generally match the interior ground floor finished floor elevation. For buildings with multiple porches, or a combination of porches and stoops, a six
foot (6') minimum landscaped area shall be provided between adjacent frontages.
d. Porches shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum beyond the front facade and extend at least fifty percent (50%) of the facade
width along the front facade.
e. An optional fence enclosing the front yard shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") maximum in height. Fences shall be made of high quality
materials and construction compatible with the building's architecture. Permitted materials include vertical wood pickets, wood lattice, wrought iron,
and metal that faithfully imitates wrought iron. Fences shall be semitransparent with maximum fifty percent (50%) opacity. Chainlink or wire mesh
fences are prohibited.
f. Front yard landscaping may include ground covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material (except trees)
shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent encroachment of
the public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the public sidewalk.
G. Portico:
1. Description: The portico frontage is a frontage type appropriate for certain buildings with ground floor residential use as well as institutional uses.
See table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The portico frontage has its building facade aligned close to the streetside
property line with the ground floor elevated above the sidewalk level to provide privacy for the ground floor windows and is accessed by a covered,
generously sized exterior stairway and landing.
FIGURE 2G-20
PORTICO
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 331/715
2. Standards:
a. The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas
other than portico, stair, accessible ramp, and paved walkway are not permitted.
b. To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen inches
(18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
c. Porticoes shall be provided at building entries along front building facades and shall consist of an exterior floor area raised eighteen inches (18")
minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to generally match the interior
ground floor finished floor elevation. Porticoes may provide access to a central lobby of a multi-unit building or may provide direct access to no
more than two (2) entrances to individual dwelling units.
d. Porticoes shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10') maximum beyond the front facade and extend ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet (20')
maximum along the front facade. A flat or pitched roof that is supported by columns or piers shall extend over the entire portico. Alternatively a flat
metal canopy suspended from support rods or cables may extend over the entirety of the portico. For buildings with multiple porticoes, or a
combination of stoops and porticoes, a six foot (6') minimum landscaped area shall be provided between adjacent frontages.
e. Landscaping on both sides of the portico is required. Landscaping may be at grade or elevated, and may be demarcated by a garden wall up to
twenty four inches (24") in height or a maximum forty two inches (42") decorative, transparent fence constructed of wrought iron or metal that
faithfully imitates wrought iron. Plants may include ground covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material
(except trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent
encroachment of the public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the public sidewalk.
H. Forecourt:
1. Description: The forecourt frontage is a subordinate frontage type intended for use in combination with one or more of the above permitted frontage
types. See table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The forecourt frontage is created by setting back the central portion of
the building facade to create an entry plaza or green that is surrounded by building facades on three (3) sides. Forecourts at corners are not
permitted.
FIGURE 2G-21
FORECOURT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 332/715
2. Standards:
a. Forecourts shall be twenty feet (20') minimum in depth and width, however, neither dimension shall exceed 1.5 times the other dimension. In
addition, the width of a forecourt shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the overall facade width.
b. Forecourts may provide access to a central lobby of a larger building or may provide access to multiple uses through individual entrances.
Depending on ground floor uses, forecourts may be appropriate for either semiprivate or public uses, such as outdoor cafes, gardens, public art, or
fountains.
c. The forecourt may be hardscaped or landscaped, or a combination thereof, and may be elevated twenty four inches (24") maximum above the
elevation of the public sidewalk to maintain visual connectivity between the forecourt and the public sidewalk. If elevated, steps and/or ramps shall
be provided to directly connect the forecourt with the adjacent sidewalk.
d. Garden walls twenty four inches (24") maximum in height may be used to separate the forecourt from the public sidewalk while maintaining visual
connectivity. The garden wall's design and materials shall be high quality and compatible with the building's architecture.
e. Where landscaped areas are provided, plants may include ground covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant
material (except trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to
prevent encroachment of the public sidewalk or walkways necessary to gain access to the building. Thorny plants are not permitted within three
feet (3') of public sidewalks or walkways necessary to gain access to the building.
f. Other design standards required for the primary frontage types shall apply. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-5: BUILDING TYPE STANDARDS:
A. Generally: The building type standards differentiate and define a range of principal building typologies deemed appropriate for the Riverfront Crossings
District and the Eastside Mixed Use District. The building types describe basic building configuration and massing, pedestrian access, vehicle access,
and parking specific to each typology. The standards are intended to complement the subdistrict standards and frontage type standards set forth in
previous sections. Illustrations are intended to demonstrate basic building type standards, and are not intended to promote a particular architectural
style or represent the architectural detail necessary for high quality buildings. In the event of conflicting requirements the more stringent requirement
shall control.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies which of the building types are allowed in each of the subdistricts: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
TABLE 2G-6
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
Permitted
Building Types
Form-Based Zoning Districts
South
Downtown Park
South
Gilbert University
Central
Crossings Gilbert
West
Riverfront
Eastside
Mixed Use Orchard
Cottage home X X X
Rowhouse X X X X
Townhouse X X X X X X X
Apartment building X X X X X X X X X
Multi-dwelling building X X X X X X X X X
Live-work townhouse X X X X X X X X2
Commercial building X X X X X X X
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 333/715
X1
Mixed-use building X X X X X X X X1
Liner building X X X X X X X X
Civic or institutional building X X X X X X X X
Notes:
1. Only allowed on properties with frontage on Van Buren Street or Burlington Street.
2. Only allowed on properties with frontage on Orchard Street.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
B. Cottage Home:
1. Description: The cottage home is a detached single-family house on a fee simple lot. The cottage home provides a semiprivate front yard and a
private back yard. Garages are located in the rear yards, accessed either from an alley or by narrow driveways between adjacent cottage homes.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-22
COTTAGE HOME (ALLEY ACCESS)
FIGURE 2G-23
COTTAGE HOME (DRIVEWAY ACCESS)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 334/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed of one-, one and a half-, or two-story volumes.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. The main entrance shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a garage located in the rear yard behind the principal building. Garages may be detached, attached to the principal
building, or connected to the principal building by a covered or enclosed breezeway.
b. Vehicular access shall be provided as follows:
(1) Where a public alley or private rear lane is present garages shall be accessed from the alley or rear lane.
(2) Where no rear access is possible, garages shall be accessed through maximum ten feet (10') wide driveways accessed from the front of the lot
between adjacent cottage homes. Shared driveways between adjacent lots are encouraged.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
C. Row House:
1. Description: The row house is a single-family unit that shares common walls with one or two (2) of the adjacent units. A row house may be located
on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multi-unit development. The row house provides a semiprivate front yard and a private back yard. Table
2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-24
ROW HOUSE
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-story volumes.
b. Groups of row houses may consist of two (2) to six (6) attached units.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. The main entrance shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a garage, which may be detached or attached to the principal building.
b. Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane and shall not face the street.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
D. Townhouse:
1. Description: The townhouse is a single-family unit that shares common walls with one or two (2) of the adjacent units. A townhouse may be located
on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multi-unit development. The townhouse provides a semiprivate front yard but no private back yard. Table
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 335/715
2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-25
TOWNHOUSE
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-story volumes.
b. Groups of townhouses may consist of two (2) to ten (10) units.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. Entrances to each dwelling shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See
section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a garage attached to or tucked under the unit at the rear.
b. Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane and shall not face the street.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
E. Apartment Building:
1. Description: The apartment building is designed to be occupied by multiple dwelling units configured as a double loaded corridor building. The
apartment building is oriented perpendicular to the primary street frontage and sits atop an underground parking garage whose bay width determines
the building width. Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-26
APARTMENT BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 336/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed of two-, three-, or four-story (where permitted) volumes.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. The main entrance to the apartment building shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed
frontage type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. Access to dwelling units shall be from a shared lobby located at the main entrance with entrances to each dwelling unit provided through central
corridors. Exterior corridors and exterior stairways to upper floor dwelling units are not permitted.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in an underground structure located beneath the building footprint. The underground structure shall be designed so that
the finished floor elevation of the residential space above matches the elevation of the frontage type (see section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type
Standards", of this article).
b. Additional surface parking may be located to the rear of the building.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
F. Multi-Dwelling Building:
1. Description: The multi-dwelling building is designed to be occupied by multi-family dwelling units or group living uses. The multi-dwelling building
may be arranged in a variety of configurations, including bar, L, U and C shapes. A multi-dwelling building may be configured around a courtyard
providing private outdoor space, or may be part of a larger development with multiple buildings configured around a common courtyard. Table 2G-6
of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-27
MULTI-DWELLING BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 337/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back requirements.
b. Courtyards shall have no dimension less than twenty feet (20') and shall be designed with appropriate landscaping and/or hardscaping to provide
a safe and attractive outdoor space for residents of the building.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. The main entrance to the multi-dwelling building shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed
frontage type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. Access to dwelling units shall be from a shared lobby located at the main entrance with entrances to each dwelling unit provided through shared
corridors. Exterior corridors and exterior stairways to upper floor dwelling units are not permitted.
c. Ground floor dwelling units fronting on a street may also have a separate entrance directly from the street through an allowed frontage type.
However, the scale and design of entrances to individual units shall be such that the entrance to the shared lobby is clearly recognizable as the
building's main entrance.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a surface lot in the rear, an underground structure, an above grade midblock structure, an integrated structure
contained within the base of the building, or a combination thereof.
b. Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This space
shall be landscaped to screen the parking structure and may contain an alley or private rear lane providing vehicular access to the structure.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
G. Live-Work Townhouse:
1. Description: The live-work townhouse is designed to be occupied by a single dwelling unit and a single ground floor commercial or flex space. The
live-work townhouse shares common walls with one or two (2) adjacent units and may be located on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multiunit
development. Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-28
LIVE-WORK TOWNHOUSE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 338/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-story volumes.
b. Groups of live-work townhouses may consist of two (2) to ten (10) units.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. Entrances to ground floor commercial or flex space shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an
allowed frontage type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. Entrances to each dwelling unit shall be provided through a separate street level entrance or through a foyer shared with the commercial space.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a garage attached to or tucked under the unit at the rear, and/or a surface lot located behind the building.
b. Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane and shall not face the street.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
H. Commercial Building:
1. Description: Commercial buildings are designed for occupancy by one or more nonresidential uses. If present, uses generating visitor or customer
traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal services) are typically located on the ground floor facing the sidewalk. Table 2G-6 of this section identifies
the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-29
COMMERCIAL BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 339/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back requirements.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. For buildings occupied by a single user: The main entrance to a lobby shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street
through an allowed frontage type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. For buildings occupied by multiple uses: Entrances to ground floor commercial spaces shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed
from a street through an allowed frontage type. Entrances to upper floor commercial space shall be through a street level lobby and/or interior
corridors accessed from the street through a separate entrance.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground structure, above grade midblock structure, tuck under parking, or a combination thereof.
b. Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This space
may contain an alley or private rear lane.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
I. Mixed Use Building:
1. Description: Mixed use buildings are designed for occupancy by a minimum of two (2) different uses that may be vertically and/or horizontally
demised. If present, uses generating visitor or customer traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal services, live-work commercial space) are
typically located on the ground floor facing the sidewalk, whereas uses generating limited pedestrian activity (such as office or residential) are
typically located on upper floors or behind street fronting commercial uses. Residential uses are not allowed in street-facing storefront spaces unless
designed as live-work space. Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-30
MIXED USE BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 340/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back requirements.
b. Courtyards shall have no dimension less than twenty feet (20') and shall be designed with appropriate landscaping and/or hardscaping to provide
a safe and attractive outdoor space.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. Entrances to ground floor commercial spaces shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street through an allowed frontage
type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. Entrances to upper floor commercial space or dwelling units shall be through a street level lobby and/or interior corridors accessed from the street
through a separate entrance.
c. Entrances to live-work residential space may be provided directly from the live-work commercial space.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground structure, above grade midblock structure, an integrated structure contained within the
base of the building, or a combination thereof in accordance with the parking type standards. See section 14-2G-6, table 2G-7 of this article.
b. Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This space
may contain an alley or private rear lane.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
J. Liner Building:
1. Description: A liner building is a shallow building designed and placed in a manner that hides a parking structure from public view and provides for
more active, pedestrian oriented building uses along a street frontage. Liner buildings are oriented toward the street with no or minimal openings to
the rear. The parking structure in the rear may be attached to the liner building, or slightly detached as required for fire separation. The liner building
may be occupied by a single use or a mix of uses. If present, uses generating visitor or customer traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal
services) are typically located on the ground floor facing the sidewalk, whereas uses generating lower pedestrian activity (such as office or
residential) are typically located on upper floors. The liner building may also include live-work units, and townhouse units. Table 2G-6 of this section
identifies the subdistricts where this building type is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-31
LINER BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 341/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. A liner building shall be at least tall enough to visually screen the parking structure behind the building.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. Entrances to ground floor uses shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type.
See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. Entrances to upper floor commercial space or dwelling units shall be through a street level lobby and/or interior corridors accessed directly from
the street.
c. Entrances to live-work residential lofts may be provided directly from the live-work commercial space through internal stairs.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. Parking shall be provided in a parking structure located behind the liner building.
b. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
K. Civic Or Institutional Building:
1. Description: Civic or institutional buildings are designed for occupancy by public or quasi-public uses that provide important services to the
community. A civic or institutional building contributes significantly to the quality of a place and often is the focal point of a public open space and built
with high quality materials and architectural design. Civic or institutional buildings may be publicly owned and operated (e.g., city hall, post office,
school, courthouse), semipublic (YMCA, Boys And Girls Club, museum), or privately owned and operated (e.g., church, daycare center, private
school).
FIGURE 2G-32
CIVIC OR INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 342/715
2. Building Size And Massing:
a. Civic or institutional buildings may be designed as freestanding buildings in a public space or integrated into the urban fabric, as deemed
appropriate for their use and context.
b. Civic or institutional buildings that are integrated into the urban fabric should generally be composed in accordance with the applicable subdistrict
standards with respect to setbacks, building height, and step back requirements. However, the FBC committee may approve exceptions under the
following circumstances:
(1) To accommodate architectural elements integral to the building design that contribute to public realm, such as a tower or steeple, or an entry
plaza.
(2) To accommodate appropriate civic or institutional uses that cannot feasibly be accommodated within the building envelope permitted in the
applicable subdistrict.
c. Freestanding civic or institutional buildings may be located within a public or publicly accessible park or plaza and are exempt from the maximum
setback requirements of the applicable subdistrict. However, freestanding buildings shall be designed with four (4) building facades of equal
architectural quality.
3. Primary Pedestrian Access:
a. For buildings occupied by a single user: The main entrance to a lobby shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street
through an allowed frontage type. See section 14-2G-4, table 2G-5 of this article.
b. For buildings occupied by multiple uses: The building may provide either a shared entrance with street level lobby, or separate entrances. All
entrances shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street through allowed frontage types.
c. Freestanding civic or institutional buildings shall provide pedestrian access from at least two (2) sides.
4. Vehicle Parking:
a. For freestanding civic or institutional buildings:
(1) Vehicular access shall be limited to service and emergency vehicle access, provided through pedestrian walkways of sufficient width and
construction.
(2) Parking shall be provided on street. Shared off street parking may be provided remotely in a lot or structure.
b. For civic or institutional buildings integrated into the urban fabric:
(1) Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground structure, above grade midblock structure, an integrated structure contained within the
base of the building, or a combination thereof in accordance with the parking type standards. See section 14-2G-6, table 2G-7 of this article.
(2) Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This
space may contain an alley or private rear lane.
c. Refer to section 14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-6: PARKING TYPE STANDARDS:
A. Generally: The parking type standards describe the allowed off street parking options and determine their basic design requirements. Additional
requirements are set forth in the subdistrict standards and building type standards of this article. The images herein are intended to illustrate typical
conditions. The actual design and configuration of a parking facility may vary.
Table 2G-7 of this section identifies which of the parking types are allowed in conjunction with each of the building types:
TABLE 2G-7
PERMITTED PARKING TYPES
Building Types
Permitted Parking Types
Garage
Tuck Under
Parking Surface Lot
Midblock
Structure
Lined
Structure
Integrated
Structure
Underground
Structure
Cottage home X
Row house X
Townhouse X X
Apartment building X X X
Multi-dwelling building X X X X
Live-work townhouse X X X
Commercial building X X X X X
Mixed use building X X X X
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 343/715
Liner building X
Civic or institutional building X X X X X X
B. Garage: Garages provide private, enclosed parking spaces for individual dwelling units. Garages shall be located behind the principal building and may
be attached to it, connected through a breezeway, or detached.
FIGURE 2G-33
GARAGE
C. Tuck Under Parking: Tuck under parking provides covered and enclosed parking spaces located at the rear of a building. Tuck under parking may be
combined with other parking types and works particularly well on properties that slope away from the primary street right of way and where a residential
dwelling must be elevated above a flood hazard area.
FIGURE 2G-34
TUCK UNDER PARKING
D. Surface Lot: Surface lots provide uncovered, at grade parking spaces. Surface lots shall be located according to the rules set forth in section 14-2G-3,
"Subdistrict Standards", of this article.
FIGURE 2G-35
SURFACE LOT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 344/715
E. Midblock Structure: Midblock structures are freestanding parking structures located in the center of a larger block. Midblock structures shall be set back
from adjacent buildings by at least forty feet (40') to provide sufficient light and privacy for commercial or residential uses facing the block interior. This
setback may accommodate an alley, private rear lane, and/or rear yards.
FIGURE 2G-36
MIDBLOCK STRUCTURE
F. Lined Structure: Lined structures are parking structures located behind shallow liner buildings that are oriented solely toward the street. Lined structures
may be directly attached to the liner building or detached by a minimal fire separation distance. Lined structures shall be limited to a height that is
adequately screened from public view by the associated liner building.
FIGURE 2G-37
LINED STRUCTURE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 345/715
G. Integrated Structure: Integrated structures are parking structures located within an occupied building. Integrated structures may be fully or partially
integrated into the building.
FIGURE 2G-38
INTEGRATED STRUCTURE
H. Underground Structure: Underground structures are parking structures located below grade. Underground structures may be combined with other
aboveground parking types.
FIGURE 2G-39
UNDERGROUND STRUCTURE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 346/715
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Streetscape And Frontage Area Improvements:
1. The area within the public right of way between existing or planned curb lines and the streetside property line shall be improved for pedestrian
circulation, streetscape amenities, and landscape space consistent with provisions of the riverfront crossings district master plan and the city's
sidewalk standards and tree requirements. In the riverfront crossings and eastside mixed use districts, street trees shall be planted in the public right
of way between the public sidewalk and street curb, according to the tree species and planting specifications of the city forester. One overstory tree
is required for every thirty feet (30') of lot frontage, but not less than one tree per lot. Smaller trees may be approved by the FBC committee in
locations where overstory trees would interfere with overhead utilities. If any of these provisions conflict, the more specific standard shall apply.
2. The private frontage area, which is the area between the property line and the plane of any street-facing building facade, shall be improved
consistent with section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article. Within the private frontage area, outdoor storage and work areas,
mechanical equipment, accessory buildings, or other improvements that detract from the quality of the pedestrian environment are prohibited. The
placement of walls and fencing shall comply with the applicable frontage type standards. In the west riverfront subdistrict the private frontage area
may differ as described in the subdistrict standards.
3. All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking, vehicular and pedestrian use areas shall be landscaped with trees and/or plant materials.
A landscaping plan for such areas must be submitted at the time of site plan review.
FIGURE 2G-40
STREETSCAPE AND FRONTAGE AREA
IMPROVEMENTS - TYPICAL NONRESIDENTIAL FRONTAGE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 347/715
FIGURE 2G-41
STREETSCAPE AND FRONTAGE AREA
IMPROVEMENTS - TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL FRONTAGE
B. Pedestrian Streets:
1. Buildings may front on a pedestrian street, where provided, in compliance with the requirements in sections 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", and
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article. In such a case, the pedestrian street is considered a primary street, and as such, all provisions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 348/715
this article that apply to primary streets shall also apply to pedestrian streets. In cases where a pedestrian street is illustrated on the regulating plan
as a primary street and for Ralston Creek frontages illustrated on the regulating plan, a pedestrian street is required, and must be designed
according to the following standards. In the case of a Ralston Creek frontage, the required stream corridor buffer may be included in the required
pedestrian street right of way or public access easement.
2. Pedestrian streets shall be designed to meet the following standards:
a. Public Pedestrian Street:
(1) Public pedestrian streets shall be located within a public right of way and function like a street, but be limited to nonmotorized traffic.
(2) Buildings shall front on and be accessed from the public pedestrian street through an allowed frontage type.
(3) Public pedestrian streets shall be at least forty feet (40') in width and intersect with, be perpendicular to and visible from a public street right of
way and be owned by a government entity. Additional right of way width may be required beyond the minimum based on location and the
amount of pedestrian traffic anticipated.
(4) Public pedestrian streets may provide for pedestrian travel through a block to other neighborhood destinations, such as parks, riverfront areas,
trails, schools, and neighborhood commercial areas.
b. Private Pedestrian Street:
(1) Private pedestrian streets shall be designed as publicly accessible thoroughfares that function like residential streets but are limited to
nonmotorized traffic.
(2) Residential buildings shall front on and be accessed from the private pedestrian street through an allowed frontage type.
(3) A private pedestrian street shall be established through a shared public access easement that shall be at minimum thirty feet (30') wide and
intersect with, be perpendicular to and visible from a public street right of way.
c. Ralston Creek Frontages:
(1) The required thirty foot (30') stream corridor buffer shall serve as the pedestrian street right of way or public access easement and shall
function like a street, but is limited to nonmotorized traffic.
(2) Buildings shall front on and be accessed from the pedestrian street through an allowed frontage type.
(3) The required public trail may serve as a sidewalk that provides access to building frontages. In addition, a separate sidewalk may be
constructed on a raised terrace along the building frontages to provide better access to residential units that are elevated above the flood hazard
level.
d. General Standards: A creative and unique streetscape along the pedestrian street is encouraged based on the type and scale of the buildings
along the frontage and the amount of pedestrian traffic anticipated. Streetscape design shall be approved by the FBC committee and must meet
the following minimum standards:
(1) To ensure public safety, pedestrian scale lighting is required along any pedestrian street per city requirements as determined by the FBC
committee.
(2) Depending on the location and the design of the development, provision for emergency vehicle access may be required. If required, a central
paved pathway must be provided that is at least twenty feet (20') wide and remains free of obstructions.
(3) Each pedestrian street, except for Ralston Creek frontages and pedestrian streets that require a central twenty foot (20') fire lane, shall include
at least two (2), minimum six foot (6') wide public sidewalks separated by a central green space. For pedestrian streets that exclusively serve
residential building types, one centrally located minimum ten foot (10') sidewalk flanked by green space may be approved by the FBC
committee. See subsection B2c of this section for sidewalk requirements for Ralston Creek frontages.
(4) Street trees must be planted at the same ratio as required for a regular street right of way, although trees may be clustered or spaced
according to the streetscape design plan approved by the FBC committee.
(5) Any areas that are not intended for pedestrian pathways shall be landscaped or used for pedestrian amenities, bicycle parking, seating areas,
public art, sidewalk cafe seating, and similar. Landscaped areas may be designed to provide stormwater conveyance.
C. Pedestrian Passageways:
1. For buildings with nonresidential uses and facades longer than two hundred feet (200') along a primary street, publicly accessible pedestrian
passageways from primary streets to and through the interior of the block are required to provide pedestrian access from parking areas at the rear of
buildings to street frontages.
2. Passageways shall be designed to meet the following standards:
a. Passageways shall be twenty feet (20') minimum in width and twelve feet (12') minimum in height;
b. Upper floors may continue over the passageway. Open air passageways are also allowed;
c. Passageways should be designed to preclude normal vehicular access and preferably be separate from other emergency vehicle accessways to
the interior of the block;
d. If a pedestrian passageway is provided in conjunction with a midblock driveway, the pedestrian walkway shall be separated from vehicular traffic
by raising and curbing the walkway. Bollards and/or landscaping may also be required to improve safety in high traffic volume situations;
e. Pedestrian passageways serving projects with ground floor residential use may be for the sole use of building tenants and secured with gates;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 349/715
f. To ensure safe and secure use, passageways shall be designed to provide clear lines of sight, little or no variation in enclosing wall planes,
adequate light levels, and shall be kept clean and clear of debris.
D. Street Screens:
1. Where street screens are required in section 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article, a wall that meets the following standards shall be built
for the purpose of enhancing security or for screening a parking lot or side yard area from public view.
2. Street screens shall be designed to meet the following standards:
a. Street screens shall be constructed coplanar with or recessed maximum two feet (2') from the street-facing facade.
b. Street screens shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height but shall not exceed the height of the ground floor facade.
c. Street screens shall be constructed of masonry or other high quality wall material complementary to the adjacent building facade. A decorative
wrought iron or metal fence that faithfully imitates wrought iron may be approved by the FBC committee, provided the intended purpose of the
street screen is achieved.
d. Street screens may have openings for approved driveways and pedestrian passageways.
e. Street screens over fifteen feet (15') in length shall be articulated and/or be enhanced by landscaping to provide visual interest along the street
frontage.
E. Open Space Requirement For Projects With Residential Use:
1. On lots that contain multi-dwelling buildings, apartment buildings, and/or mixed use buildings that contain multi-family or group living uses, usable
open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square feet per bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, according
to the standards set forth in this subsection.
2. For the purpose of this section, "open space" is defined as having the following characteristics:
a. Open air, outdoor space accessible for shared use by occupants of residential units on the property, except as allowed for indoor activity space, as
noted below;
b. Designed to preserve privacy for individual dwelling units;
c. Improved to support passive recreation, leisure activities and informal gathering;
d. Includes amenities such as seating, shade trees, planters, gardens, and/or other improvements to support passive recreation or leisure activities;
e. Located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than four hundred (400) square feet, with no dimension less than
twenty feet (20') and no slope greater than ten percent (10%);
f. Separated and buffered from vehicular use areas through the use of landscaping and/or garden walls or fencing.
3. Paved areas and bicycle parking areas shall not be counted toward usable open space, except that paved paths no wider than five feet (5') and
pervious pavement designed exclusively for passive outdoor recreation may be included within the defined open space area.
4. Private frontage areas may not count toward the open space requirement, except for forecourts, as noted below.
5. Shared garden and patio space located on upper floor terraces, rooftops or podiums (on the top level of a parking garage) shall count toward the
open space requirement, provided these areas are designed with green features, such as planters or functional green roofs, contain outdoor seating
and other appropriate amenities, are free of any obstructions, screened from rooftop mechanical equipment, and are improved and available for safe
and convenient access to all residential occupants of the building. Security and close monitoring of any such space is required to ensure the safety of
residents and the public. The city reserves the right to restrict or close such a space and require the owner to pay a fee in lieu if such space is
deemed a public hazard or nuisance.
6. A forecourt meeting the standards above shall count toward the open space requirements, provided:
a. It complies with the forecourt frontage type standards in section 14-2G-4 of this article;
b. It is square or rectangular in form with a minimum side dimension of twenty feet (20') and no side greater than 1.5 times the dimension of another
side;
c. It includes amenities such as seating, shade trees, planters, gardens, and/or other improvements to support passive recreation or leisure activities;
d. Its elevation is not lower than grade or higher than the ground floor finished floor elevation.
7. Indoor activity space may count for up to fifty percent (50%) of the required open space, provided the indoor activity space meets the following
requirements:
a. The space is accessible for shared use by occupants of residential units on the property;
b. It is designed to preserve privacy for individual dwelling units;
c. It is improved to support recreation and leisure activities and informal gathering and as such is separate and distinguishable from entry areas,
storage areas, mailroom, and other areas not devoted to recreation and leisure activities;
d. Each indoor activity area is not less than two hundred twenty five (225) square feet, with no dimension less than fifteen feet (15');
e. A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the combined surface area of all the walls is transparent and at least one wall is an exterior wall with
minimum forty percent (40%) window coverage. If located on the top floor, transparent skylights may be counted toward the transparency
requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 350/715
8. The payment of a fee in lieu of providing the required usable open space may be requested by the developer in cases where there is practical
difficulty meeting the standards. A fee in lieu of the open space requirement may be requested according to the following procedures and
requirements:
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the open space requirement must be met on site, either as usable outdoor space and/or as indoor activity area
meeting the minimum dimensional requirements as stated above, unless the lot contains residential development of twenty (20) or fewer
bedrooms. In such a case, up to one hundred percent (100%) of the open space requirement may be satisfied with a payment in lieu;
b. The developer must request payment in lieu of open space at the time of site plan review;
c. The fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit;
d. The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land that otherwise would have been required for the open space. The fair market value of
the land shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser who is acceptable to both the city and the developer. The appraisal cost shall be
borne by the developer.
e. All such fees shall be deposited in either the riverfront crossings district east (for properties located east of the Iowa River), the riverfront crossings
district west (for properties located west of the Iowa River), or the eastside mixed use open space account. All payments will be used to acquire or
develop public open spaces, parks, recreation facilities and greenways/trails that are located within the applicable riverfront crossings open space
district. For the eastside mixed use district funds shall be used within the central planning district - subarea A.
F. Building Design Standards:
1. Facade Composition:
a. Building facades shall be designed with a base, middle, and top, as illustrated in figure 2G-42 of this section. The ground floor facade, or in the
case of taller buildings the facade of the first few stories, composes the base. The building elements and features above or including the
uppermost occupied floor, including parapet walls and eaves, compose the top. The top of buildings shall be delineated with some form of cornice
expression, either with trim material, brackets and panels, eave details, or accentuated masonry. The base of a building shall be distinguished from
the middle through the use of string courses, cornice expression, or installation of awnings or canopies. Where the exterior wall material changes
along the vertical plane of the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a belt course, soldier course, band board or
other trim appropriate to the building materials being used.
b. To break up building facades along street frontages, facades shall be divided vertically into bays, as illustrated in figure 2G-42 of this section.
Facade bays shall be twenty feet (20') minimum and thirty five feet (35') maximum in width and establish a rhythm of vertical modules unified by a
complementary rhythm of windows and window groupings. Facade bays shall be distinguished by varying fenestration patterns, recessing wall
planes, varying building materials, or establishing a rhythm of architectural elements such as pilasters or window bays. Where the exterior wall
material changes along the horizontal plane of a building, the change must occur on an inside corner of the building wall. In the eastside mixed use
district, the standard in subsection F1d of this section applies instead of this standard.
c. To avoid flat, continuous, and overly long upper floor facades, the maximum length of an upper floor facade shall be fifty feet (50'). Articulation
between continuous upper floor facade sections shall be accomplished by recessing the facade two feet (2') minimum for a distance of at least ten
feet (10') along rear and side facades and three feet (3') minimum for a distance of at least ten feet (10') along front facades, as illustrated in figure
2G-42 of this section. If an upper story facade is recessed more than five feet (5'), said distance shall be increased to at least twenty feet (20'). If
balconies are constructed within the recessed area, the distance between the outside edges of any balconies that face each other across the
recessed area shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18'). In the eastside mixed use district, the standard in subsection F1d of this section applies
instead of this standard.
d. In the eastside mixed use district, building facades greater than forty feet (40') in width must be broken into modules that give the appearance of
smaller, individual buildings, as illustrated in figure 2G-42B of this section. Each module must meet the following standards. In no case shall a
mixed use building, commercial building, multi-dwelling building or apartment building be greater than sixty feet (60') in width along primary street
frontages unless designed as a building with a landscaped forecourt frontage and building wings that do not exceed sixty feet (60') in width along
primary street frontages, as approved by the FBC committee.
(1) Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no less than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent modules
by a variation in the wall plane of at least two feet (2') in depth along rear and side facades and at least three feet (3') in depth along front
facades.
(2) Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
(3) As appropriate to the chosen architectural style of the building, each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at least one of
the following means: variation in material colors, types, or textures; variation in the building and/or parapet height; variation in the architectural
details such as decorative banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents; variation in window pattern; variation in the use of balconies, recesses, or bay
windows.
e. Architectural style in the eastside mixed use district: Buildings must be designed in a manner that is consistent with a historic architectural style
typical of residential buildings in the central planning district. However, building facades that are visible only from public alleys are not subject to
these standards. The applicable architectural styles are as follows: Italianate; Queen Anne; colonial revival; craftsman; craftsman bungalow;
American foursquare; prairie style; period revival; and eclectic. The applicant must indicate in detail how each of the following architectural
elements in the proposed building are consistent with one of these architectural styles:
(1) Form and mass of the building;
(2) Roof configuration and pitch;
(3) Style and placement of windows and doors;
(4) Window and door trim, eave boards, frieze boards, and other trim;
(5) Porch and entrance features;
(6) Building details and ornamentation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 351/715
f. To create a seamless transition between the facades of a building at a street corner, both street-facing facades shall be designed with equal
architectural quality and detail as illustrated in figure 2G-43 of this section. Buildings shall reinforce street corners by repeating facade elements
such as signs, awnings and window and wall treatments on both sides of the building facing the corner. Additional corner emphasis with chamfered
or rounded facades, corner entries accentuated through changes in design treatments, materials, canopy projections, roof or parapet forms, or
through other architectural method is encouraged on street corners. Where additional corner emphasis is provided that extends vertically to the top
of the building, the upper floor step back requirement may be waived or adjusted by the FBC committee.
g. For any exterior building wall that faces a street, park, forecourt, plaza, public trail, the Iowa River or Ralston Creek, a minimum of twenty five
percent (25%) of said wall between the ground floor and the top of the wall shall be comprised of doors and transparent windows, with the
following exceptions:
(1) For buildings with storefront and urban flex frontages, this standard applies only to upper floors with the ground floor meeting fenestration
requirements for these frontage types.
(2) Side facades built to the property line that will abut an adjacent building, but that are temporarily within public view, are exempt from this
requirement.
h. Along street-facing facades and facades that face the Iowa River, Ralston Creek, plazas, open space or trails, blank walls greater than fifteen feet
(15') in length are not allowed. Elements such as windows, doors, columns, pilasters, changes in material, artwork, or other architectural details
that provide visual interest must be distributed across the facade in a manner consistent with the overall design of the building.
FIGURE 2G-42
FACADE COMPOSITION
FIGURE 2G-42B
BUILDING COMPOSITION IN THE EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 352/715
FIGURE 2G-43
CORNER TREATMENT
2. Building Entries:
a. Primary entries to ground floor building space and to common lobbies accessing upper floor building space shall be accessed through an allowed
frontage type located along street-facing facades with preference given to entries along facades facing primary streets. Building entries along rear
and side facades or from parking garages may not serve as principal building entries. Buildings with more than three (3) street-facing facades shall
have building entries on at least two (2) sides.
b. For buildings that contain residential dwelling units, there must be at least one main entrance on the street-facing facade that provides pedestrian
access to dwelling units within the building through an allowed frontage type. For buildings with more than two (2) street frontages, building
entrances must be provided along at least two (2) street frontages and at least one of those entrances must be along the primary street. Access to
dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage or from a rear or side entrance.
c. Entries on street-facing facades shall be sheltered by an awning, canopy, a recessed doorway, portico, and/or a porch as appropriate to the
frontage type, and shall be distinguished by facade recesses or variations in facade design appropriate to the frontage type as set forth in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
d. Primary residential entries shall be demarcated with a transom and sidelight windows, pilasters and pediment, door surround and raised cornice,
or a combination of these treatments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 353/715
e. For storefront and urban flex frontages greater than one hundred feet (100') in length, at least one usable building entry shall be provided for every
fifty feet (50') of frontage. This requirement shall not apply in the west riverfront subdistrict.
f. Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways to upper floor building space are not permitted. Unenclosed, exterior corridors on upper floors
are not permitted.
g. Along street frontages, sliding doors are prohibited as building entries. Sliding doors may not be used as a primary means of entrance to any
residential building or residential unit.
3. Windows:
FIGURE 2G-44
WINDOW CONFIGURATIONS
a. Windows in residential buildings or the residential portions of mixed use buildings shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Individual window units that are visible from a public street, pedestrian street, or public park, plaza or trail shall have a height that is at least 1.5
times greater than the width of the window unit, as illustrated in figure 2G-44 of this section.
(2) Individual window units may be located side by side, or ganged, in a wider window opening, but the width of the opening may not exceed its
height, as illustrated in figure 2G-44 of this section.
(3) Windows may be grouped, but individual window units shall be separated by minimum three and one-half inch (31/2") trim, as illustrated in
figure 2G-44 of this section.
(4) Bathroom, kitchen, skylights, and decorative windows, such as stained glass and ocular windows, are not required to meet the above
dimensional standards.
(5) Windows on facades shall be double or single hung, hinged casement, pivoted, projected, or fixed.
(6) Windows shall be accentuated with facade treatments, recesses, and trim appropriate to the wall material and architectural style of the building.
Windows in walls constructed of masonry, stucco, or similar shall be recessed a minimum of two inches (2") from the facade and accentuated
with sills and lintels or other similar treatment. In walls not constructed of masonry, stucco or similar, windows must include minimum three inch
(3") trim. If simulated muntins are used they shall be affixed to the exterior of the windows.
4. Story Heights:
a. For all mixed use and nonresidential buildings, the minimum ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height is fourteen feet (14'). For live-work
townhouses, the minimum ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height is eleven feet (11').
b. Upper floors shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') floor to floor.
5. Building Materials:
a. Buildings shall be constructed of durable, high quality materials. Table 2G-8 of this section lists allowable exterior finish materials, the portion of
the building on which they are allowed, and any specific standards that apply. The FBC committee shall review the proposed palette of building
materials to ensure compliance with these standards and to ensure that materials and colors form a cohesive design for the building as related to
the mass and scale of the building, the building type, frontage condition, and proposed architectural style.
b. All building facades within public view of a street, pedestrian street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek, or the Iowa River shall use materials
and design features similar to or complementary to those of the front facade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 354/715
TABLE 2G-8
PERMITTED BUILDING MATERIALS
Permitted
Building Materials
Permitted Location/Application Of Material
Trim/Accent
Material
Top Of
Building
Middle Of
Building
Base/Bottom
Of Building
Storefront And
Urban Flex
Frontages
Architectural CMU2 X X X X X
Brick (face/veneer)1 X X X X X
EIFS/synthetic stucco/hand laid stucco6 X X
Fiber cement siding/panels3 X X X X X
Metal panels4 X X X X X
Precast concrete panels5 X X X X
Reflective glass/spandrel7 X
Tile, stone/stone veneer1 X X X X X
Translucent, fritted glass/window film8 X X X X X
Transparent glass9 X X X X X
Wood/wood composite3 X X X X X
Notes:
1. Any brick or stone veneer must be of a quality, thickness, durability, and design that faithfully imitates full wythe masonry and allows windows
and entryways to be recessed to meet the standards.
2. Shall be used in conjunction with a palette of materials and shall not comprise more than 33 percent of any facade within public view of a street,
pedestrian street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek frontage, parking area, or the Iowa River. Except for burnished/polished or glazed units,
CMU is not generally allowed for storefront and urban flex frontages. However, if approved by the FBC, architectural CMU, such as split face,
ground face, and rock face, may be used as an accent material on the storefront/urban flex frontage level.
3. For buildings that exceed 3 stories in height, these materials shall only be used in conjunction with a palette of materials and shall not comprise
more than 33 percent of any facade within public view of a street, pedestrian street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek frontage, parking area,
or the Iowa River. Not generally allowed for storefront/urban flex front applications; however, high quality, smooth faced versions may be approved
by the FBC as accent materials.
4. Shall be used in conjunction with a palette of materials; shall be a heavy gauge, nonreflective metal. Durability and maintenance of the material
shall be carefully considered if used on the ground level floor or in high use areas.
5. Shall incorporate horizontal and vertical articulation and modulation, including, but not limited to, changes in color and texture, or as part of a
palette of materials. This category does not include tilt-up concrete wall construction, which is not allowed.
6. May only be used for architectural detailing above the ground floor.
7. Shall be used in limited quantities as an accent material or as a means of visual screening. Shall not count toward minimum fenestration
requirements.
8. May be used for architectural detailing and signage. Other than for decoration and signage, use of these materials on a storefront level is
discouraged. For storefront and urban flex frontages, if use of these materials on ground floor windows reduces the transparency and blocks views
into the interior of a building, said windows shall not count toward the minimum fenestration requirements of the ground floor of the building.
Window film shall not be applied to required storefront windows in a manner that reduces transparency and blocks views into the interior of the
storefront.
9. Glass used for storefronts or urban flex frontages should be as clear and transparent as possible and individual lites for display windows should
be as large as possible to invite views into the interior of the commercial space. Transom windows are encouraged above storefront display
windows. Residential window types, closely spaced mullions, and punched windows are not allowed for storefront or urban flex frontages. Low-E
glazing will reduce transparency, so is discouraged for storefronts or urban flex fronts, but if used, the glass chosen should have a high visible light
transmittance and low reflectivity.
6. Roof Design:
a. The following building types may have flat or pitched roofs; however, mansard roofs are discouraged and shall not be permitted on single-story
buildings. Buildings over three (3) stories in height shall have flat roofs.
(1) Townhouse.
(2) Apartment building.
(3) Multi-dwelling building.
(4) Live-work townhouse.
(5) Commercial building.
(6) Mixed use building.
(7) Liner building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 355/715
(8) Civic or institutional building.
b. The following building types shall have pitched roofs. Mansard roofs are not permitted.
(1) Cottage home.
(2) Row house.
c. All roof edges shall be accentuated with eaves in a manner proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall. Buildings with flat roofs
shall be enclosed by a parapet wall and decorative cornice.
7. Awnings And Canopies:
a. Awnings and canopies may project over the public sidewalk with a minimum eight foot (8') clearance above the sidewalk, but shall not project in a
manner that will interfere with utilities, street trees, or other important right-of-way features.
b. Awnings shall be constructed of a durable material such as canvas or metal that will not fade or tear easily. Plasticized, rigid, or curved awnings or
mansard style canopies are prohibited. On storefront frontages, awnings must be open ended to allow views along the frontage.
c. Awnings shall not be internally illuminated and any signs shall be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed downward.
8. Mechanical Equipment:
a. Outdoor mechanical, electrical, and communication equipment, including heating, air conditioning, and ventilation equipment; venting and vent
terminations for commercial hoods; electric meters; electrical and communications equipment and panels; and similar features shall be placed on
the roof or to the rear of buildings. Such equipment shall not be placed in private frontage areas. Except for venting and vent terminations for
commercial hoods, said equipment may be located along the nonstreet side of buildings, if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the FBC
Committee that it is impractical to locate such equipment on the roof or to the rear of the building. Venting for commercial hoods shall be internal to
the building and terminations shall be located on the roof or may terminate through an exterior wall that abuts an alley right-of-way. If there is
practical difficulty locating horizontal vent terminations for kitchen fans, bathroom fans, and gas fireplaces for individual residential dwelling units
on the roof or to the rear or side facades, they may be allowed on front facades as long as they are designed to blend with the exterior building
facade, as approved by the FBC Committee.
b. All such equipment must be screened from public view by architectural finished screen walls and enclosures consistent and complementary to the
exterior facade of the building.
c. If within public view, rooftop mechanical penthouses shall be designed to complement the design of street-facing building facades and shall be
clad on all sides in the same materials as used on street-facing facades.
d. Packaged terminal air conditioner (PTAC) units and other similar mechanical units that are integrated into and behind the wall plane of a building
and covered and screened from view with a decorative guard that is integrated into the design of the building wall are allowed on any side of a
building.
e. Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are not visible from public streets and may not be located in a right-of-way.
G. Building Height Bonus Provisions: The building height bonus provisions provide an incentive for developments to incorporate features that provide a
public benefit or that further important goals and objective of the downtown and riverfront crossings master plan according to the eligible bonuses set
forth in this section.
1. Review Process: Request for building height bonuses will be reviewed by the FBC Committee through the design review process according to the
following rules. If Level II design review is required the proposal must also be approved by the City Council:
a. Bonus height up to two (2) additional stories above the applicable subdistrict height standard may be approved through a Level I design review.
b. A Level II design review is required for a height bonus that exceeds two (2) stories above the maximum height established for the applicable
subdistrict.
c. A Level II design review is required for open space height transfers, historic preservation height transfers and public right-of-way height transfers.
d. Multiple height bonuses or transfers may be applied to one (1) site, however, the resulting height may not exceed the following maximums:
(1) Fifteen (15) stories maximum for properties within the South Downtown, University, and Park Subdistricts.
(2) Twelve (12) stories maximum for properties within the West Riverfront Subdistrict that have frontage along the Iowa River.
(3) Eight (8) stories maximum for properties within the Central Crossings and South Gilbert Subdistricts.
(4) Five (5) stories maximum for properties within the Gilbert Subdistrict and properties within the West Riverfront Subdistrict that do not have
frontage along the Iowa River. However, bonus height is not allowed on lots that abut a residential zone. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(5) Height bonuses are not allowed in the Eastside Mixed Use District and Orchard Subdistrict. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-
16-2017)
(6) In no case shall the building height exceed the maximum height allowed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
e. All requests for bonus height shall meet the applicable approval criteria. All proposals shall demonstrate excellence in building and site design, use
high quality building materials, and be designed in a manner that contributes to the quality and character of the neighborhood. The resulting
development must meet all other applicable zoning standards. Bonus height is granted solely at the discretion of the City based on the quality of
the proposal. For buildings receiving height transfers or granted bonus height, additional upper floor stepbacks may be required to help reduce the
mass and scale of the building as it relates to surrounding development and public open space.
2. Open Space Height Transfers: The following transfer of development rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for the
development of needed public open space as envisioned in the downtown and riverfront crossings master plan:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 356/715
a. Eligibility: The open space height transfer is an option for sites that meet the following criteria:
(1) Minimum size of the open space dedication is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; and
(2) The site must have sufficient frontage on a public street or future public street so that it is highly visible and accessible to the public or is land
that can be added to an existing park or land that is suitable for development into a park node along a stream or river corridor trail; and
(3) The site is designated on the riverfront crossings regulating plan as green space; or if the site is not designated as green space on the
regulating plan, the applicant must demonstrate through a level II design review process that the site is ideally located to serve the need for
public open space for people living or working in the area and the city parks and recreation department approves the site.
b. Requirements:
(1) The area designated for the open space must be dedicated to the city as a public park.
(2) All buildings and structures that will not be retained for park purposes must be removed and the land graded and seeded to the satisfaction of
the city, unless the city council approves an alternative arrangement.
c. Transfer Of Development Rights:
(1) The floor area that results from multiplying the number of stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict standards
by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more eligible site(s) within the riverfront crossings district. For example, if the
land being dedicated for public open space is located in the park subdistrict and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, then one
hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 6) may be transferred to one or more eligible sites and the resulting
building or buildings on the receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective subdistrict, within the limits established in this section.
(2) The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s) may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
3. Historic Preservation Height Transfers: The following transfer of development rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for the
preservation and adaptive reuse of historic properties:
a. Eligibility: The historic preservation height transfer is an option for sites that meet the following criterion:
(1) The site from which the height transfer is requested (sending site) is designated as an Iowa City landmark, eligible for landmark designation,
registered on the national register of historic places, or listed as a historically significant building as determined by the survey and evaluation of
the historic and architectural resources for the vicinity.
b. Requirements:
(1) If the sending site has not already been designated as an Iowa City landmark, the applicant must apply for and obtain approval of this
designation as a condition of the transfer of development rights; and
(2) All historic buildings and structures on the sending site must be preserved against decay, deterioration, and kept free from structural defects by
the owner or such person, persons, or entities who may have custody or control thereof, according to the provisions of section 14-3B-7,
"Prevention Of Demolition By Neglect", of this title.
c. Transfer Of Development Rights:
(1) The floor area that results from multiplying the number of stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict standards
by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more eligible site(s) within the riverfront crossings district. For example, if the
land being preserved as a historic landmark is located in the central crossings subdistrict and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size,
then eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 4) may be transferred to one or more eligible sites and the resulting building or
buildings on the receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective subdistrict, within the limits established in this section.
(2) The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s) may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
4. Public Right-Of-Way Height Transfers: The following transfer of development rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for
dedication of land for public rights-of-way necessary to realize the vision of the Riverfront Crossings master plan:
a. Eligibility: The public right-of-way height transfer is an option for sites that meet the following criterion:
(1) The land proposed for dedication (sending site) is needed in order to construct or improve rights-of-way necessary to realize the vision of the
Riverfront Crossings master plan.
b. Requirements:
(1) The subject land must be dedicated to the City for use as public right-of-way.
(2) All buildings and structures on the land to be dedicated must be removed, unless the City Council approves an alternative arrangement.
c. Transfer Of Development Rights:
(1) The floor area that results from multiplying the number of stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict standards
by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more eligible site(s) within the Riverfront Crossings District. For example, if the
land being dedicated for public right-of-way is located in the South Gilbert Subdistrict and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, then
one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 6) may be transferred to one or more eligible sites and the resulting
building or buildings on the receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective subdistrict, within the limits established in this section.
(2) The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s) may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
5. Height Bonus For Class A Office Space: Two (2) additional floors of building height may be granted for every floor of Class A office space provided.
To qualify for this bonus, the office space must be located on floors above the ground floor of the building and meet the definition of Class A office
space as stated below. Only nonresidential uses shall be allowed in the designated Class A office space. As defined by the Building Owners and
Managers Association International (BOMA), Class A office space is space that is of a quality that is attractive for premier office users with rents
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 357/715
above average for the area. Class A office buildings have high quality standard finishes, state of the art systems, exceptional accessibility and a
definite market presence. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
6. Height Bonus For Public Art: One additional floor of building height may be granted for a contribution to the City's public art program equal to one
percent (1%) of threshold value of the project. Threshold value is the sum of all construction costs shown on all building permits associated with the
project, including site preparation. For alterations to existing development, the threshold value is the sum of all construction costs as defined above
plus the value of existing improvements to the property, as listed in the City Assessor's records. Funds contributed shall be used by the City for public
art within the Riverfront Crossings District as approved by the Public Art Committee. (Ord. 18-4770, 11-20-2018)
7. Height Bonus For Leadership In Energy And Environmental Design: Up to four (4) additional floors of building height may be granted for projects that
are designed to meet high standards with regard to energy efficiency and environmental stewardship, according to LEED or other similar
environmental or energy efficiency rating system. In general, the higher the level of energy efficiency or environmental stewardship demonstrated,
the greater the bonus. The amount of bonus granted will be based on the overall quality of the project. Bonus height may also be granted for projects
that are designed to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on the environment through the use of bioswales, rain gardens, greenroofs, rainwater
harvesting, and stream bank stabilization and restoration along Ralston Creek or the Iowa River, as described in the riverfront crossings district
subarea plan adopted in April 2011. Any such green feature(s) must be designed using best management practices and demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the design will be successful given applicable factors, such as soil conditions, access to sunlight, topography, etc. A long
term maintenance plan must accompany any proposal for such green features.
8. Height Bonus For Student Housing: Up to five (5) floors of additional building height may be granted for projects that are ideally located and
designed to provide a high quality living environment for college students.
a. Location: To qualify for this bonus, projects must be located on land that:
(1) Is within the University Subdistrict, South Downtown Subdistrict, or the West Riverfront Subdistrict; and
(2) Is within one thousand feet (1,000') walking distance along public rights-of-way from the University of Iowa campus as defined for these
purposes and illustrated on the regulating plan, section 14-2G-2, figure 2G-1 of this article.
b. Management, Design And Amenities:
(1) An enforceable plan for on site management and security must be submitted to and approved by the City;
(2) For projects with two hundred (200) or more bedrooms, professional twenty four (24) hour on site management and security must be provided.
A professionally staffed management office/reception desk must be provided in the entrance lobby of the building;
(3) Interior and exterior usable shared open space must be provided with amenities that create a high quality living environment for students. The
management plan must include adequate provisions for management, maintenance, and security of such spaces;
(4) A secure bicycle parking/storage area shall be provided and maintained within the building or parking garage;
(5) The owner shall maintain a valid rental permit and comply with all applicable City codes;
(6) The City reserves the right to inspect the property to verify compliance with these provisions.
9. Height Bonus For Hotel Space: One additional floor of building height may be granted for every floor of high quality hotel space. The additional
building height may be used for additional hotel space or for other uses. The resulting building must demonstrate excellence in building and site
design as demonstrated through use of high quality building materials, architectural detailing, building amenities, landscaping and streetscaping
elements, and similar.
10. Height Bonus For Workforce Or Affordable Housing: Up to five (5) floors of additional building height may be granted for projects that designate a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units within the development as "affordable housing", as defined in section 14-2G-8 of this article
and regulated in accordance therewith.
11. Height Bonus For Elder Housing: Up to five (5) floors of additional building height may be granted for projects where all or a portion of the dwelling
units are designed to provide a high quality living environment for elders or persons with disabilities. The project must satisfy the following criteria:
a. The development is designed for use and occupancy by elders and/or persons with disabilities;
b. All individual dwelling units and any communal space must be handicap accessible, as defined in the Iowa Administrative Code;
c. No more than ten percent (10%) of all individual dwelling units within the project can contain more than two (2) bedrooms;
d. Prior to issuance of the building permit, the owner must submit an affidavit to the City that all designated dwelling units will be reserved for and
occupied by elders and/or persons with disabilities;
e. The units may be renter or owner occupied. If rented, the owner shall maintain a valid rental permit, unless the use is licensed by the State of
Iowa; and
f. The City reserves the right to inspect the property to verify compliance with these provisions. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
H. Minor Adjustments:
1. The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the building placement and parking, loading, and service area placement standards set forth in
section 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article. Standards greater or lesser than the ranges allowed may be approved in the following
circumstances, provided the approval criteria listed below are met: (Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017)
a. For publicly accessible outdoor plazas;
b. For irregular lots that make meeting the requirements impractical or infeasible;
c. For buildings along Ralston Creek;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 358/715
d. For liner buildings, civic, or institutional buildings where unique building needs or site constraints make it difficult to fully comply with the standards;
e. For buildings along pedestrian streets designed to maximize access to and views of the Iowa River; or
f. For other special circumstances, provided that the intent of the standard and the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central
District plan, whichever is applicable, is met. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
g. Approval criteria:
(1) There are unique characteristics of the site or neighboring properties that lend to alternative design approaches or that make it difficult or
infeasible to meet the requirements; and
(2) The proposed placement of the building, parking, and service areas fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, are
consistent with the intent of the standard being modified and the goals of the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central District
plan, as applicable, and will not detract from or be injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017)
2. The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the facade continuity requirements set forth in section 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this
article, for buildings with forecourts at primary building entries, open air pedestrian passageways connecting public sidewalks to rear yard parking, or
driveways on sites without secondary street, cross parcel, or alley access to parking and service areas, or for small or irregularly shaped lots where
there is practical difficulty meeting the standard. In such cases, additional and/or enhanced screening and landscaping may be required to ensure a
pleasant and comfortable pedestrian environment along street frontages.
3. The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the requirements set forth in section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article, to
accommodate buildings located on steeply sloped sites or within flood hazard zones, where meeting the requirements is impractical or infeasible, or
to make minor adjustments to elements of a frontage to ensure they are proportional to the scale of a building. If warranted and approved, deviations
may include the following:
a. Floor height of stoops, porticoes, porches or terraces may exceed the maximum;
b. The finished ground floor elevation of the building may exceed the maximum;
c. Garden walls enclosing terraces or forecourts may exceed the maximum height;
d. The terrace frontage may be configured as a stepped terrace with two (2) levels above grade;
e. Allow additional width and depth for portico frontages in order to create proportional entryways for large multi-dwelling or civic/institutional
buildings; or
f. Minor deviations from window coverage standards for storefront frontages on small buildings located on corner lots, where full compliance on both
frontages may not be feasible.
4. Where accessibility standards cannot be met using the standards herein, the FBC Committee may approve deviations to allow adherence to
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. Deviations may include lowering the height requirements of frontages and finished ground floor
elevations, and accommodating wheelchair accessible ramps. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
5. The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the facade stepback requirements set forth in section 14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this
article or building design standards set forth in subsection F of this section, provided the following approval criteria are met:
a. The building includes an alternative design solution that equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified; and
b. The building is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, is consistent with the goals of the
Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central District plan, as applicable, and will not detract from or be injurious to other property or
improvements in the vicinity; and
c. The building demonstrates excellence in architectural design and use of durable materials; and
d. There are unique characteristics of the site or neighboring properties that lend to alternative design approaches, or that make it difficult or
infeasible to meet the requirements; or the proposed building is designed true to a specific architectural style and adherence to the building design
standards would be impractical or compromise the building's architectural integrity; and
e. For requests for waivers of an upper floor stepback requirement, the building must include an alternative means of visually breaking up the vertical
plane of the building.
6. In mid-block locations, the FBC Committee may waive the minimum building height standard to allow for a 2nd story pedestrian courtyard (an area
surrounded by building facades on at least 3 sides), provided a screen wall that is at least as tall as the second story building facade is constructed
co-planar or recessed a maximum of three feet (3') from the street-facing facade. The screen wall may either be constructed of high quality building
materials that faithfully imitate an architecturally-finished exterior building facade with complementary window openings and articulation, or
constructed as a decorative screen wall with a semi-transparent, open pattern, where the top of the screen wall aligns generally with the top of the
second story. For purposes of regulating signage, the screen wall will be considered a building wall. (Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017)
14-2G-8: AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
1. Create a more inclusive, just and sustainable Iowa City;
2. Reduce concentrations of low and moderate income households in Iowa City;
3. Increase the multi-family housing stock near the university and the City's urban core;
4. Promote the construction of housing that is affordable to the community's workforce;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 359/715
5. Increase opportunities for people of all income levels to work and live near key employment centers;
6. Promote a balanced community that provides housing for people with diverse income levels;
7. To reduce the number of housing cost burdened households; and
8. Promote household stability and reduce the threat of homelessness.
B. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply to these terms:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: The collective reference to "owner occupied affordable housing" and/or "affordable rental housing", as those terms are
defined herein.
AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING: Housing that is rented for no more than the HUD fair market rent for the Iowa City, Iowa, HUD metro FMR area, as
adjusted annually, and rented to an income eligible household.
INCOME ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD: A household is an income eligible household for purposes of purchasing an owner occupied affordable housing
dwelling unit if that household has an annual income equal to or less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the area median income (AMI) for Iowa
City, as adjusted annually. A household is an income eligible household for leasing affordable rental housing if that household has an annual income
equal to or less than sixty percent (60%) of the AMI for Iowa City, as adjusted annually.
OWNER OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing that is sold at a price no greater than the most current published housing and urban
development (HUD) homeownership sale price limit for existing and new homes to an income eligible household.
C. General Requirements:
1. Affordable Housing Requirement: Except for developments providing affordable housing pursuant to a development agreement with the city
executed prior to June 6, 2016, and except for developments exclusively providing elder apartment housing, any development containing ten (10) or
more dwelling units on land zoned a riverfront crossings zoning designation is required to provide affordable housing dwelling units in an amount
equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units. Should ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units result
in a fractional number, this fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number for any fraction over fifty percent (50%) to establish the required
number of affordable housing dwelling units. Any exempt elder apartment housing developments shall be subject to periodic inspection to ensure
compliance with the zoning code regulations of this title of such use.
2. Methods Of Achieving Affordability: The affordable housing requirement may be satisfied through the provision of one or more of the following
methods:
a. On site owner occupied affordable housing;
b. On site affordable rental housing;
c. A fee in lieu contribution to an affordable housing fund;
d. Off site affordable housing; and/or
e. Contribution of land.
If the owner desires to utilize methods in subsection C2d or C2e of this section, the owner must establish that methods in subsections C2a, C2b,
and C2c of this section cannot feasibly be satisfied, as reasonably determined by the city.
3. Affordable Housing Agreement: Upon rezoning to a riverfront crossings zoning designation, the property owner shall enter into an affordable housing
agreement with the city establishing which method or methods it will utilize. This agreement must be executed prior to the close of the public hearing
on the rezoning ordinance. Upon application for a building permit to construct any development for which affordable housing is required, the property
owner shall enter into an agreement with the city detailing how it will satisfy the obligations of this code, which shall include details of the
programming and development requirements if applicable. The city manager is hereby given the authority to execute such an agreement, which shall
be recorded in the records of the Johnson County, Iowa recorder's office at owner's expense.
4. Term Of Affordability: The affordable housing dwelling units shall remain so for no less than ten (10) years from the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for the dwelling unit and recording of the deed restriction described below.
5. Occupancy: No affordable housing dwelling unit shall be occupied by anyone other than an income eligible household. Households that wish to
purchase or rent affordable housing dwelling units shall be subject to verification of their eligibility in accordance with the applicable income
verification provisions set forth below and as set forth in administrative rules adopted to accomplish the purposes of this section.
6. Deed Restriction: A deed restriction documenting the affordable housing requirements, selected method of achieving affordability, term, applicable
resale restrictions, and applicable occupancy and rental restrictions shall be placed upon the owner occupied affordable housing dwelling unit or, in
the case of the affordable rental housing, shall be placed upon the land being developed contemporaneously with the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. This deed restriction shall be recorded with the Johnson County, Iowa recorder and referenced in any deed conveying title of any such
unit or land during the term of affordability. This deed restriction shall automatically upon the expiration of the term of affordability. The city manager
is hereby authorized to issue any release of this deed restriction, as may be necessary and appropriate, in a form approved by the city attorney.
7. Parking: Affordable housing dwelling units shall be exempt from providing the parking spaces otherwise required by the zoning code.
D. Owner Occupied Affordable Housing: Owner occupied affordable housing must satisfy the general requirements set forth in subsection C of this section
and the following requirements:
1. Development Requirements:
a. Dwelling Unit Types: The affordable housing dwelling units shall be comprised of the same mix of dwelling unit types in proportion to the market
rate dwelling units within the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 360/715
b. Dwelling Unit Size And Quality: The affordable housing dwelling unit size shall be at least eighty percent (80%) of the floor area for the market rate
dwelling units of the same type, and shall be of similar quality, or as approved by the city manager or designee.
c. Location: The affordable housing dwelling units shall be distributed throughout the development to achieve integration and avoid concentration or
segregation of the affordable housing dwelling units, unless a different distribution will result in the provision of additional affordable housing
dwelling units than that which is required by this code, as approved by the city manager or designee.
d. Timing Of Construction: The affordable housing dwelling units shall be constructed and issued a certificate of occupancy concurrently with or prior
to the market rate dwelling units in the development.
2. Program Requirements:
a. Occupancy: An affordable housing dwelling unit shall, at all times during the term of affordability, be occupied by an income eligible household as
the household's primary residence.
b. Income Verification: The annual household income shall be determined according to the HUD part 5, section 8 regulations on annual income
codified in 24 CFR 5.609, as amended, and verified by the city prior to close of the sale.
c. Rental Restriction: An owner occupied affordable housing unit may not be rented, except an owner may rent or lease a bedroom in the unit.
d. Sale Restrictions: In addition to the deed restrictions required above, all required owner occupied affordable housing dwelling units shall be subject
to the following sale restrictions during the term of affordability, compliance with which shall be verified by the city manager, or designee, prior to
closing on the sale.
(1) Approved Purchasers: A seller of an affordable dwelling unit must sell the unit only to an income eligible household.
(2) Sale Price: The sale price of any affordable housing dwelling unit shall not exceed the purchase price paid by the original income eligible
household purchaser or the HUD homeownership sale price limit, whichever is greater, with the following exceptions:
(A) Closing Costs: Customary closing costs and costs of sale.
(B) Real Estate Commissions: Costs of real estate commissions paid by the seller to a licensed real estate agent.
(C) Permanent Capital Improvements: Reasonable value added to the dwelling unit due to permanent capital improvements installed within the
unit by the seller pursuant to a properly issued building permit.
(D) Special Fees: The seller of an affordable dwelling unit shall not levy or charge any additional fees or any finder's fee nor demand any other
monetary consideration other than provided in this chapter.
E. Affordable Rental Housing: Affordable rental housing must satisfy the general requirements set forth in subsection C of this section and the following
requirements:
1. Development Requirements:
a. Affordable rental units shall be provided in accordance with the development requirements for owner occupied affordable housing set forth in
subsection D1 of this section.
b. If a tenant initially deemed an income eligible household for purposes of occupying an affordable housing dwelling unit pursuant to this chapter,
but is subsequently deemed no longer income eligible upon annual examination of household income, that tenant's unit shall not be considered an
affordable housing dwelling unit and the rent can be adjusted to market rate. To maintain compliance with the affordable housing requirement, the
next available rental unit in the project of comparable size or larger must be rented to an income eligible household. To that end, the affordable
rental units need not be specifically designated in a fixed location, but may be floating throughout the development.
2. Program Requirements:
a. Rental Rate: The monthly rental rate shall be no more than the fair market rents as published by HUD for the Iowa City, Iowa, HUD metro FMR
area, as adjusted annually.
b. Occupancy: Affordable rental units must be rented to income eligible households.
c. Income Verification: The landlord shall annually verify to the city that the affordable rental housing units are occupied by income eligible
households. Prior to the commencement of a lease, the landlord shall determine a potential tenant's annual household income according to the
HUD part 5, section 8, regulations on annual income codified in 24 CFR 5.609, as amended. Upon extension or renewal of a lease, the landlord
may determine a tenant's annual household income based upon federal income tax returns for all adults in the household.
d. Owner Verification Of Compliance: The owner must annually verify to the city that it is in compliance with these program requirements, and provide
any documentation as deemed necessary by the city to determine compliance, which may include examination of the documents used to verify
tenant income. Any violation of this requirement may result in immediate suspension of any rental permit issued for the applicable unit.
F. Fee In Lieu Contribution: In lieu of providing affordable housing dwelling units, an owner may contribute a fee to a riverfront crossings district affordable
housing fund to be established by the city. The contribution per dwelling unit shall be determined biennially by resolution of the city council based upon
a formula that analyzes the difference between renting a market rate unit for the term of affordability and renting a dwelling unit affordable to an income
qualified household. The fund shall be utilized solely for affordable housing purposes, which may include administration costs, in the riverfront
crossings district.
G. Transfer Of Affordable Dwelling Units Off Site: Upon the owner establishing that the affordable housing requirements cannot be satisfied on site, as
reasonably determined by the city, it may be satisfied by designating off site existing or newly constructed dwelling units in the riverfront crossings
district as affordable housing dwelling units. Any transferred affordable housing units shall in no way waive or reduce any obligation to provide
affordable housing units within the development to which the obligation is transferred. In addition to satisfying the general requirements set forth in
subsection C of this section, these units must satisfy the following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 361/715
1. Development Requirements:
a. Provision Of Units: Off site affordable dwelling units, whether they are owner occupied or rental units, shall be provided in accordance with the
development requirements for owner occupied affordable housing set forth in subsection D1 of this section. The city reserves the right to deny a
request to transfer affordable housing units to a particular development if it would result in an undue concentration of affordable housing units
within that development.
b. Timing: Where the affordable housing requirement is to be met through the provision of newly constructed dwelling units, such units shall be
constructed and pass final inspection no later than the date the occupancy permit is issued for the development creating the need for the
affordable housing, unless otherwise agreed upon by the city manager, or designee. Where the affordable housing requirement is to be met
through the provision of existing off site dwelling units, they shall be established as affordable housing dwelling units prior to issuance of any
occupancy permit for the development creating the need for the affordable housing. The marketing of the affordable housing dwelling units should
occur no later than one year after the first market rate dwelling unit in the site that generated the requirement passes final inspection, unless
otherwise agreed upon by the city manager. The affordable housing agreement pursuant to subsection C3 of this section shall be recorded prior to
issuance of a building permit for the development creating the need for the affordable housing.
2. Programming Requirements:
a. Where the off site affordable dwelling units are to be owner occupied affordable housing, those units shall comply with the programming
requirements for owner occupied affordable housing set forth in subsection D2 of this section.
b. Where the off site affordable dwelling units are to be affordable rental housing, they shall comply with the programming requirements for affordable
rental housing set forth in subsection E2 of this section.
H. Land Dedication: Upon the owner establishing that the affordable housing requirements cannot be satisfied on site, as reasonably determined by the
city, it may be satisfied by the dedication of land to the city of Iowa City or an entity designated by the city of Iowa City for construction of affordable
dwelling units in accordance with the provisions of this section, upon consideration of the following factors:
1. Location: The land shall be located in the riverfront crossings district, in an area appropriate for residential redevelopment, as determined by the city;
2. Number Of Affordable Units: The total dwelling units possible on the land shall be equal to or greater than the number of required affordable housing
dwelling units;
3. Dwelling Type: The land shall allow for the provision of affordable units of equivalent type (single-family, multi-family, townhome, etc.), floor area, and
number of bedrooms to that which would have been otherwise required;
4. Land Value: The value of land to be dedicated shall be determined, at the cost of the developer, by an independent appraiser, who shall be selected
from a list of certified appraisers provided by the city, or by such alternative means of valuation to which a developer and the city agree; and
5. Right To Refuse: The city reserves the right to refuse dedication of land in satisfaction of the affordable housing requirement if it determines, in its
sole discretion, that such a dedication is not in the best interests of the public for any reason, including a determination that the city is not likely to
construct or administer an affordable housing development project in a timely manner due to the unavailability of funds or other resources.
Additionally, where the value of the land proposed to be dedicated is less than the value of the fee in lieu contribution established in accordance with
the provisions above, the city reserves the right to require an owner to contribute a fee making up this difference in values.
I. Administrative Rules: The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish administrative rules deemed necessary not inconsistent with any
ordinance adopted by the city council in order to assure that the purposes of this section are accomplished. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the
city clerk and available on the city website. (Ord. 16-4668, 7-5-2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
Chapter 3
OVERLAY ZONES
ARTICLE A. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (OPD)
14-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The planned development overlay zone (OPD) is established to permit flexibility in the use and design of structures and land in situations where
conventional development may be inappropriate and where modification to requirements of the underlying zone will not be contrary to the intent and
purpose of this title, inconsistent with the comprehensive plan, as amended, or harmful to the surrounding neighborhood. The OPD zone is intended to:
A. Provide flexibility in the design, placement and clustering of buildings; mixture of land uses; use of open space; traffic circulation and parking; and
related site and design considerations;
B. Encourage the preservation and best use of existing landscape features through development that is sensitive to the natural features of the surrounding
area;
C. Promote efficient land use with smaller utility and street networks while maintaining pedestrian oriented street frontages;
D. Encourage and preserve opportunities for energy efficient development;
E. Promote an attractive and safe living environment compatible with surrounding residential developments;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 362/715
F. Provide an alternative method for redeveloping older residential areas; and
G. Encourage infill development. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-2: APPLICABILITY:
A planned development overlay rezoning may be requested, provided the property meets the zoning and size limitations listed below and falls into one or
more of the following categories of planned developments:
A. Zoning:
1. The property on which the planned development is requested must be zoned residential or commercial, except as specified in subsection A2 of this
section.
2. A sensitive areas development is allowed or may be required on any property, regardless of the underlying base zone, in order to protect regulated
sensitive features while facilitating reasonable development of the remainder of the property for uses allowed in the underlying base zone.
B. Size Limitation:
1. To qualify for a planned development overlay rezoning, properties must contain an undeveloped area of two (2) acres or more, except for the
following situations.
2. Development of areas containing less than two (2) acres but more than one acre qualify for a planned development overlay rezoning where the
existence of environmentally sensitive areas or natural features, the age of existing development, scenic assets or the fact that the land is completely
surrounded by development makes a planned development more appropriate and efficient than conventional development. Except as allowed in
subsection B3 of this section, commercial and institutional uses are prohibited in planned developments containing less than two (2) acres.
3. When a sensitive areas development is required, there is no size limitation.
C. Categories Of Planned Developments:
1. Sensitive Areas Development: A planned development containing regulated sensitive features according to the provisions of chapter 5, article I,
"Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title.
2. Conservation Development: A planned development in which a portion of the land area is designated as permanent open space for the purpose of
preserving natural or cultural features and resources as follows:
a. Development that protects or preserves environmental features not otherwise regulated by this title, but which are significant to the neighborhood
or community. For example, such a plan might preserve an important view shed, protect wildlife areas or other unique natural features of the site.
b. Development that preserves cultural and historic features such as historic sites, historic buildings, and archaeological sites, particularly those that
are designated or that would qualify for historic designation according to the provisions of chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation
District Overlay", of this chapter.
c. Development in which the site and the buildings are specifically oriented and designed for the conservation of energy and other resources.
3. Neo-Traditional Development: A planned development that is characterized by lot configurations, street patterns, streetscapes, and neighborhood
amenities similar to neighborhoods platted prior to 1950.
4. Mixed Use Development: A planned development that contains a mix of residential and commercial uses designed in such a manner that such uses
complement one another to form a more urban neighborhood.
5. Infill Development: Development or redevelopment on land that is surrounded by existing development where the constraints of the existing
infrastructure, buildings, or site make it more difficult to develop the property.
6. Alternative Ownership Development:
a. Manufactured Housing Parks: Manufactured housing parks, where the dwelling unit owner leases the lot on which the dwelling is located from a
separate individual or organization.
b. Condominium Development: Condominium developments, where multiple units are located on the same lot. Dwelling units are typically owned
individually and the structures, common areas, and facilities are owned by all dwelling unit owners on a proportional, undivided basis. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Applications for planned developments must be submitted according to the procedures for planned development overlay rezonings as set forth in chapter
8, "Review And Approval Procedures", of this title. The proposed development must meet the applicable approval criteria listed in the following sections.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-4: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Applications for all planned developments will be reviewed for compliance with the standards of this section, except for sensitive areas developments that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 363/715
comply with all underlying zoning and subdivision regulations. If, however, modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision regulations have been
requested as a part of a sensitive areas development, the standards of this section will apply.
A. General Standards:
1. The density and design of the planned development will be compatible with and/or complementary to adjacent development in terms of land use,
building mass and scale, relative amount of open space, traffic circulation and general layout.
2. The development will not overburden existing streets and utilities.
3. The development will not adversely affect views, light and air, property values and privacy of neighboring properties any more than would a
conventional development.
4. The combination of land uses and building types and any variation from the underlying zoning requirements or from city street standards will be in
the public interest, in harmony with the purposes of this title, and with other building regulations of the city.
B. Ownership: At the time of preliminary OPD plan approval, the developer must submit evidence of ownership of the property to be developed or of a
legally binding executed option agreement for purchasing all of the property.
C. Land Uses Allowed: A mixture of land uses are allowed in planned developments that might not otherwise be allowed with the underlying zoning. Land
uses proposed must meet all of the dimensional and site development standards of the underlying base zone, unless a modification is specifically
approved during the planned development process. The following provisions provide standards for uses that might not otherwise be allowed in the
underlying zone:
1. Uses Allowed On Properties Zoned Residential: A mixture of housing types, including single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, is
encouraged in all residentially zoned planned developments. To help assure that the various building types are compatible with one another, similar
architectural elements, scale, massing, and materials should be used and the following standards must be followed: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
a. Single-Family And Two-Family Uses:
(1) Unless modified as allowed in subsection C1a(3) of this section, attached and detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the specific
approval criteria for attached and detached zero lot line dwellings in the RS-12 zone as set forth in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title. Townhouse style condominiums must also meet these approval criteria. In
addition, the following provisions apply:
(A) Main entrances to dwelling units must be clearly demarcated by one of the following means: covered porch or canopy; transom and sidelight
windows; pilasters and pediment; or other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway
does not meet this standard.
(B) If multiple townhouse style condominium buildings are located on a common lot, the buildings must be separated by a distance of at least
twenty feet (20').
(C) If the underlying base zone is RS-5 or RS-8, the requirement that attached single-family dwellings are only allowed on corner lots with each
main entrance oriented toward a different street applies in all planned developments in order to encourage a mix of residential uses. If multiple
two-unit buildings will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot lines must be illustrated on the plan for purposes of determining where the
corner units would be located according to base zone standards. This corner lot standard may only be waived if convincing evidence is
submitted that the configuration of the property or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of this standard impractical. If
this standard is waived the units must be designed and located in a manner that prevents monotony by varying aspects such as facade
detailing, window pattern, building materials, and color.
(2) Two-family uses must comply with the standards for two-family uses as set forth in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title. In addition, the following provisions will apply:
(A) Main entrances to dwelling units must be clearly demarcated by one of the following means: covered porch or canopy; transom and sidelight
windows; pilasters and pediment; or other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway
does not meet this standard.
(B) If multiple two-family buildings are located on a common lot, the buildings must be separated by a distance of at least twenty feet (20').
(C) If the underlying base zone is RS-5 or RS-8, the requirement that two-family uses are only allowed on corner lots with each main entrance
oriented toward a different street applies in all planned developments in order to encourage a mix of residential uses. If multiple two-unit
buildings will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot lines must be illustrated on the plan for purposes of determining where the corner units
would be located according to base zone standards. This corner lot standard may only be waived if convincing evidence is submitted that the
configuration of the property or other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of this standard impractical. If this standard is
waived the units must be designed and located in a manner that prevents monotony by varying aspects such as facade detailing, window
pattern, building materials, and color.
(D) Garages and off street parking areas must be located and designed so that they do not dominate the streetscape according to the standards
specified in subsection K1c(2) of this section.
(3) Minimum lot area, lot width, lot frontage, and setbacks required in the underlying base zone may be reduced in order to provide the opportunity
for a variety of single-family and two-family dwelling types. However, any such modification to the underlying zoning requirements must be noted
on the plan and the development must comply with the standards listed in subsection E, "Zoning Requirements", of this section.
b. Multi-Family And Group Living Uses: If multi-family or group living uses are proposed, they must comply with the multi-family site development
standards set forth in chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family Residential Zones", of this title. When located adjacent to single-family and duplex
structures, multi-family buildings should be of a scale, massing and architectural style that is compatible with adjacent lower density residential
development. (Ord. 09-4366, 12-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 364/715
c. Commercial Uses: Commercial uses are not permitted in planned developments that are less than two (2) acres in size on property that is zoned
residential. In larger residentially zoned developments, where commercial uses are proposed, they must comply with the following standards:
(1) Any commercial development proposed must comply with the CN-1 site development standards as set forth in chapter 2, article C,
"Commercial Zones", of this title.
(2) Mixed use buildings, which include residential dwellings and commercial uses, are encouraged.
(3) Any commercial development proposed must be of a scale suited to serve the residents of the immediate development and adjacent
neighborhoods.
(4) Commercial development should be designed to serve as a focal point of the overall development and is encouraged to incorporate open
spaces such as town squares.
(5) Commercial development should be designed so that the material, massing and architectural style is compatible with adjacent residential
development.
d. Institutional Uses: Institutional uses, such as educational facilities, religious institutions, and childcare centers, are only allowed if they are listed as
an allowed use in the underlying base zone.
2. Uses Allowed On Property Zoned Commercial:
a. On property zoned commercial, development must comply with the commercial site development standards of the underlying base zone as set
forth in chapter 2, article C, "Commercial Zones", of this title.
b. Residential uses are only allowed in such planned developments if residential uses are listed as an allowed use in the underlying commercial
zone. Residential uses must comply with the requirements specified for such uses in the underlying base zone, unless modifications are
specifically approved through the planned development process.
3. Uses Allowed On Property Zoned Industrial Or Research Park: A planned development is not allowed on properties that are zoned industrial or
research park unless the property contains regulated sensitive areas according to the provisions of chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And
Features", of this title. Uses allowed in such a planned development are limited to those uses allowed in the underlying base zone. Such uses must
comply with the requirements and standards specified in the underlying base zone, unless modifications are specifically approved through the
planned development process.
D. Maximum Residential Density:
1. The city will approve a residential density based on the underlying density allowed in the base zone and what is compatible with the natural
topography of the site and with surrounding development. The residential density for a planned development may not exceed the value specified in
table 3A-1, located at the end of this subsection. Actual residential density allowed, however, may be less than the maximum expressed in the table
due to the topographical constraints of the property, the scale of the project relative to adjacent development, and the dimensional, site development,
and other requirements of this title.
2. For purposes of this article, "net land area" is defined as total land area minus public and private street rights of way. When calculating net land area,
the land area devoted to alley and private rear lane rights of way need not be subtracted from the total land area. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 3A-1: Maximum Residential Density
Underlying Base Zone Dwelling Units Per
Acre Of Net Land Area
RR-1 1
RS-5 5
RS-8 8
RNS-12 8
RS-12 13
MU 24
CO-1 15
CN-1 24
CC-2 15
RM-12 15
RNS-20 24
RM-20 24
RM-44 43
PRM 49*
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 365/715
*Density bonuses are available in the PRM zone that would increase the allowed density beyond the figure in this table.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
E. Zoning Requirements:
1. All planned developments must comply with all the applicable requirements and standards of this title, unless specifically waived or modified under
the provisions of this article.
2. Variations in the dimensional requirements of the underlying base zone may be necessary in order to facilitate the provision of desired neighborhood
amenities or open space; to preserve or protect natural, historic, or cultural features; to achieve compatibility with surrounding development; or to
create a distinctive or innovative neighborhood environment for area residents. Therefore, the dimensional requirements of the underlying base zone
may be modified or waived, provided the standards for modified developments set forth in subsection K of this section are met.
3. In order to accommodate the various types of manufactured housing, the minimum building width specified in the underlying base zone may be
waived for manufactured housing parks.
4. In order to avoid development on or near regulated sensitive areas, parking requirements for commercial and industrial uses may be reduced.
However, parking requirements for residential uses within the development may not be reduced other than through a special exception approved by
the board of adjustment according to the procedures and approval criteria set forth in this title for such an exception.
F. Dedication Of Public Right Of Way: All proposed dedications of land for public use, including land dedicated for recreational use, shall be approved, in
writing, by appropriate departments of the city prior to city council approval of the planned development. All land dedications for public use shall
conform to the requirements of city ordinances.
G. Streets: Planned developments shall provide for the continuation and extension of streets and public sidewalks in accordance with current city
standards. Requests for modifications to city street standards will be evaluated according to the provisions of subsection K of this section.
H. Pedestrian Facilities:
1. On Site Pedestrian Facilities: To assure that pedestrians have adequate access throughout a development, a pedestrian network plan must be
developed so that residents and visitors have access to public streets and sidewalks, building entrances, parking areas, shared open spaces, natural
areas, and other amenities.
2. Pedestrian Facilities Along Streets: Sidewalks must be provided along all public and private streets according to city standards. Particular emphasis
must be given to maintaining or establishing pedestrian oriented street frontages. Pedestrian oriented streets are those that are designed to provide
a safe, comfortable environment for pedestrians. Important elements include sidewalks that are separated and buffered from vehicular traffic with
limited interruption from driveways; the provision of street trees; and buildings that visually address the street with visible doors and windows.
Buildings with blank facades along the street, long stretches of repetitive building designs, surface parking lots, and other expanses of paving are
contrary to a pedestrian oriented street.
I. Tree Requirements: For any planned development that contains attached single-family dwellings, two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses,
or lease lots for manufactured housing, a landscape plan must be submitted with the preliminary plan illustrating how the requirements of chapter 5,
article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this title will be met.
J. Open Space:
1. Public Open Space Requirement:
a. Residentially zoned planned developments must dedicate land for public open space, pay a fee in lieu of land for public open space, or a
combination thereof, as set forth in chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this title.
b. In the event that the dedicated open space land will contain amenities, such as trails, that will serve the residents of the proposed development,
the city may require such amenities be installed by the developer with the costs shared jointly by the developer and city based on an estimate of
proportional use by the residents of the proposed development. The timing of such improvements shall be determined and set forth in a
development agreement between the developer and the city.
2. Private Shared Open Space:
a. In the event open space land, in addition to that required by chapter 5, article K of this title, is to be retained under private ownership, the
developer must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed for maintaining the areas and for financing
maintenance costs. Such costs shall be shared by all owners of property located within the planned development through the use of an owners'
association or other entity satisfactory to the city. Any costs incurred by the city due to failure of this designated entity to meet its obligations under
the provisions of this subsection J2a shall be assessed against, and will become a lien on all individual properties located within the planned
development in favor of the city.
b. The intended purpose of any private, shared open space proposed for a planned development must be set forth in the plan. Such land must be
suitably improved for its intended purpose. The timing of such improvements shall be set forth in a legally binding instrument as described in the
subsection J2a of this section.
3. Protected Sensitive Areas: Protected sensitive areas and their required buffers should be incorporated into the design of the development as public
open space dedicated to the city or private open space held in common by an owners' association. Where protected features and/or their required
buffers are incorporated into individual lots, they must be included within a recorded conservation easement or protected by restrictive covenants
with the city that are recorded and run with the land.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 366/715
K. Standards For Modified Developments: The following standards are to be used by the city when evaluating a planned development when modifications
to the underlying zoning requirements or to city street standards are requested. For single-family uses, townhouse style multi-family uses and twofamily
uses that will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot lines must be illustrated on the plan for purposes of determining when modifications to
the underlying dimensional standards are being requested. When applying the standards, the city will weigh the specific circumstances surrounding
each application, and strive for development solutions that best promote the spirit, intent and purpose of this article and of chapter 5, article I,
"Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title and of the goals, policies and objectives of the adopted district plan for the area in which the proposed
development is located, while permitting development of the property for reasonable, beneficial uses. Modifications that the city deems as contrary to
public safety will not be approved.
1. Modifications To Zoning Requirements:
a. Minimum setbacks may be reduced if the following conditions are met:
(1) The setbacks proposed will provide adequate light, air, and privacy between dwellings and between dwellings and public rights of way.
(2) Sufficient setbacks are incorporated to provide the opportunity for adequate private open space for each dwelling unit.
(3) The setbacks proposed will provide sufficient area for utilities and street trees.
(4) If front setbacks are reduced, measures should be taken to preserve privacy within residential dwellings and to provide a transition between the
public right of way and private property. To ensure privacy within single-family and two-family dwellings for which setbacks are reduced, the first
floor must be elevated at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent public sidewalk. Other methods to increase privacy are also
encouraged, such as use of front porches.
(5) Residential buildings that are located in close proximity to each other must be designed to preserve privacy. This can be achieved by
placement of windows to prevent direct views into the windows of adjacent residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air conditioning
units may not be located along a building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of a building wall of an adjacent principal building on the same lot, if
the wall of the adjacent building contains window or door openings into dwelling units. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current
building code fire protection requirements.
b. The maximum building height and building coverage may be modified or waived, provided the design of the development results in sufficient light
and air circulation for each building and adequate, accessible open space for all residents of the development. When the underlying base zone is
single-family residential, at least thirty five percent (35%) of the net land area in a planned development shall remain free of buildings, parking and
vehicular maneuvering areas.
c. Minimum lot area, lot width, and lot frontage requirements may be reduced. However, due to the concentration of dwelling units that will occur if
these dimensional requirements are reduced, the following conditions must be met:
(1) The proposed modifications will not result in increased traffic congestion or a reduction in neighborhood traffic circulation. To mitigate for the
concentration of dwellings, shorter block lengths may be appropriate, and the location of driveways and pedestrian facilities must be carefully
planned.
(2) Garages and off street parking areas must be located so that they do not dominate the streetscape. Alley or private rear lane access will be
required, unless garages are recessed behind the front facade of the dwelling in a manner that allows the residential portion of the dwelling to
predominate along the street. Figure 3A.1 below illustrates some options for garage placement for detached and attached dwelling units. Other
options meeting these standards are also acceptable. Figure: 3A.1 - Garage Placement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 367/715
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 368/715
(3) If garages are located with access to the street, the development must be designed so that there is adequate right of way and front yard area
available to accommodate street trees and front yard landscaping. The widths of driveways may need to be reduced and garages set back an
adequate distance to accommodate these elements.
2. Modifications To Street Standards:
a. Right Of Way Width: Street right of way widths may be reduced below those otherwise required by the subdivision regulations if the proposed
planned development provides sufficient area within the right of way for required street trees and public and private utilities.
b. Pavement Widths For Local Streets: Requests for reductions to street pavement widths for local streets will be considered if streets are designed
to promote pedestrian oriented frontages and safe access for emergency vehicles. For example, this might be achieved through the use of alleys
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 369/715
or private rear lanes. Depending on the width of the proposed street and the anticipated traffic, additional off street parking clusters may be
required. Any separate off street parking areas must be screened to the S2 standard.
c. Private Streets:
(1) Private streets in single-family and two-family residential areas are discouraged. Requests for private streets in these areas will be carefully
scrutinized and will only be approved if the proposed private street serves as a shared access to a cluster or small group of housing units and
does not support any through traffic. In addition, adequate provisions must be made for street maintenance, snow removal, and garbage service
according to the provisions listed in subsection K2c(3) of this section.
(2) Private streets in multi-family, commercial, and industrial areas may be allowed; provided, that the responsibilities for maintenance, snow
removal, and garbage service is clearly established according to the provisions of subsection K2c(3) of this section.
(3) If private streets are approved, the developer must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed for
maintaining private streets and providing garbage service and snow removal, and for financing these services. Such costs shall be shared by all
owners of property located within the planned development through the use of an owners' association or other entity satisfactory to the city. Any
costs incurred by the city due to failure of this designated entity to meet its obligations under the provisions of this subsection K2c(3) shall be
assessed against, and will become a lien on all individual properties located within the planned development in favor of the city.
L. Other Conditions: Other conditions may be imposed if found necessary to protect and promote the best interests of the surrounding property or the
neighborhood. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Improvement of traffic circulation for vehicles and pedestrians in the proposed development and adjoining properties and streets.
2. Specific landscaping requirements to maintain privacy or reduce impacts on adjoining properties.
3. Joint use of private open space or amenities by adjoining property owners. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR SENSITIVE AREAS DEVELOPMENTS:
For properties containing regulated sensitive features, a sensitive areas development plan must be submitted that demonstrates compliance with the
applicable standards of chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-6: ADDITIONAL APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS:
A manufactured housing park must comply with the following standards:
A. Minimum Area: The development must be at least two (2) acres in size.
B. Lot Requirements: The plan must clearly delineate individual lease lots within the development. Each individual lease lot must meet the dimensional
standards of the underlying base zone, except for variations approved through the planned development process as set forth in this article.
C. Additional Setback Requirements: A thirty foot (30') setback must be provided between any dwelling unit and the edge of the planned development
except where abutting an arterial street, in which case, a forty foot (40') building setback is required.
D. Minimum Space Between Units: At least a twenty foot (20') building separation between manufactured housing units shall be provided, except with
respect to manufactured housing units parked end to end. End to end separation must be at least fifteen feet (15').
E. Parking: Nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') hard surfaced off street parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of two (2) parking spaces per unit. At
least one off street parking space shall be located on each manufactured housing lease lot. The other required parking space may be located in a
common parking area with convenient access to the manufactured housing unit. Parking spaces may not be located in the front setback or within ten
feet (10') of an adjacent manufactured housing unit. Separate parking areas must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any lease lot line and at least
twenty feet (20') from any edge of the planned development. Separate parking areas must be screened to the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
F. Sanitary Sewers: The sewerage system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable city codes or specifications
approved by the city. Provision shall be made for plugging the drain when a manufactured housing unit does not occupy the space.
G. Additional Requirements For Solid Waste Handling:
1. Collection Stations: Unless individual solid waste collection is provided for each lease lot within the development, dumpsters or collection stands
consisting of a holder or rack on an impervious slab must be provided within three hundred feet (300') of every manufactured housing space they
serve. Container stands must be designed to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate
cleaning around them. Collection stands must be screened from adjacent dwellings to the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And
Buffering Standards", of this title.)
2. Collection Receptacles: Collection receptacles shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all solid waste.
H. Accessory Structures And Facilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 370/715
1. Manufactured Housing Sales: Sales of manufactured housing units is allowed as an accessory use in conjunction with the management office.
Manufactured housing units, which are not currently located on lease lots, may not be displayed on site.
2. Equipment And Materials Storage: Maintenance materials and equipment shall be stored either in a permanent structure or in yards fenced in with a
minimum six foot (6') high fence of solid construction.
3. Tenant Storage: Storage facilities for tenants of the manufactured housing park may be provided on individual manufactured housing lease lots or in
shared compounds located within the park. Any shared storage facility or compound must be screened from view of adjacent streets, neighboring
lease lots, and neighborhood developments to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The approval criteria contained in this article are to be used by the city as minimum requirements for evaluating planned developments. However, such
criteria are not intended to restrict creativity and an applicant may request modifications to the planned development approval criteria. The city will use the
following criteria when evaluating any such request:
A. The modification will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this title and the city comprehensive plan.
B. The modification will generally enhance the proposed planned development and will not have an adverse impact on its physical, visual or spatial
characteristics.
C. The modification shall not result in a configuration of lots or a street system that is impractical or detracts from the appearance of the proposed
development.
D. The modification will not result in danger to public health, safety or welfare by preventing access for emergency vehicles, by inhibiting the provision of
public services, by depriving adjoining properties of adequate light and air, or by violating the purposes and intent of this title or the city's
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. HISTORIC DISTRICT AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY
14-3B-1: HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
A. Purpose: The historic district overlay (OHD) zone is used to designate local historic landmarks and historic districts. The purpose of this overlay zone is
to:
1. Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public by protecting, enhancing and perpetuating historic landmarks and
districts of historic, architectural and cultural significance;
2. Safeguard the city's architectural, historic and cultural heritage by preserving historic buildings and neighborhoods;
3. Provide for design review of new construction or alteration of existing resources to assure compatibility with the existing character of historic
neighborhoods and preserve the historic integrity of the resource;
4. Stabilize and improve property values by encouraging reinvestment in historic neighborhoods;
5. Foster civic pride in the legacy and beauty of past achievements; and
6. Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness to tourists and visitors, thereby supporting and stimulating business.
B. Authority:
1. The city council may designate by ordinance areas of the city as historic districts or local historic landmarks. The process of designation is
considered an overlay rezoning. A historic district overlay rezoning is required to designate historic districts and local historic landmarks. The
procedures for historic district overlay rezonings are set forth in chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures", of this
title.
2. There are typically many properties within a designated historic district or that have been designated as local historic landmarks that are listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or are eligible for listing on the National Register. However, properties listed on the National Register are not
subject to the regulations of this article unless they are located within a designated historic district or have been designated as a local historic
landmark by the city council.
C. Descriptions:
1. Historic districts are geographically cohesive areas with significant concentrations of buildings and other resources that possess a high degree of
historic integrity and convey a distinct sense of time and place and that have been designated as a historic district by the city council pursuant to the
applicable procedures outlined in this title. To qualify for designation as a historic district, the subject area must contain abutting pieces of property
under diverse ownership that meet approval criteria of subsections C1a and C1b of this section and at least one of approval criteria of subsection
C1c, C1d, C1e or C1f of this section.
a. Are significant to American and/or Iowa City history, architecture, archaeology and culture; and
b. Possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials and workmanship; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 371/715
c. Are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
d. Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
e. Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, method of construction; or represent the work of a master; or possess high artistic values;
or represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
f. Have yielded or may likely yield information important in prehistory or history.
2. A historic landmark is any building, structure, object, area of land or element of landscape architecture with significance, importance or value
consistent with the approval criteria listed in subsection C1 of this section for historic districts and that has been designated as a local historic
landmark by the city council pursuant to the applicable procedures outlined in this title.
D. Designated Resources:
1. The following areas of the city are designated as historic districts:
a. Woodlawn Historic District:
b. East College Street Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 372/715
c. Brown Street Historic District:
d. Summit Street Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 373/715
e. Longfellow Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 374/715
f. College Green Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 375/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
g. Northside Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 376/715
h. Jefferson Street Historic District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 377/715
(Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010)
2. The following properties have been designated as local historic landmarks:
747 W. Benton Street Cyrus S. and Georginia Ranck House
518 Bowery Street Bowery Street Grocery Store
30 N. Clinton Street Congregational Church of Iowa City
125 E. College Street College Block Building
307 E. College Street Old Carnegie Library
320 E. College Street Trinity Episcopal Church
906 E. College Street Thomas C. Carson House
935 E. College Street Lindsay House
1142 E. Court Street Oakes-Wood House
1415 E. Davenport Street Rose Hill
515 E. Davenport Street Letovsky-Rohret House
716 N. Dubuque Street Pi Kappa Alpha Fraternity
115 S. Dubuque Franklin Printing House
914 S. Dubuque Street Tate Arms
120 E. Fairchild Street Jackson-Swisher House and Carriage House
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 378/715
630 E. Fairchild Street F.X. Rittenmeyer (Burger) House
115 N. Gilbert Street Bostick William House
219 N. Gilbert Street Jacob Wentz House
2460 S. Gilbert Street McCollister James Farmstead
529 S. Gilbert Street Hawthorne Glove & Novelty Co./Shrader Drug Co.
538 S. Gilbert Street C.D. Close House
30 S. Governor Street Stevenson-Baker House
604 Iowa Avenue Windrem House
726 Iowa Avenue Crum-Overholt House
130 E. Jefferson Street Park House Hotel
220 E. Jefferson Street St. Mary's Church and Rectory
610 E. Jefferson Street St. Mary's Rectory
524 N. Johnson Street Czecho Slovakian Association Hall
1101 Kirkwood Avenue Samuel Kirkwood House
829 Kirkwood Avenue Clark House
119-123 N. Linn Economy Advertising Company
127-131 N. Linn Union Brewery
203 N. Linn Bashnagel Bakery
13 S. Linn Street Hohenshuh Mortuary
28 S. Linn Street Old Post Office
9 S. Linn Street Van Patten House
410 N. Lucas Street Schindhelm-Drews House
26 E. Market Street North Presbyterian Church
410 E. Market Street Henry C. Nicking House
108 McLean Street Theta Xi Fraternity House
320 Melrose Avenue Cannon Wilbur D. and Hattie House
503 Melrose Avenue A.W. Pratt House
629 Melrose Avenue Billingsley-Hills House
704 Reno Street Cavanaugh-Zetek House
228 S. Summit Street Summit Apartment Building
800 N. Van Buren Street Vogt-Unash House
207-215 E. Washington Street Paul-Helen Building
221 E. Washington Street Englert Theater
803 E. Washington Street The Crag/Haddock House
115 Wright Street Chicago Rock Island and Pacific Railroad Passenger Station
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 12-4478, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4498, 10-23-2012; Ord. 13-4513, 1-8-2013; Ord. 13-4523, 4-23-2013; Ord. 14-4585, 6-
3-2014; Ord. 14-4592, 8-19-2014; Ord. 14-4599, 10-21-2014; Ord. 16-4662, 4-19-2016)
14-3B-2: CONSERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
A. Purpose: The conservation district overlay zone is used to designate conservation districts. The purpose of this overlay zone is to:
1. Conserve the unique characteristics of older neighborhoods and resources, including their architectural, historical and aesthetic qualities;
2. Provide for design review of new construction or alteration of existing resources to assure compatibility with the existing character of older
neighborhoods and preserve the historic integrity of the resource;
3. Encourage the retention, rehabilitation and appropriate maintenance of existing buildings, structures and sites in older neighborhoods;
4. Stabilize property values and encourage reinvestment in older neighborhoods; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 379/715
5. Protect the environmental setting of historic landmarks and historic districts through the designation of conservation districts adjacent to historic
landmarks and historic districts.
B. Authority: The city council may designate by ordinance areas of the city as conservation districts. The process of designation is considered an overlay
rezoning. A conservation overlay rezoning is required to designate conservation districts. The procedures for conservation district overlay rezonings are
set forth chapter 8, in article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures", of this title.
C. Descriptions: A conservation district is a geographically cohesive area that is similar to a historic district in character. However, because it has fewer
properties that retain a high degree of historic integrity or contribute to a distinct sense of time and place, it does not currently qualify as a historic
district. Because these areas are still considered worthy of protection, the city council may designate them for conservation. To qualify for designation
as a conservation district, the subject area must contain abutting pieces of property under diverse ownership, the built portions of which, by majority,
are at least fifty (50) years old, but according to a historic resources survey, sixty percent (60%) or less of the structures are of a quality, integrity and
condition that qualify for historic district designation. The properties within the subject area must also meet one of the following additional criteria:
1. They represent the traditional character of Iowa City neighborhoods through architectural characteristics, building scale, building setback and
streetscape design; or
2. They exemplify a pattern of neighborhood settlement or development significant to the cultural history or tradition of Iowa City; or
3. They represent unique or unusual physical character that creates a distinctiveness.
D. Designated Resources: The following areas of the city are designated as conservation districts:
1. College Hill Conservation District:
2. Governor-Lucas Street Conservation District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 380/715
3. Clark Street Conservation District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 381/715
4. Dearborn Street Conservation District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 382/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
5. Goosetown/Horace Mann Conservation District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 383/715
(Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010)
14-3B-3: HISTORIC REVIEW:
A. Purpose: The intent of the historic review process is:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 384/715
1. To ensure that material changes to exterior features of landmarks and properties in historic and conservation districts do not substantially alter or
destroy the defining architectural character of a building, site or neighborhood.
2. To provide property owners, contractors and consultants with technical assistance and design alternatives to ensure that proposed projects conform
with the applicable historic preservation guidelines.
B. Applicability:
1. If a material change that requires a regulated permit, as defined in chapter 9, article B, "Historic Preservation Definitions", of this title, is proposed for
any property located in a historic or conservation district or to a property that has been designated a historic landmark, historic review is required. A
minor, intermediate, or major review will be conducted as applicable, and as set forth in chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission
Approval Procedures", of this title, and if approved, will result in the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of no material effect.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. For purposes of this article, a "material change" is any act that adds new materials or otherwise modifies an exterior feature of a property. "Material
changes" include alterations to the exterior features of a building or structure, demolition of a building or structure, demolition of a portion of a
building or structure, and new construction on a property, including construction of any new street access drives. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
3. Normal repairs or maintenance that do not involve material changes for which a regulated permit is required are exempt from historic review. For
example, changes made in the color of the exterior surfaces of a building are considered normal maintenance and repair and are therefore not
subject to historic review.
C. Approval Criteria: Applications for historic review will be reviewed for compliance with the following guidelines and standards, which are published in the
"Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended:
1. Historic Districts And Landmarks: For properties located within a historic district or designated a historic landmark:
a. "Secretary Of Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation", 1990 edition or subsequent revision thereof.
b. "Iowa City Guidelines For Historic Preservation".
c. Individual district guidelines:
(1) "Longfellow Neighborhood District Guidelines".
(2) "College Hill Neighborhood District Guidelines".
(3) "Woodlawn District Guidelines".
(4) "Northside Neighborhood District Guidelines".
2. Conservation Districts: For properties located within a conservation district:
a. "Iowa City Guidelines For Historic Preservation".
b. Individual district guidelines:
(1) "Longfellow Neighborhood District Guidelines".
(2) "College Hill Neighborhood District Guidelines".
3. Multi-Family And Two-Family Uses: For properties located within a historic or conservation district in which alterations, additions or new construction
will result in two (2) or more dwelling units, the property must meet the central planning district multi-family standards in addition to any applicable
guidelines and standards listed above.
D. Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for historic review in a historic district or for a historic
landmark may appeal the action to the city council. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for historic
review in a conservation district may appeal the action to the board of adjustment. Procedures for such appeals are set forth in chapter 8, article E,
"Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-4: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
After receiving written notification from the commission of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness, the owner of record may apply for a certificate
of economic hardship if he or she believes that the application of the provisions of this article would result in economic hardship to the extent that the
property in question cannot yield a reasonable return. The review and approval procedures for a certificate of economic hardship are set forth in chapter 8,
article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures", of this title. The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the
approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
A. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if required to comply with the requirements and standards specified in this article. It is not
sufficient to show that the potential return will be reduced as a result of these regulations, but rather it must be demonstrated that the resulting
reduction would be near confiscation.
B. The owner's situation is unique or peculiar to the property in question, and the situation is not shared with other landowners in the area nor due to
general conditions in the neighborhood.
C. The hardship is not of the property owner's or applicant's own making. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 385/715
14-3B-5: COMPLIANCE WITH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of no material effect, or a certificate of economic hardship is authorization to make only those
material changes specified in the approved application. It shall be the duty of the building official or designee to inspect, from time to time, any work
performed pursuant to such a certificate to ensure compliance with the requirements of such certificate. If it is found that such work is not being carried out
in accordance with the certificate, the building official shall issue a stop work order. Any material change at variance with that authorized by the certificate
shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to any enforcement action and penalties allowed herein. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-6: REMEDY OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
A. Except for emergencies as determined by the building official pursuant to the ordinances of the city, city enforcement agencies and departments must
give the historic preservation commission at least thirty (30) days' notice of any proposed order for remedying conditions determined to be dangerous
to life, health or property which may affect the exterior features of any building or structure located in a historic district, conservation district or that has
been designated a historic landmark.
B. The commission may require that material changes not adversely affect the exterior features of a building in cases where the danger to life, health or
property may be abated without detracting from the exterior features of the building. In such cases, it is the responsibility of the commission and the city
enforcement agency or department to cooperate with the property owner in an attempt to achieve a preservation solution whereby the dangerous
conditions will be corrected with minimal adverse impact on exterior features. Such plan shall be approved by the commission and shall be signed by
the chair of the commission, the property owner and the head of the city enforcement agency or department.
C. If a solution acceptable to the commission, the city enforcement agency or department and the property owner cannot be reached within thirty (30) days
or a period of time acceptable to the city enforcement agency or department, the agency or department shall proceed to issue and enforce its proposed
order. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-7: PREVENTION OF DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT:
A. Duty To Maintain: All buildings and structures that contribute to a conservation or historic district, or that are listed or are eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places, regardless of whether they are in a designated historic or conservation district, must be preserved against decay,
deterioration, and kept free from structural defects by the owner or such person, persons, or entities who may have custody or control thereof.
Accordingly, all such buildings and structures must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of section 17-5-19, "Responsibilities Of Owners
Relating To Maintenance And Occupancy Of Premises", of this code.
B. Determination And Action:
1. The historic preservation commission may file a petition with the building official requesting investigation of any applicable building or structure
suspected of neglect or deterioration according to the standards referenced in subsection A of this section. The building official will proceed with
investigation and may take any enforcement action necessary to correct or prevent further violation.
2. Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of the property owner(s) or other responsible person(s), duly notified, to take the corrective action(s) specified by the
building official within the time allotted, the building official may institute any and all legal or equitable remedies along with penalties provided by law
for said violations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE C. DESIGN REVIEW
14-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of design review is to:
A. Assure compatibility with the defining characteristics of the surrounding area or to preserve the integrity of existing neighborhoods or to support a
unifying theme for a particular development or area in order to spur economic growth.
B. Provide for careful review of new construction or alteration of existing structures in areas of the City where the existing built environment is expressive
of the architectural traditions of Iowa City and the unique physical features of the area or to provide guidance in areas where there is a lack of any
defining physical or aesthetic qualities but in which the City wishes to establish such qualities.
C. To provide property owners, contractors and consultants with technical assistance and design alternatives to ensure that proposed projects conform
with the applicable standards.
D. Enhance the social, cultural, economic, environmental and aesthetic development of the community by encouraging both harmonious and innovative
design.
E. Promote orderly community growth and protect property values.
F. Recognize that land use regulations aimed at these objectives provide not only for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens, but also for their
comfort and prosperity, and for the beauty and balance of the community. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 386/715
14-3C-2: APPLICABILITY:
The City Council may designate buildings, areas, and structures within the City that are subject to design review. The Council may also designate Design
Review Districts that contain contiguous parcels of real property, the built portions of which are expressive of the defining architectural and other physical
and aesthetic properties that give evidence to the physical traditions of Iowa City and the unique features of the area; or are areas that lack any defining
physical or aesthetic qualities but are places where the City wishes to establish such qualities.
A. Designated Areas, Buildings, And Structures: Projects located in the following areas are subject to the design review process:
1. Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14: Exterior alterations or new construction occurring on all parcels that were acquired and/or disposed of by the
City as part of the urban renewal project known as Iowa R-14 are subject to design review. Design review is also required for public right-of-way
improvements occurring within and adjacent to the urban renewal area designated as Urban Renewal Project R-14.
2. City Plaza: Design review is required for all projects designated as requiring such review by title 10, chapter 5, "City Plaza", of this Code. Any public
improvements to City Plaza are also subject to design review.
3. Other Public-Private Partnership Agreements: Projects specifically designated as requiring design review pursuant to a development agreement
between a private property owner and the City, such as for urban renewal parcels and other properties receiving public tax abatements or subsidies.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Central Planning District: Any exterior alterations to, additions to, or new construction of two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses, and
institutional/civic uses located on a property in the Central Planning District, are subject to design review according to the rules of applicability and
standards contained in section 14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this title. (See Central Planning District map located in
section 14-2B-6 of this title.)
5. PRM Zone: All exterior alterations to, additions to, or new construction on properties located within the PRM Zone are subject to design review
according to the rules of applicability and standards contained in section 14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this title.
6. Towncrest Design Review District: Any exterior alterations to, additions to, or new construction of buildings and structures, or alterations or additions
to site development, such as parking areas, landscaping, screening, lighting, and access on property within the boundaries of the Towncrest Design
Review District, as illustrated on the map below, are subject to design review. However, on property zoned Single-Family Residential, new
construction, alterations, or additions to single-family uses, including alterations or additions to site development associated with said uses, are
exempt from design review. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
a. Towncrest Design Review District Map:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 387/715
(Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; amd. Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
7. Design Review For Form Based Code Districts: Any exterior alterations to, additions to, or new construction of buildings and structures, or alterations
or additions to site development, including, but not limited to, parking areas, landscaping, screening, lighting, and access on property zoned to a
Form Based Code designation shall be subject to design review as specified in subsection 14-2G-1D, "Design Review", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
8. Rooftop Service Areas: Rooftop service areas as set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-
2015; amd. Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
B. Requests For Advice:
1. The City Council may request advice and recommendations from the Design Review Committee on projects located outside of designated areas.
2. Property owners in the CB-10 and CB-5 Zones may request advice from the Design Review Committee for projects located outside of designated
areas, but such advice will be purely advisory.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 388/715
C. Exemptions: Ordinary maintenance or repairs that do not involve changes in architecture and general design, arrangements, texture, material, or color
are exempted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3C-3: DESIGN REVIEW:
Where design review is required pursuant to this article, such review shall be conducted and approved in accordance with the following levels of review
prior to issuance of any building permit. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
A. Levels Of Design Review:
1. Level I Review:
a. A level I review will be conducted for the following designated areas, properties, and structures:
(1) City Plaza.
(2) Sidewalk cafes.
(3) Central Planning District.
(4) PRM Zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
(5) Certain public-private partnership agreements; level of review is pursuant to the specific development agreement.
(6) Minor exterior alterations, such as window placement, and color, that do not substantially change the building concept of a Council approved
plan under Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
(7) Towncrest Design Review District. (Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
(8) Design review for Form Based Code Districts. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
(9) Certain building height bonus provisions as specified in subsection 14-2G-7G of this title. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-
2016)
(10) Rooftop service areas as set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; amd. Ord.
16-4685, 11-15-2016)
b. Applications for level I review will be reviewed and approved, modified, or disapproved by the staff Design Review Committee or, in the case of
Form Based Code Districts, by the Form Based Code Committee, in accordance with chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of
this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
2. Level II Review:
a. A level II review will be conducted for the following designated areas, properties, and structures:
(1) Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14, except for minor exterior alterations, such as signage, window placement, and color, that do not
substantially change the building concept of the Council approved plan. Such minor alterations will be subject to level I review.
(2) Certain public-private partnership agreements; level of review is pursuant to the specific development agreement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
(3) Structures designed with certain building height bonuses allowed pursuant to subsection 14-2G-7G of this title. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
b. Applications for level II review will be reviewed by the staff Design Review Committee with their recommendation forwarded to the City Council for
approval, modification, or disapproval according to the procedures for design review contained in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title.
B. Approval Criteria: Applications for design review will be reviewed for compliance with the guidelines and standards as referenced below:
1. Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14: Design review subject to the design guidelines listed in subsection C of this section.
2. City Plaza: Design review subject to design guidelines listed in subsection C of this section.
3. Other Public-Private Partnership Agreements: Design review guidelines for each such project that is specifically designated as requiring design
review will be pursuant to the development agreement between the private property owner and the City. In the absence of such guidelines, the
design guidelines listed in subsection C of this section will be used.
4. Sidewalk Cafes: Design review subject to the design guidelines listed in subsection C of this section, and any additional requirements and guidelines
listed in title 10, chapter 3 of this Code.
5. Central Planning District: Design review according to the applicable multi-family site development standards set forth in chapter 2, article B, "Multi-
Family Residential Zones", of this title.
6. PRM Zone: Design review according to the applicable multi-family site development standards set forth in chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family
Residential Zones", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
7. Towncrest Design Review District: Design review according to the applicable design provisions within the "Towncrest Urban Renewal Area Design
Plan Manual" and according to the applicable standards listed in subsection C of this section. For purposes of design review, Towncrest Drive shall
be considered a street, with buildings, parking areas, pedestrian amenities, landscape screening, and other streetscape elements designed and
located to appropriately address Towncrest Drive as a street frontage as illustrated in the "Towncrest Urban Renewal Area Design Plan Manual".
(Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 389/715
8. Form Based Code District Design Review: Form Based Code District design review according to subsection 14-2G-1D of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
9. Rooftop Service Areas: Rooftop service areas allowed as provisional uses according to approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory
Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
C. Design Review Guidelines: When reviewing a project subject to design review, the Design Review Committee and City Council will adhere to the
following guidelines, if applicable as stated in subsection B of this section. In no case shall these guidelines be used to attempt to replace or override
the other requirements of this title.
1. Definitions:
COMPATIBILITY: Harmony in the appearance of buildings, structures and landscape developments along the same streetscape.
HARMONY: An aesthetically pleasing image resulting from an arrangement of various architectural and landscape elements along the same
streetscape.
LANDSCAPE: Elements of nature, topography, buildings and other manmade objects viewed in relation to one another.
MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES: Structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples include memorials, antennas, sheds,
shelters, fences and walls, transformers and drive-up facilities.
SCALE: The relationship of the size of elements to one another and to the human figure.
SCREENING: Structures and/or plantings that conceal an area from view of a public way.
STREET FURNITURE: Manmade objects, other than buildings, that are part of the streetscape. Examples include benches, litter containers, planting
containers, sculptures, vending machines and newspaper dispensers.
STREETSCAPE: The scene of a public street or way composed of natural and manmade elements, including buildings, paving, plantings, street
furniture and miscellaneous structures.
2. Building Design:
a. The project evaluation will be based on the architectural concepts of the design and the project's relationship to and compatibility with the defining
characteristics of the buildings and site features of the surrounding area, or alternatively, in areas proposed for redevelopment or revitalization, the
proposed building(s) will be evaluated according to the goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be to strengthen or preserve the integrity of the
existing area or to support a new architectural theme or set of unifying characteristics for a particular development or area. (See figure 3C.1 of this
section.)
Figure 3C.1 - Unified Architectural Theme
b. Architecturally significant buildings proposed for renovation or rehabilitation should retain the original architectural style and the essential and
prominent features and materials of the original facade.
c. Alignment of the horizontal and vertical architectural features on building fronts is desirable so as to enhance the visual continuity of the
streetscape. (See figure 3C.2 below.)
Figure 3C.2 - Alignment Of Architectural Features
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 390/715
d. The development of the first floor level should provide visual interest to and interaction with pedestrians through the use of such features as
windows, doors, and lighting. Blank stretches of wall will be discouraged.
Figure 3C.3 - Pedestrian Oriented Streetscape
e. Exterior lighting and fixtures should blend with the architectural design. They should provide adequate illumination for safety purposes without
excess glare.
f. Colors should be an integral part of the architectural style.
g. Rooftop equipment should blend with building design or be screened.
3. Relationship Of Building(s) To Site:
a. The project should integrate with adjoining properties, provide a transition between the project and pedestrian uses, and provide appropriate
landscaping.
Figure 3C.4 - Integration Of Pedestrian Amenities And Landscaping
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 391/715
b. Parking and service areas should blend with the street frontage or be screened from public view.
c. The scale of each building should be compatible along a street frontage to preserve the character of the street or to create the desired streetscape
anticipated by the development plan or agreement. Rhythm and proportion of buildings, doors, windows and other projections should be
considered. (See figure 3C.2, located at the end of subsection C2c of this section.)
d. Building materials, colors, textures, lines and masses should harmonize with adjoining buildings and sites, or alternatively, in areas proposed for
redevelopment or revitalization, the proposed building materials, colors, textures, lines and masses should be in harmony with the architectural
theme or goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be to strengthen or preserve the integrity of the existing area or to support a new architectural
theme or set of unifying characteristics for a particular development or area.
e. Site grading work should blend with surrounding site grades.
4. Landscaping:
a. Landscaping should enhance and complement architectural features and improve the visual and aesthetic quality of the streetscape.
b. Plants should be protected by appropriate curbs, raised planting surfaces, tree guards or other devices when located in areas where plants may
be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic.
Figure 3C.5 - Tree Guard
c. Paved areas, such as sidewalks and parking spaces, should be designed to facilitate the safe and efficient circulation of pedestrians and vehicles.
d. Service yards, trash receptacles and storage areas should be screened by buildings, fencing, plantings, walls or an appropriate combination of
these.
e. Existing natural features should be maintained and incorporated into site design if possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 392/715
f. Street furniture and miscellaneous structures should be integrated with the architectural concept and be located and designed to be convenient
and functional for the public. Their design should be compatible with surrounding buildings and streetscape in scale, materials and color scheme.
Alternatively, in areas proposed for redevelopment or revitalization, the proposed street furniture and miscellaneous structures should be
integrated with the architectural theme or goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be to strengthen or preserve the integrity of the existing area or
to support a new architectural theme or set of unifying characteristics for a particular development or area. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
5. Canopies And Awnings:
a. Canopies and awnings must respect the style and character of the structure on which they are located, particularly in the material and color.
b. The highest point of a canopy/awning or its superstructure must not be higher than the midpoint of the space between the second story
windowsills and the top of the first floor storefront window or transom. (See figure 3C.7 of this section.)
Figure 3C.7 - Awnings And Canopies
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
c. Along sidewalks and pedestrianways, canopies and awnings should project a sufficient distance from the building wall to be functional, i.e., to
provide shade and weather protection for pedestrians and to prevent reflective glare on storefront windows that may block views into the storefront
or display window. (Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
D. Appeals: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the design review committee regarding a level I design review
application may appeal such decision to the board of adjustment according to the applicable procedures for appeals set forth in chapter 8, article C,
"Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3C-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Approved applications for design review authorize only those changes in appearance set forth in such approved applications and no other changes in
appearance. It will be the duty of the building official or designee to inspect, from time to time, any work performed pursuant to such an approved
application to ensure compliance with the requirements of such application. If it is found that such work is not being carried out in accordance with the
approved application, the building official will issue a stop work order and may deny issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Any change in appearance at
variance with that authorized by the approved application shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3C-5: REVISIONS TO APPROVED DESIGN PLANS:
If the building application deviates from approved design review applications, the director of housing and inspection services or designee will inform the
design review committee, who will then determine if the proposed changes are substantive. Substantive changes to an approved application for design
review require submittal of those changes to the design review committee and approval thereof according to the applicable design review procedures.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 4
USE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. USE CATEGORIES
14-4A-1: PURPOSE:
This article classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the basis of common functional, product, or physical characteristics. The use
categories provide a systematic basis for assignment of present and future uses to zones. Certain use categories are broken down into subgroups if
further distinction is needed. The decision to permit, permit with provisions, or allow by special exception a particular use or use category in the various
zones is based on the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan and the stated purposes of the base zones. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 393/715
14-4A-2: CLASSIFYING USES:
A. Use Characteristics:
1. Land uses are assigned to the use category that most closely describes the nature of the principal use. A number of the most common uses are
listed under the "examples" subsection for each use category. In some zones, developments may have more than one principal use. Developments
may also have one or more accessory uses. For uses not listed as examples, the following is a list of factors to be considered when classifying a use
into a particular category, and is also used to determine whether the activities constitute principal uses or accessory uses:
a. The description of the use or activities in comparison to the stated characteristics of each use category;
b. The intensity of the activity or use in comparison to the stated characteristics of each use category;
c. The amount of site or floor area and equipment devoted to the use or activity;
d. The presence of and amount of sales from each use or activity;
e. The customer type for each use or activity. For example, do individual customers come to the site or does the firm primarily sell goods or services
to other firms?
f. The number of employees involved in the use or activity;
g. The hours of operation;
h. The building and site arrangement;
i. The type of vehicles used for the activity;
j. The number of vehicle trips generated by the use or activity;
k. How the use advertises itself;
l. Whether the use or activity would be likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site;
m. Whether the use is subordinate to and serves another use in the development;
n. Whether a use is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or use served;
o. Whether the use contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees of a principal use; and
p. Any other relevant evidence regarding use or activity that would help to classify a particular land use.
2. In cases where a specific use is not listed as an example, the director of housing and inspection services shall determine the appropriate category
for a use based on the factors listed in subsection A1 of this section.
3. In cases of dispute, the zoning code interpretation panel will issue a written use determination. Such determination may be appealed to the board of
adjustment according to the procedures outlined in chapter 8, article C, "Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title. If an appeal is
made, the board of adjustment shall determine whether the city has made an error in classifying the subject use based on the facts in evidence and
the factors listed in subsection A1 of this section.
4. Any use that cannot be clearly classified within an existing use category by the procedures noted above is prohibited, unless incorporated into this
title by a zoning code text amendment, the procedures for which are outlined in chapter 8, article D, "Planning And Zoning Commission Approval
Procedures", of this title. A specific use that cannot be classified into an existing use category shall not be listed as permitted, provisional, or a
special exception in any zone without first establishing a new use category within this article by zoning code text amendment.
B. Use Of Examples:
1. The "examples" subsection under each use category provides a list of examples of specific uses that are included in the use category. These lists
may not be exhaustive of all the specific uses that might be included in a use category.
2. The names of uses on the lists are generic. They are based on the common meaning of the terms and not on what a specific use may be called. For
example, a use with the business name "Wholesale Liquidators", that sells mostly to individual consumers, would be included in the sales oriented
retail category rather than the wholesale sales category, because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the sales oriented retail
category.
C. Accessory Uses:
1. For reference purposes, a list of accessory uses commonly associated with a particular use category is included under a subsection entitled
"Accessory Uses". Accessory uses and their associated regulations and requirements are addressed in detail in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory
Uses And Buildings", of this title.
2. A use that is accessory to a principal use in one instance may, in other circumstances, be considered a principal use. For example, a large business
may provide an in-house daycare center for employees. This daycare center would be considered an accessory use. However, a daycare center
would be considered a separate principal use if it were not affiliated with another business or use on the property.
D. Exceptions: Some of the use categories may contain an "Exceptions" subsection. These subsections provide a cross reference for uses that may seem
to be part of a particular category, but which are explicitly classified into a different use category.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 394/715
E. Prohibited Uses: Certain uses are specifically prohibited in the city of Iowa City, even though they may be construed to be part of a particular use
category. These uses are listed in a subsection entitled "Prohibited" under the relevant use category. As noted in subsection A4 of this section, some
uses may also be prohibited because they cannot be clearly classified within an existing use category by the procedures set forth in subsection A of
this section.
F. Developments With Multiple Principal Uses: Developments with multiple principal uses will be categorized using the following rules:
1. When all of the principal uses of a development fall within one use category, then the entire development is assigned to that use category. For
example, a development that contains a hair salon, a dry cleaners, and a photographic studio would be classified as personal service oriented retail.
2. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified into the applicable use category and
each use is subject to all applicable regulations for the use category. For example, a development that contains a store that sells musical instruments
and an architectural office would fall into two (2) different use categories: Sales oriented retail and general office.
3. Developments with multiple principal uses, such as shopping centers, shall incorporate only those uses permitted or allowed as provisional or by
special exception in the underlying zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G. Use Classification For Establishments That Sell Alcohol:
1. Applicability: Any use for which an application has been filed for a liquor control license or wine or beer permit is subject to the following use
classification process.
2. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this subsection:
ALCOHOL SALES: The sale of alcohol and alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, alcohol, beer or wine in closed containers intended for
off site consumption; and alcoholic beverages, including cocktails, shots, wine, beer, and any part of an alcoholic beverage intended for on site
consumption, as defined in chapter 123 of the state code.
LICENSE: Any liquor control license, wine or beer permit issued by the state of Iowa that allows sales of alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
LICENSEE: Any person or entity that holds a liquor control license, wine or beer permit issued by the state of Iowa.
3. Classification Process:
a. Prior to issuance of a license for a new use or renewal of a license for a use that was established prior to the effective date hereof, but which has
not yet been classified according to these provisions, the licensee must submit to the department of housing and inspection services a verified
statement that details the nature of the principal use for which the license will be issued, the type of license(s) applied for, and the hours that the
establishment will be open for business. The city may request any other information deemed necessary to verify and classify the use, including,
but not limited to, business records upon which the statement is based, state and federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance and
audits performed to determine dramshop insurance premiums, and receipts from vendors for goods purchased.
b. Based on the information provided by the applicant, the type of license being applied for, and the classification system set forth in this article, the
city will advise the applicant regarding the classification of the proposed use for zoning purposes, and, if applicable, whether the alcohol sales will
be considered a principal or accessory use of the property.
c. If through this use classification process, a use that was legally established prior to the effective date hereof is determined to be nonconforming
with regard to the separation requirements for drinking establishments or alcohol sales oriented retail uses, the property file will be tagged by the
building official or designee as a nonconforming drinking establishment or nonconforming alcohol sales oriented retail use, as applicable. Such a
nonconforming use may continue provided it is in compliance with the applicable provisions of article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this
chapter.
4. Accessory Alcohol Sales Certification: Any use that is classified as an alcohol sales oriented retail use is considered a principal use and subject to
the regulations pertaining thereto, unless it is determined that alcohol sales are an accessory use to another principal use of the property through the
following certification process. Any licensee applying for an accessory alcohol sales certificate must submit verified statements and business records
as set forth in the following subsections:
a. For existing uses, if according to a verified statement issued by a certified public accountant, alcohol sales expressed as a percentage of gross
yearly income is less than twenty five percent (25%), an accessory alcohol sales certificate will be issued for one year, after which time it must be
renewed annually at the time the license is renewed. Said statement shall be based on records made in the regular course of the licensee's
business. The licensee shall allow, upon request, the building official, city clerk or designee to examine the business records upon which the
statement is based, including state and federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance and audits performed to determine dramshop
insurance premiums, and receipts from vendors for goods purchased.
b. For new uses, if the licensee estimates, based on their submitted business plan, that alcohol sales expressed as a percentage of gross yearly
income will be less than twenty five percent (25%), an accessory alcohol sales certificate will be issued for one year. The certificate must be
renewed annually thereafter at the time the license is renewed based on actual sales according to a verified statement from a certified public
accountant as described in subsection G4a of this section.
c. If, at the time of renewal of the certificate, alcohol sales constitute twenty five percent (25%) or more of gross yearly income and the use is not in
compliance with zoning requirements for alcohol sales oriented uses, a notice of violation will be issued. If the use is in violation of the zoning
requirements for alcohol sales oriented uses, the licensee must reduce alcohol sales to below twenty five percent (25%) of gross yearly income or
otherwise bring the use into compliance with the applicable regulations. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009)
14-4A-3: RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Household Living Uses:
1. Characteristics: The residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single household or group household, who are living together as a single
housekeeping unit. The principal use of the property is for long term residential living, with each dwelling unit containing its own facilities for living,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 395/715
sleeping, cooking and eating meals, and with all spaces within the unit open to the entire household. The dwelling or dwelling units are designed for
residential living and any accessory use shall be secondary to the use of the property as a residence. Tenancy is typically arranged on a yearly basis,
but at least on a month-to-month basis.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below. The single family uses are further divided into various dwelling types, because
these dwelling types have distinct dimensional and development standards based on the zone in which they are located. Group households, given
that they are a type of "household" rather than a type of dwelling, are permitted in any type of dwelling listed in the three (3) other subgroups.
a. Group Households: Group households include only the following specific uses: elder family homes, elder group homes, parental group homes,
and family care homes, all as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
b. Single Family Uses: A single family use is a household living use where there is no more than one principal dwelling unit per lot. Single family uses
include the following dwelling types.
(1) Detached single family dwellings. Farm dwellings; detached single family houses; manufactured homes; modular homes; and mobile homes, if
converted to real property and taxed as a site built dwelling, as provided in the Code of Iowa, as amended. (See exceptions, below.)
(2) Detached zero lot line dwellings.
(3) Attached single family dwellings. Attached zero-lot-line dwellings; townhouse dwellings.
c. Two Family Uses: Two family uses are household living uses in which there are two (2) principal dwelling units within a single building and both
dwelling units are located on the same lot. These uses are often referred to as duplexes.
d. Multi-Family Uses: Multi-family uses are household living uses where there are three (3) or more principal dwelling units within a single building
and all dwelling units within the building are located on the same lot. These uses include apartments, condominium apartments, elder apartments,
assisted living apartments, townhouse-style apartments and condominiums, efficiency apartments, and dwelling units located within mixed-use
buildings.
3. Accessory Uses: Private recreational uses; storage buildings; parking for residents' vehicles. Home occupations, accessory dwelling units, childcare
homes, and bed and breakfast facilities are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations outlined in article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this chapter. Any accessory use of the property shall remain secondary to the principal use of the property for residential living.
4. Exceptions:
a. Mobile homes located within manufactured housing parks approved through a planned development process are considered detached single
family dwellings, regardless of whether they are converted to real property and taxed as site built dwellings.
b. Detached single family dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings approved through a planned development process are considered single
family uses for purposes of this title, even if they are located on one common lot and sold as condominiums.
c. Single family uses that contain accessory apartments are not considered a two family use.
d. Mixed-use buildings containing dwelling units are always considered multi-family uses, regardless of the number of dwelling units within the
building.
e. Uses such as hotels, motels, and guest houses, which by definition may arrange tenancy for periods shorter than one month, are not considered
residential. They are considered a form of temporary lodging and are classified as hospitality-oriented retail.
f. Transient housing, which by definition arranges tenancy for periods shorter than one month, is not considered residential. It is considered a form of
temporary lodging or shelter and is classified as community service - shelter.
g. Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents are placed in the facility by court order and are under supervision of
employees or contractees of the Department of Corrections, are classified as detention facilities.
h. Any single family dwelling or dwelling unit within a two family dwelling where there is more than one residential lease issued per unit or where
there are locks installed on bedroom doors through which one resident may prevent other residents from entering his/her private room(s) when
he/she is not physically present is classified as a group living use, unless the dwelling meets the definition of a group household.
B. Group Living Uses:
1. Characteristics: Group living uses are characterized by the residential occupancy of a dwelling by a group of people (roomers) who do not meet the
definition of a "household" or "group household". Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period. Group living structures
contain individual, private rooming units that are not open to all the residents of the dwelling. Rooming units contain private space for living and
sleeping, but not for cooking. Bathroom facilities may be private or shared. There may also be shared kitchen and dining facilities and shared
common rooms and amenities for all residents. The rooming units are furnished with locks through which one member of the group may prevent
other members of the group from entering his/her private rooming unit. The residents may or may not receive any combination of care, training, or
treatment, but those receiving such services must reside at the site.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below.
a. Assisted group living: Group care facilities, including nursing and convalescent homes; assisted living facilities.
b. Independent group living: Rooming houses; student dormitories.
c. Fraternal group living: Fraternities; sororities; monasteries; convents; and rooming house cooperatives.
3. Accessory Uses: Recreational facilities; meeting rooms; associated offices; shared amenity areas, shared kitchens and dining rooms, food
preparation and dining facilities; off-street parking for vehicles of the occupants and staff; storage facilities; off-street loading areas.
4. Exceptions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 396/715
a. Uses such as hotels, motels, and guest houses, which by definition may arrange tenancy for periods shorter than one month, are not considered
residential. They are considered a form of temporary lodging and are classified as hospitality-oriented retail.
b. Family care homes, elder group homes, and elder family homes are considered group households and are classified as household living uses.
c. Transient housing, which by definition arranges tenancy for periods shorter than one month, is not considered residential. It is considered a form of
temporary lodging or shelter and is classified as community service - shelter.
d. Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents are placed in the facility by court order and are under supervision of
employees or contractees of the Department of Corrections, are classified as detention facilities. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
14-4A-4: COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Adult Business Uses:
1. Characteristics: Any amusement or entertainment establishment, bookstore, massage establishment, motion picture theater, video rental or sales
establishment, or other similar use, in which twenty five percent (25%) or more of its floor area is customarily not open to the public generally but only
to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age under chapter 728, "Obscenity", Code of Iowa, as amended.
2. Examples: Adult bookstores; adult video stores; nightclubs featuring nude dancing.
3. Accessory uses: Off street parking.
4. Exceptions: Therapeutic massage is considered personal service oriented retail.
B. Animal Related Commercial Uses:
1. Characteristics: Commercial services related to the temporary care, medical treatment, or cremation of domestic animals. Uses are divided into two
(2) subgroups based on the intensity of the use, outdoor activity on the site, and the potential for noise and odor related externalities.
2. Examples: This category includes uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below:
a. General: Veterinary clinics; animal grooming establishments; pet crematoriums.
b. Intensive: Kennels; stables.
3. Accessory uses: Boarding facilities and pet crematoriums within veterinary clinics; overnight sleeping accommodations for staff; parking; outdoor
animal exercise areas associated with kennels and stables.
4. Exceptions:
a. Pet and pet supply stores are classified as sales oriented retail.
b. Pet crematoriums may also be considered an accessory use to a mortuary or funeral home. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C. Building Trade Uses:
1. Characteristics: Building trade uses are characterized by firms who undertake activities of a type that are specialized either to building construction
or to both building and nonbuilding construction projects. These specialized trade contractors may work on subcontract from the general contractor,
performing only part of the work covered by the general contract, or they may work directly for the owner of the building or project. Building trade
contractors primarily perform their work at the site of construction, although they also may have shops where they perform work incidental to the job
site.
2. Examples: Electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning contractors, painting and wall papering services, masons, stone and tile setters, glass
and glazing services.
3. Accessory Uses: Off street parking, workshops, storage.
4. Exceptions:
a. Contractors and others who perform services off site are included in the office use category if large equipment and materials are not stored
indoors or outdoors on the site, and fabrication, or similar work, is not conducted on the site.
b. Businesses that repair and install glass in automobiles, trucks and other vehicles are classified as vehicle repair uses.
c. Uses specializing in heavy construction work, or that include major fabrication or assembly activities, or that store large quantities of materials on
site will be classified as industrial service, manufacturing and production, and/or warehouse and freight movement depending on the particular
characteristics of the use (see section 14-4A-2, "Classifying Uses", of this article).
d. Artisans and artists that manufacture or assemble goods made of wood, glass, metal, tile, stone or similar that are intended for sale to the general
public are categorized as cottage industries, as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. (Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
D. Commercial Recreational Uses:
1. Characteristics: Commercial facilities used primarily for physical exercise, recreation, or culture. Outdoor uses in this category are typically land
intensive uses that provide continuous recreation or entertainment oriented activities. They may take place in a number of structures that are
arranged together in an outdoor setting. Indoor uses in this category may require larger indoor areas to accommodate equipment or facilities for the
proposed activity.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 397/715
a. Outdoor: Campgrounds; commercial tennis and swimming facilities; drive-in theaters; outdoor skating rinks; golf driving ranges; outdoor miniature
golf facilities; commercial amphitheaters; amusement parks; privately owned active sports facilities such as ball fields.
b. Indoor: Physical fitness centers; health clubs; gyms; bowling alleys; indoor skating rinks; billiard halls; amusement arcades; indoor theaters; indoor
play parks.
3. Accessory Uses: Concessions; off street parking; maintenance facilities.
4. Exceptions:
a. Golf courses are considered parks and open space.
b. Commercial art galleries are classified as sales oriented retail.
c. Private lodges and clubs are classified as religious/private group assembly.
d. Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature, such as community centers, libraries and museums are considered community service.
e. Establishments featuring nude dancing are considered an adult business use.
E. Commercial Parking Uses:
1. Characteristics: Commercial parking facilities provide parking that is not accessory to a specific use. A fee may or may not be charged. A facility that
provides both accessory parking for a specific use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the use is also classified as commercial
parking.
2. Examples: Municipal parking facilities; short term and long term fee parking facilities; commercial shuttle parking facilities; mixed parking lots
(partially for a specific use, partly for rent to others). (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
F. Eating And Drinking Establishments:
1. Characteristics: Establishments where the principal activity is the preparation, dispensing and consumption of food and/or beverages. Depending on
the type of establishment, food and/or beverages may be consumed on or off of the premises. These uses may vary with regard to traffic generation,
congestion, and the potential for off site impacts. Therefore, the size, location, and accessory uses permitted may be regulated differently based on
the underlying zoning.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below:
a. Eating Establishments: Restaurants; cafes; cafeterias; coffee shops; delicatessens, tearooms; dining rooms; supper clubs; fast food restaurants;
ice cream parlors.
b. Drinking Establishments: Any use that meets all of the defining characteristics listed in subsections F2b(1), F2b(2), and F2b(3) of this section, is
considered a drinking establishment for purposes of this title, unless listed as an exception in subsection F4 of this section.
(1) The principal activity of the establishment is the preparation, dispensing and consumption of food and/or beverages; and
(2) The establishment is licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on site consumption, as defined by Iowa Code chapter 123;
and
(3) The establishment is open for business on a regular basis any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
3. Accessory Uses: Off street parking. Drive-through facilities and sidewalk cafe seating are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations
outlined in article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
4. Exceptions:
a. Establishments featuring nude dancing are considered an adult business use. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-
4452, 10-18-2011)
b. Restaurants and/or bars that are associated with a hospitality oriented retail use and that have been issued a class B liquor control license are
considered accessory to the subject hospitality oriented retail use and are not considered eating or drinking establishments or alcohol oriented
retail uses. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
G. Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses:
1. Characteristics: Quick vehicle servicing uses provide direct services for motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car or on site before
and while the service is performed. The facility may include a drive-through area where the service is performed. Full serve and miniserve gas
stations are always classified as a principal use, rather than an accessory use, even when they are in conjunction with other uses.
2. Examples: Full serve and miniserve gas stations; unattended card key service stations; car washes.
3. Accessory uses: Off street parking and stacking lanes.
4. Exceptions:
a. Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks is classified as vehicle repair and is considered a
principal use rather than an accessory use, even when in conjunction with a gas station or other use. A development with both a gas station and
automotive repair shop would be classified as containing two (2) principal uses: quick vehicle servicing and vehicle repair. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 398/715
b. A convenience store located on the same lot as a quick vehicle servicing use is regulated as a separate principal use, sales oriented retail or
alcohol sales oriented retail, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
c. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and heavy trucks is classified as industrial service.
d. Fleet vehicle refueling facilities that are located on the site where the fleet vehicles are kept are classified as an accessory use.
H. Office Uses:
1. Characteristics: Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government,
professional, medical, or financial services.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
a. General Office: Professional offices, such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, and real estate agents; financial businesses, such as
mortgage lenders, brokerage houses, administrative and back office banking facilities; data processing; government offices; public utility offices;
social service agency offices; television and radio studios; and business services, such as advertising agencies, consumer credit reporting
agencies, collection agencies, mailing and copying services, quick printing services, building management services, detective agencies, computer
services, software development, research and development, consulting and public relations, protective services, bondspersons, drafting services,
auctioneer services, call centers. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
b. Medical/Dental Office: Medical and dental clinics; chiropractic clinics; medical and dental labs; blood collection facilities; physical therapy clinics.
3. Accessory Uses: Cafeterias; exercise facilities for employees; off street parking; other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or
building. Antennas and satellite receiving devices that are accessory to a television or radio studio are subject to additional regulations. (See article
C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter.)
4. Exceptions:
a. Broadcast and other communication towers associated with radio and television studios are classified as communication transmission facilities
and are regulated as a separate principal use.
b. Offices that are accessory to a business or facility in another use category are not classified as an office use, but are subject to the relevant
regulations for accessory uses. For example, a manufacturing facility may include some offices for administrative functions. These offices are
considered accessory to the manufacturing and production use.
c. Retail banking establishments that offer teller services and other personal banking services for individual customers are considered personal
service oriented retail. Banking establishments that contain both administrative offices/back office functions and retail operations are considered to
contain two (2) principal uses: office and personal service oriented retail.
d. Offices for contractors and others who perform services off site are included in the office category if equipment and materials are not stored on the
site and fabrication services or similar work is not conducted on site.
e. Salons and spas that offer therapeutic massage and other aesthetic health treatments are classified as personal service oriented retail.
I. Retail Uses:
1. Characteristics: Establishments involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products to the general public for personal or household
consumption and establishments involved in the sale of personal services, hospitality services, or product repair services to the general public. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below: (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
a. Sales Oriented: Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods, including, but not limited to, antiques, appliances, art, art
supplies, bicycles, carpeting, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware,
household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationery, videos. Also includes retail establishments that
have a cottage industry component, such as bakeries, confectioneries, upholsterers, artist/artisans' studios, and similar. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
b. Personal Service Oriented: Establishments engaged in providing retail services and services related to the care of a person or a person's apparel,
such as retail banking establishments, laundromats, catering services, dry cleaners, tailors, shoe repair, photographic studios, beauty salons,
tanning salons, therapeutic massage establishments, taxidermists, mortuaries, funeral homes, and crematoriums. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009; amd.
Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
c. Repair Oriented: Repair of consumer goods, such as electronics, bicycles, office equipment; appliances.
d. Hospitality Oriented: Hotels; motels; convention centers; guesthouses; and commercial meeting halls/event facilities.
e. Outdoor Storage And Display Oriented: Uses that typically include large areas of outdoor storage or display, such as lumberyards; sales or leasing
of consumer vehicles, including passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and recreational vehicles; sales of landscaping materials and
nursery products to the general public; farm supply and implement sales; equipment or vehicle rental businesses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
f. Alcohol Sales Oriented: Liquor stores; wine shops; grocery stores; convenience stores; and other retail establishments for which a class E liquor
control license or wine or beer permit has been issued that allows sale of alcohol or alcoholic beverages in closed containers for off premises
consumption. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
g. Delayed Deposit Service Uses: Payday lenders and any other similar use that meets the definition of "delayed deposit service use", as defined in
chapter 9, article A of this title. (Ord. 12-4495, 9-18-2012)
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; storage of goods; assembly, repackaging, or processing of goods for on site sale; off street parking, services incidental to
the sale of goods; wholesale sales. Drive-through facilities are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations outlined in article C,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 399/715
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter. Crematoriums, for either human or pet remains, may be an accessory use to a funeral home or
mortuary. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
4. Exceptions:
a. Lumberyards and other building material suppliers that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as wholesale
sales.
b. Repair of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks is classified as vehicle repair. Repair and service of industrial
vehicles and equipment, and heavy trucks is classified as industrial service.
c. Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment is classified as wholesale sales.
d. Firms that primarily sell tree nursery products and landscaping materials to other retail outlets rather than to the general public are considered
wholesale sales. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
e. Restaurants and/or bars that are associated with a hospitality oriented retail use and that have been issued a Class B liquor control license are
considered accessory to the subject hospitality oriented retail use and are not considered drinking establishments or alcohol oriented retail uses.
f. Drinking establishments are not considered alcohol sales oriented uses, even if they have a liquor control license or wine or beer permit that allows
sale of alcohol, wine, or beer in closed containers for off premises consumption.
g. A use is not considered an alcohol sales oriented use if an accessory alcohol sales certificate has been granted according to the process set forth
in subsection 14-4A-2G, "Use Classification For Establishments That Sell Alcohol", of this article. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-
18-2011)
h. Bed and breakfast inns and bed and breakfast homestays are considered accessory uses to owner occupied, detached single-family dwellings
and are regulated according to the provisions specified for such uses in article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter.
i. A pet crematorium, if a principal use on a property, is considered an animal related commercial use. Pet crematoriums may also be an accessory
use to a veterinary clinic. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
j. Sales of first-class and/or second-class consumer fireworks is classified as an "other use" as set forth in subsection 14-4A-7E of this article. (Ord.
17-4732, 11-21-2017)
J. Surface Passenger Services:
1. Characteristics: Passenger terminals for regional bus and passenger rail service; dispatch facilities for local taxi and limousine service.
2. Examples: Regional bus and passenger rail depots; charter and rental bus services; dispatch facilities for local taxi and limousine services.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; concessions; parking; maintenance and fueling facilities.
4. Exceptions: Bus stations and park and ride facilities for local mass transit are classified as general community service uses. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
K. Vehicle Repair Uses:
1. Characteristics: Establishments providing repair and servicing of passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles
such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed.
2. Examples: Vehicle repair shops; auto body shops; transmission and muffler shops; alignment shops; auto upholstery shops; auto detailing services;
tire sales and mounting.
3. Accessory uses: Offices; sales of parts; off street parking; vehicle storage.
4. Exceptions:
a. Towing services and the repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and of heavy trucks are classified as industrial service.
b. Vehicle wrecking and salvage are classified as salvage operations.
c. Quick vehicle lubrication businesses are classified as quick vehicle servicing. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
14-4A-5: INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Industrial Service Uses:
1. Characteristics: Firms that are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or byproducts.
Industrial service firms that service or repair consumer goods do so primarily by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets, rather than
for individual customers. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Examples: Facilities, yards, and preassembly yards for construction contractors; welding shops; machines shops; tool repair; electric motor repair;
repair of scientific or professional instruments; repair of heavy machinery; towing and vehicle storage; servicing and repair of medium and heavy
trucks; exterminators; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; laundry, dry cleaning and carpet cleaning plants; schools for industrial trades. (Ord. 11-
4452, 10-18-2011)
3. Accessory uses: Offices; parking; storage; rail spur or lead lines. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Exceptions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 400/715
a. Building contractors who primarily perform services off site are included in the building trade uses category. However, contractors and others who
perform services off site are included in the office use category if large equipment and materials are not stored indoors or outdoors on the site, and
fabrication, or similar work, is not conducted on the site. (Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
b. Recycling processing facilities are classified as waste related uses.
c. Schools that offer training in industrial trades, but that do not include training on large equipment or vehicles and that do not include activities that
generate noise, odors, or dust more typical of industrial uses, are classified as specialized educational facilities or colleges and universities.
B. Manufacturing And Production Uses:
1. Characteristics: Firms that are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manmade, raw,
secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semifinished and are generally made for the wholesale
market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for businesses or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a
subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the three (3) subgroups listed below: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
a. Technical/Light Manufacturing: Firms engaged in the manufacturing, development, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling of electronic
components; electrotherapeutic, electromedical and X-ray apparatus; engineering, scientific and research laboratory equipment; measuring and
controlling instruments; office, computing and accounting machines; optical instruments and lenses; pharmaceuticals; photographic equipment and
supplies; photofinishing laboratories. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
b. General Manufacturing: Manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise. This subgroup
excludes those manufacturing firms listed as examples under heavy manufacturing and also excludes those manufacturing uses that are expressly
prohibited in Iowa City. For example, this subgroup includes the manufacture of most chemicals and allied products and the manufacture of most
food and kindred products, except those listed under the heavy manufacturing subgroup.
c. Heavy Manufacturing: Manufacturing firms not included in the manufacturing categories above because they may have significant external effects
(excessive odor, fumes, smoke, dust, hazardous waste) on adjacent, less intense commercial or industrial uses. Included in this category are uses
such as concrete batch/mix plants; asphalt mixing plants; meatpacking plants; sawmills and planing mills; wet corn milling; manufacture of animal
feeds; and paper and paperboard mills.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; cafeterias; off street parking; employee recreational facilities; on site daycare facilities; warehouses; storage yards; rail
spur or lead lines; docks; repair facilities; truck fleets.
4. Exceptions:
a. Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on site and to the general public are classified as sales oriented retail.
b. Salvage and wrecking of automobiles, trucks, and other heavy machinery is classified as salvage operations.
5. Prohibited Uses: Rendering plants; Portland cement plants; stockyards and slaughterhouses; manufacture of fertilizers or explosives; oil refining and
alcohol plants; steel mills; pulp mills.
C. Salvage Operations:
1. Characteristics: Firms that collect, store, and dismantle damaged or discarded automobiles, trucks, machinery, appliances, and building materials.
Damaged goods are often dismantled in order to salvage usable parts for resale.
2. Examples: Auto and truck salvage and wrecking; salvage and wrecking of heavy machinery, appliances, and building materials.
3. Accessory uses: Towing services; offices; parking; storage.
4. Exceptions:
a. Recycling processing facilities are classified as waste related uses.
b. Uses that receive, store, or dispose of liquid or solid organic materials or waste are classified as waste related uses.
D. Self-Service Storage Uses:
1. Characteristics: Uses that provide separate storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private access by
the tenant for storing or removing personal property.
2. Examples: Miniwarehouses; ministorage facilities.
3. Accessory uses: Security and leasing offices. Use of the storage areas for sales, service, repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered
accessory to a self-service storage use.
4. Exceptions: A transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods
to be stored or transferred is classified as warehouse and freight movement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Warehouse And Freight Movement Uses:
1. Characteristics: Firms involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or
the final consumer, except for some will-call pick ups. There is little on site sales activity with the customer present.
2. Examples: Separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage; cold
storage plants, including frozen food lockers; major wholesale distribution centers; truck and air freight terminals; railroad switching yards; bus and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 401/715
railcar storage lots; storage lots for large fleets of vehicles; parcel services; major postal facilities; grain terminals; and the stockpiling of sand, gravel,
and other aggregate materials.
3. Accessory uses: Offices; fleet parking and maintenance areas; rail spur or lead lines; docks; and repackaging facilities.
4. Exceptions:
a. Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as waste related uses.
b. Miniwarehouses are classified as self-service storage.
c. Dispatch facilities and accessory parking areas for taxi and limousine services are classified as surface passenger services. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
F. Waste Related Uses:
1. Characteristics: Uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location; uses that collect
sanitary wastes; uses that recycle solid waste or recyclable materials; and uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from biological
decomposition of organic material.
2. Examples: Recycling processing facilities; sanitary landfills; limited use landfills; waste composting; waste transfer stations; energy recovery plants;
sewage treatment plants; portable sanitary collection equipment storage and pumping; and hazardous waste collection sites.
3. Accessory uses: Recycling of materials; offices; repackaging and transshipment of byproducts.
4. Exceptions: Uses that receive, store, and dismantle damaged or discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances or building materials for reuse or resale
of component parts are classified as salvage operations.
5. Prohibited Uses: Disposal, reduction or dumping of dead animals or offal; radioactive waste storage or disposal facilities. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G. Wholesale Sales Uses:
1. Characteristics: Firms that are primarily involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products to retailers; to industrial, institutional, or commercial business
users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies.
Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on site or delivered
to the customer.
2. Examples: Wholesale sales and rental of heavy trucks, machinery, equipment, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine
parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail order houses; wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts,
and building hardware.
3. Accessory uses: Offices; products repair; warehouses; parking; minor fabrication services; repackaging of goods.
4. Exceptions:
a. Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are classified as sales oriented retail.
b. Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on site business activity are classified as warehouse and freight movement.
c. Wholesale plant or tree nurseries are classified as agriculture. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-4A-6: INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC USES:
A. Basic Utility Uses:
1. Characteristics: "Basic utilities" are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic utility uses
generally do not have a large number of employees at the site. Services may be publicly or privately provided.
2. Examples: Utility substation facilities, such as electric substations, gas regulator stations, telecommunications switching and relay facilities; water
and sewer lift stations, water towers, and reservoirs.
3. Accessory Uses: Parking; control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment.
4. Exceptions:
a. Services where employees or the general public are generally present are classified as community service or office uses.
b. Utility offices where employees or customers are generally present are classified as office uses.
c. Bus barns are classified as warehouse and freight movement.
d. Communications towers, including radio, television, and wireless communications infrastructure, are classified as communication transmission
facilities.
B. Colleges And Universities:
1. Characteristics: Public or private colleges and universities that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a formal degree. Colleges,
universities and professional schools granting academic degrees and requiring at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic
training for admission. Junior colleges and technical institutes requiring at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic training for
admission and granting associate academic degrees, certificates or diplomas. These uses tend to be in campuslike settings or on multiple blocks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 402/715
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the following two (2) subgroups:
a. Public: Public universities and community colleges that are under state jurisdiction.
b. Private: Private colleges and universities; private technical colleges; private nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital; seminaries.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; housing for students; food service; laboratories; health and sports facilities; theaters; meeting areas; parking; maintenance
facilities; support commercial.
4. Exceptions: Business, technical, trade, martial arts, music, dance, and drama schools/studios are classified as specialized educational facilities.
However, business and technical colleges that offer degree programs in campuslike settings are classified as private colleges and universities. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C. Community Service Uses:
1. Characteristics: Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing a local service to people of the community. Generally, they provide the
service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Included are community
centers or facilities that have membership provisions that are open to the general public to join at any time, e.g., a senior center that allows any
senior to join. The use may provide shelter or short term housing where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than one month when operated
by a public or nonprofit agency. The use may provide tenancy for long term housing for persons with disabilities when operated by a public or
nonprofit agency. The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the following three (3) subgroups:
a. General Community Service: Libraries; museums; transit centers; park and ride facilities; senior centers; community centers; neighborhood
centers; youth club facilities; some social service facilities; vocational training facilities for the physically or mentally disabled; soup kitchens;
surplus food distribution centers; public safety facilities, such as police and fire stations.
b. Community Service - Shelter: Transient housing operated by a public or nonprofit agency.
c. Community Service - Long Term Housing: Long term housing for persons with a disability operated by a public or nonprofit agency. (Ord. 16-4667,
7-5-2016)
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas; parking; health and therapy areas; daycare uses; athletic facilities.
4. Exceptions:
a. Religious institutions and private clubs and lodges are classified as religious/private group assembly uses.
b. Group care facilities where patients are residents of the facility are classified as assisted group living.
c. Private, for profit athletic or health clubs are classified as indoor commercial recreational uses.
d. Private, for profit art galleries are classified as sales oriented retail.
e. Social service agencies that consist primarily of office and counseling functions and operate in a similar fashion to other office uses are classified
as general office.
f. Parks and cemeteries are classified as parks and open space.
g. Uses where tenancy is arranged on a month to month or longer period are residential and are classified as household living or group living.
h. Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents of the facility are under supervision of sworn officers of the court are
classified as detention facilities.
D. Daycare Uses:
1. Characteristics: A nonresidential facility that provides less than twenty four (24) hour per daycare or supervision for children and adults for a fee.
Daycare uses also include organized programs of short term supportive daycare in a group environment for adults who need supervision, assistance
or both. Services may include, but are not limited to, nursing and rehabilitative services, personal care, transportation services, social or recreational
activities, and preventative or restorative services.
2. Examples: Childcare centers; adult daycare; preschools and latchkey programs not accessory to an educational facility use.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; recreational areas; playgrounds; parking.
4. Exceptions:
a. A childcare home (see definition of "childcare home" in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title) is considered an accessory use and
is subject to the requirements of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
b. Preschools and latchkey programs located within an educational facility are considered an accessory use and are subject to the regulations of
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
c. Daycare centers that provide on site care for the employees of a particular business are considered accessory uses and are subject to the
regulations of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
E. Detention Facilities:
1. Characteristics: Facilities for the judicially required detention or incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under twenty four (24) hour
supervision by employees or contractees of the department of corrections, except when on an approved leave. This category also includes
alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents or inmates are placed by and remain under the supervision of the courts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 403/715
2. Examples: Prisons; jails; probation centers; juvenile detention homes; halfway houses.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; recreational and health facilities; therapy facilities; maintenance facilities; hobby and manufacturing activities.
4. Exceptions:
a. Programs that provide care and training or treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, but
where patients are not under twenty four (24) hour supervision of employees or contractees of the department of corrections are classified as
assisted group living.
b. Programs that provide transitional living experience for former offenders, where residents are not currently under twenty four (24) hour supervision
by employees or contractees of the department of corrections, are classified as assisted group living.
F. Educational Facilities:
1. Characteristics: Public and private schools that provide state mandated primary and secondary generalized education; and schools for specialized
activities, such as dance, music, martial arts, business, and technical skills.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the following two (2) subgroups:
a. General Educational Facilities: Public and private elementary, middle, junior high and senior high schools, including such schools owned or
operated by a religious entity; boarding schools; military academies.
b. Specialized Educational Facilities: Schools primarily engaged in offering specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, but not academic
training. Also specialized nondegree granting schools, such as music schools, dramatic schools, dance studios, martial arts studios, language
schools and civil service and other short term examination preparatory schools.
3. Accessory Uses: Cafeterias; parking; play areas; recreational and sports facilities; auditoriums; preschools; before and after school programs.
4. Exceptions:
a. Preschools that are not accessory to an educational facility use are classified as daycare.
b. Schools that offer training in industrial trades that include training on large equipment or vehicles, or that include activities that generate noise,
odors, or dust more typical of industrial uses are classified as industrial service.
c. Business, technical, and other colleges that offer degree programs in campus like settings are classified as private colleges and universities.
G. Hospitals:
1. Characteristics: Uses providing health services for inpatient medical care for sick or injured humans, including related facilities that are an integral
part thereof, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, staff offices and emergency medical services. Hospitals tend to be on multiple blocks or in
campus settings.
2. Examples: Hospitals; medical centers.
3. Accessory Uses: Outpatient clinics; offices; laboratories; teaching facilities; meeting areas; cafeterias; parking, maintenance facilities; overnight
facilities for staff or trainees; crematoriums.
4. Exceptions:
a. Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the
program, are considered group care facilities and are classified as assisted group living.
b. Medical clinics that provide care where patients are not kept overnight are classified as medical/dental offices.
c. Heliports, helipads and helistops are not considered an accessory use to or an integral part of a hospital use. Such uses are considered aviation
related uses and are always regulated as a principal use.
H. Parks And Open Space Uses:
1. Characteristics: Large areas consisting mostly of natural areas, formal or informal landscaped open space, and/or open space for outdoor assembly
and recreation. This category includes both public open space areas as well as private, shared open space. These uses tend to have few structures.
2. Examples: Parks; golf courses; cemeteries; public squares; plazas; botanical gardens; arboretums; community gardens; boat launching areas;
nature preserves.
3. Accessory Uses: Maintenance facilities; concessions; parking. Mausoleums, columbariums, and crematoriums within cemeteries and recreational
uses within private open space areas, such as clubhouses, tennis courts, sports fields, and swimming pools, are regulated as accessory uses and
are subject to the regulations of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
4. Exceptions:
a. Recreational uses, such as health and athletic clubs, operated as commercial businesses that are open to the general public, whether payment is
on a fee for services or on a membership basis, are classified as commercial recreational uses.
b. Accessory outdoor recreational facilities that are located on private property that are exclusively for use of those that live on the property are
considered an accessory use to the principal use of the property. For example, a swimming pool, tennis court, or other similar facility located on a
property that has as its principal use an apartment building would be considered an accessory use to a multi-family use, not an accessory use to a
parks and open space use. However, a swimming facility located on property that has been designated private, shared open space used jointly by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 404/715
multiple properties in the vicinity would be considered an accessory use to a parks and open space use because the principal use of the property
is private, shared open space.
I. Religious/Private Group Assembly Uses:
1. Characteristics: A religious/private group assembly use provides meeting space and facilities for a religious institution or a private, nonprofit
association. Such a use typically restricts access to the general public and owns, leases or holds property in common for the benefit of its members.
2. Examples: Religious institutions, such as churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques; private, nonprofit meeting halls, clubs, associations, or
nonresidential fraternal organizations, such as the Masonic, Eagles, Moose and Elks Lodges, and the Lions and American Legion Clubs.
3. Accessory Uses: Parking; maintenance/storage buildings; living quarters for clergy; columbariums.
4. Exceptions:
a. Recreational, sports, or athletic clubs operated as a commercial business and open to the general public to join are classified as commercial
recreational uses.
b. Clubs where the primary activity is the sales of goods or services are classified as either sales oriented or personal service oriented retail.
c. Commercial meeting and event facilities are classified as hospitality oriented retail.
d. Fraternities and sororities associated with a college or university are classified as fraternal group living uses.
e. Facilities owned or operated by a religious institution that provide state mandated primary and secondary generalized education are classified as
educational facilities.
f. Colleges and universities, as defined in this article, which are owned and/or operated by a religious institution are classified as colleges and
universities.
g. Hospitals owned and/or operated by a religious institution are classified as hospital uses.
h. Uses that are not typically associated with the primary assembly purpose of the use, such as retail sales, residential uses (other than for clergy),
amusement parks, and large sports and entertainment facilities may be considered separate principal uses and regulated accordingly. Decisions
regarding whether a use is an accessory use or a principal use will be based on the factors listed in subsection 14-4A-2A of this article. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4A-7: OTHER USE CATEGORIES:
A. Agricultural Uses:
1. Characteristics: Uses where the principal activities may include the commercial cultivation of plants, including crop, vegetable, and fruit production,
livestock production, and the raising, boarding, and training of domestic animals.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below:
a. Plant Related: Crop farming; vegetable, fruit, and tree farms; wholesale plant nurseries.
b. Animal Related: Livestock operations; dairy farms; horse farms.
3. Accessory Uses: Dwellings for proprietors and their families and for employees of the use; storage buildings; farm outbuildings.
4. Exceptions:
a. Livestock auctions are classified as wholesale sales.
b. Processing of animal or plant products, including processing and packaging of dairy products, is classified as either general or heavy
manufacturing.
c. Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified as outdoor storage and display oriented retail.
d. Kennels (see definition in chapter 9, article A of this title) are classified as intensive animal related commercial.
5. Prohibited Uses: Stockyards; feedlots and confinement feeding operations.
B. Aviation Related Uses:
1. Characteristics: Facilities for the landing and take off of flying vehicles, including loading and unloading areas and passenger terminals. Aviation
facilities may be for commercial carriers or for shared use by private aircraft.
2. Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed below:
a. Airports: Public and private airports and airstrips.
b. Helicopter Landing Facilities: Heliports; helipads; helistops.
3. Accessory Uses: Freight handling areas; concessions; offices; parking; maintenance, storage, and fueling facilities.
4. Exceptions: Helicopter landing facilities are always classified and regulated as a separate principal use. No helicopter landing facility shall be
construed or interpreted as being an integral part of any principal use or as being accessory to any principal use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 405/715
C. Extraction Uses:
1. Characteristics: The industrial extraction of sand, gravel, or topsoil for off site use, excluding the process of grading a lot in preparation for
constructing a building or infrastructure.
2. Examples: Quarrying or dredging for sand and gravel.
3. Accessory Uses: Offices; storage and transfer facilities.
D. Communication Transmission Facility Uses:
1. Characteristics: All devices, equipment, machinery, structures or supporting elements necessary to produce nonionizing electromagnetic radiation
and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. Towers may be self-supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings.
2. Examples: Broadcast towers and antennas; wireless communication towers and antennas; point to point microwave towers and antennas;
emergency communication broadcast towers and antennas.
3. Accessory Uses: Transmitter facility buildings.
4. Exceptions:
a. Receive only antennas are not included in this category.
b. Shortwave radio towers for personal use are regulated as an accessory use.
c. Radio and television studios are classified in the office category. Their broadcast towers are classified as communication transmission facilities
and are regulated as a separate principal use. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Consumer Fireworks Sales Uses:
1. Characteristics: Sales of first-class and/or second-class consumer fireworks, as defined by the American Pyrotechnics Association.
2. Examples: Seasonal sales outlets.
3. Accessory Uses: None. (Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
ARTICLE B. MINOR MODIFICATIONS, VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, AND
PROVISIONAL USES
14-4B-1: MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
The building official or designee is empowered to grant minor modifications from certain standards specifically enumerated below. Minor modifications
provide a mechanism by which the specified regulations may be modified or waived if the proposed development meets certain criteria and continues to
meet the intended purpose of those regulations. Minor modification reviews provide flexibility for unusual situations applicable to the property, for which
strict application of the regulations is impractical. The minor modifications listed below may be granted, provided the approval criteria as set forth in
subsection B of this section are met. The approval procedures for minor modifications are set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 10-4397, 7-12-2010)
A. Applicability: The building official may grant the following minor modifications from the requirements of this title, provided the approval criteria are met.
Any requests for modifications that exceed the limitations set forth below and all other requests for modifications of the requirements of this title require
the filing of a special exception or variance application with the Board of Adjustment.
1. The number of required parking spaces for commercial uses may be reduced up to ten percent (10%).
2. The building official, in consultation with the Director of Planning and Community Development, may approve a minor reduction of up to fifty percent
(50%) of the total number of parking spaces required, if the uses sharing the parking are not normally open, used, or operated during the same
hours. However, this reduction is not allowed for residential uses. To qualify for a reduction under this provision, a parking demand analysis must be
submitted that provides evidence that the amount of parking proposed for the shared parking area will be sufficient to meet the parking demand.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. In the CB-5 and CB-10 Zones, a minor modification may be granted exempting up to thirty percent (30%) of the total number of dwelling units
contained in a building from the minimum parking requirements; provided that those dwelling units are committed to the City's assisted housing
program or any other affordable housing program approved by the City. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
4. The height of a wall or fence may be increased up to twenty five percent (25%), but in no case shall a minor modification allow a fence greater than
eight feet (8') high.
5. The height of a principal or accessory building may be increased up to ten percent (10%).
6. In cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp cannot meet the limitations placed on its allowed extension into a
required setback, this limitation may be modified.
7. Required setbacks from a side lot line may be reduced by up to two feet (2'), but in no case shall a required setback from a side lot line be reduced
to less than three feet (3'), unless the subject side lot line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 406/715
8. Other setbacks may be reduced by up to fifteen percent (15%) of the required setback, but in no case shall a required setback from a rear lot line be
reduced to less than three feet (3'), unless the subject side lot line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
9. One space for parking for persons with disabilities may be located in a required front setback for commercial uses in a Commercial Zone, when
adjacent to a Residential Zone, where the topography or shape of the lot precludes compliance with the location requirements for off street parking.
10. The permitted height of a freestanding sign may be increased by up to ten feet (10') if the property is within one thousand feet (1,000') of a divided,
limited access highway, and there is a difference in topographical elevations between the property and the highway, such that the visibility of the sign
from the highway would be obstructed if the sign were limited to the maximum height permitted by ordinance.
11. One nonresident employee may be approved for a home occupation use. However, nonresident employees are not permitted under any
circumstances for the types of medical offices allowed as home occupations.
12. One nonresident employee may be approved for a bed and breakfast homestay or bed and breakfast inn.
13. Modifications to the driveway spacing standards contained in section 14-5C-4 of this title may be granted, provided there is no feasible alternative
to the modification requested, and vehicular and/or pedestrian safety will not be compromised due to the modification. The building official must
obtain approval from the City Engineer and the Director of Planning and Community Development prior to granting any such modification.
14. A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square feet or an accessory storage building less than five hundred (500) square feet in size may
be approved for accessory uses within parks and open space uses without approval from the Board of Adjustment. However, if any such building
addition increases the occupancy load of the building, a special exception must be obtained. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
15. Modifications to the multi-family site development standards contained in section 14-2B-6 of this title according to the alternate approval criteria set
forth in that section. The building official must obtain approval from the Design Review Committee and the Director of Planning and Community
Development prior to granting any such modification. Such requests shall be reviewed and approved jointly by the Design Review Committee, the
Director of Planning and Community Development, and the Building Official.
16. Modifications to the site development standards contained in section 14-2C-6, 14-2C-7, 14-2C-8, or 14-2C-9 of this title according to the alternate
approval criteria set forth in section 14-2C-10 of this title. The building official must obtain approval from the Design Review Committee and the
Director of Planning and Community Development prior to granting any such modification.
17. Modifications to the site development standards contained in sections 14-2D-5, "Industrial And Research Zone Site Development Standards", and
14-2F-5, "Public Zone Site Development Standards", of this title according to the alternate approval criteria set forth in those sections, respectively.
The building official must obtain approval from the Director of Planning and Community Development prior to granting any such modification.
18. One additional garage entrance/exit to structured parking may be granted according to the provisions of subsection 14-5A-5F7, "Garage
Entrances/Exits", of this title. The building official must obtain approval from the Director of Planning and Community Development prior to granting
any such modification.
19. Freestanding signs in the CB-2 Zone, according to the approval criteria and specifications as stated in section 14-5B-8, table 5B-4 of this title.
20. Modifications or waivers of nonconforming development according to the provisions set forth in section 14-4E-8, "Regulation Of Nonconforming
Development", of this chapter.
21. A modification of the required driveway length in Single-Family Zones according to the provisions set forth in subsection 14-2A-6C4 of this title.
22. An entranceway/gate more than four feet (4') in height in Residential Zones, provided it is designed to be compatible with and enhance the
surrounding neighborhood. An identification sign no more than twelve (12) square feet in area incorporated as an integral element of the
entranceway/gate may be permitted as part of the requested minor modification.
23. Modification to reduce the open space requirement for single family and two family uses in certain qualifying situations and according to the specific
approval criteria as specified in sections 14-2A-4 and 14-2B-4 of this title. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
B. Approval Criteria: The building official may approve an application for a minor modification, in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if the
following approval criteria are met: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
1. Special circumstances apply to the property, such as size, shape, topography, location, surroundings, or characteristics, or preexisting site
development, which make it impractical to comply with the subject regulation or which warrant a modification and/or waiver of the subject regulation.
(Ord. 10-4397, 7-12-2010)
2. The minor modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity
and in the zone in which the property is located.
3. The minor modification does not exceed the minor modification standards or allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the
regulations governing the subject property.
4. The minor modification requested is in conformity with the intent and purpose of the regulation modified.
5. The requested minor modification complies with other applicable statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
C. Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
D. Precedents: The granting of a minor modification is not grounds for granting other minor modifications for the same or differing properties. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4B-2: VARIANCES:
The Board of Adjustment is empowered to grant variances from the provisions of this title that will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 407/715
unique circumstances or conditions, a literal interpretation of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
zoning district under the terms of this title and would impose unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant. To ensure that the spirit of this title is
observed and substantial justice done, no variance to the strict application of any provision of this title shall be granted by the Board unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following approval criteria are met. The procedures for obtaining a variance are set forth in chapter 8, article C, "Board Of
Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title.
A. Approval Criteria:
1. The proposed variance will not threaten neighborhood integrity, nor have a substantially adverse effect on the use or value of other properties in the
area adjacent to the property included in the variance; and
2. The proposed variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title and will not contravene the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan, as amended; and
3. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if required to comply with the requirements and standards specified in this title; and
4. The owner's situation is unique or peculiar to the property in question, and the situation is not shared with other landowners in the area nor due to
general conditions in the neighborhood, except when a variance from a floodplain management standard is requested per section 14-5J-9 of this title;
and
5. The hardship is not of the landowner's or applicant's own making or that of a predecessor in title.
B. Use Variance Prohibited: Under no circumstance may the Board grant a variance that would allow a land use, other than those specifically allowed in
the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
C. Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
D. Precedents: The granting of a variance is not grounds for granting other variances for the same or differing properties. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-4B-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The Board of Adjustment is empowered to grant special exceptions to the provisions of this title in certain circumstances specifically enumerated within
this title. To ensure that the spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice done, no special exception shall be granted by the Board unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following general approval criteria are met in addition to any specific approval criteria for the proposed exception
listed in section 14-4B-4 of this article or elsewhere in this title. The procedures for obtaining a special exception are set forth in chapter 8, article C, "Board
Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title.
A. Approval Criteria: In order to grant a special exception, the Board must find that the applicant meets the specific approval criteria set forth in this title
with respect to the specific proposed exception. The Board must also find that the applicant meets the following general approval criteria or that the
following criteria do not apply:
1. The specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare.
2. The specific proposed exception will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity and will not substantially
diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood.
3. Establishment of the specific proposed exception will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district in which such property is located.
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
5. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress designed to minimize traffic congestion on public streets.
6. Except for the specific regulations and standards applicable to the exception being considered, the specific proposed exception, in all other respects,
conforms to the applicable regulations or standards of the zone in which it is to be located.
7. The proposed exception will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, as amended.
B. Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
C. Precedents: The granting of a special exception is not grounds for granting other special exceptions for the same or differing properties. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-4B-4: SPECIFIC APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR PROVISIONAL USES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following uses are listed as provisional uses or special exceptions in one or more of the base zones. Provisional uses are permitted, subject to the
additional requirements contained in this article. A use listed as a special exception in a base zone is permitted only after approval from the board of
adjustment, subject to the approval criteria contained in this section and to the general special exception approval criteria contained in section 14-4B-3 of
this article. In addition to the approval criteria listed in this article, all provisional uses and special exceptions are required to meet the regulations of the
base zone in which they are located and all other applicable regulations of this title. If a regulation in another part of this title conflicts with a regulation
contained in this article, the regulation that is more specific to the situation applies. When regulations are equally specific or when it is unclear which
regulation to apply, the more restrictive regulation applies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 408/715
A. Residential Uses:
1. Detached Single-Family Dwellings In ID Zones:
a. Detached single-family dwellings associated with an agricultural use of the property are allowed in any ID zone, provided the dwelling is developed
in accordance with the minimum dimensional standards specified for detached single-family dwellings in the RR-1 zone. Only one principal
dwelling is permitted per lot.
b. In an ID-RS zone, detached single-family dwellings not associated with an agricultural use are allowed on minimum lot areas of five (5) acres
according to the dimensional requirements otherwise specified for the ID zones. Only one principal dwelling is permitted per lot.
2. Attached Single-Family Dwellings In RS-5 And RS-8 Zones:
a. Number Of Units: Only one principal dwelling unit is permitted per lot. A maximum of two (2) dwelling units may be attached.
b. Location: One of the attached dwelling units must be located on a corner lot.
c. Setbacks:
(1) Interior Lots: On interior lots, the side setback on the side containing the common wall is reduced to zero. The side building setback on the side
opposite the common wall must be at least ten feet (10').
(2) Corner Lots: On corner lots, either the rear setback or nonstreet side setback may be reduced to zero. However, the remaining nonstreet
setback must be at least ten feet (10') if it is a side setback and twenty feet (20') if it is a rear setback.
d. Entrances:
(1) To give the attached units the overall appearance of separate dwellings, each dwelling unit must have its main entrance oriented towards a
different street than the main entrance of the other dwelling unit.
(2) The main entrance must be visible from and oriented towards the street. To meet this standard, the main entrance must face the street, be at
an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street, or open onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an alley or private rear lane.
(3) Each dwelling must have a paved connection between the main pedestrian entrance and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in cases
where a sidewalk is not provided.
e. Garages: The garage entrance for a dwelling unit must be oriented towards the same street as the dwelling unit's main entrance, unless the
garage is oriented toward an alley or private rear lane. The length of any garage wall that faces a street-side lot line may not exceed sixty percent
(60%) of the total length of the building facade that faces the same street-side lot line.
f. Design Features:
(1) All windows, doors, and roof eaves, including roof eaves on porches, must be demarcated with trim. The city may waive this requirement in
cases where the building has an exterior material of stucco or masonry such that trim is impractical or inappropriate to the design of the building.
(2) All roof eaves must project at least twelve inches (12") from the building wall.
(3) Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any building wall that faces a street-side lot line.
g. Vehicular Access:
(1) Access points must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
(2) If the lot width is less than forty five feet (45'), vehicular access is restricted to an alley or private rear lane.
h. Utilities: Each dwelling unit must have a separate utility service from the street or rear lot line.
i. Maintenance: A permanent access and maintenance easement must be secured from the owner of the lot that abuts the zero lot line side of the
dwelling. The easement must ensure access for maintenance of the exterior portion of the building wall located on the lot line and other common
elements, such as drives and aisles. This easement must be recorded as a covenant on the applicable lots. Proof of such recording must be
submitted prior to issuance of a building or occupancy permit.
j. Figure 4B.1 - Single-Family Attached In The RS-5 And RS-8 Zones:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 409/715
3. Attached Single-Family Dwellings In RS-12, RM-12, RNS-20, RM-20, And MU Zones:
a. Number Of Units: Only one principal dwelling unit is permitted per lot. A maximum of six (6) dwellings units may be attached unless approved
through a planned development overlay rezoning.
b. Setbacks: The side setbacks for the attached dwellings may be reduced to zero along the common wall side of the units. Each end unit in a row of
attached single-family dwellings shall have one side setback that is a minimum of ten feet (10'), unless the end unit is on a corner lot. If an end unit
is on a corner lot, the remaining nonstreet setback must be at least ten feet (10') if it is a side setback and twenty feet (20') if it is a rear setback.
(See figure 4B.2 below.) Figure 4B.2 - Setbacks For Attached Single-Family Dwellings
c. Entrances:
(1) Each dwelling unit must have a separate main entrance that is visible from and oriented toward the street. To meet this standard, the main
entrance must face the street, be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street, or open onto a porch. The main entrance may not
face an alley.
(2) Each dwelling must have a paved connection between the main pedestrian entrance and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in cases
where a sidewalk is not provided.
(3) If parking is located at the rear of a dwelling, a second entrance to the dwelling must be provided within twenty feet (20') of the rear facade of
the dwelling on either the rear or side facade of the dwelling.
d. Design Features:
(1) All windows, doors, and roof eaves, including roof eaves on porches, must be demarcated with trim. The city may waive this requirement in
cases where the building has an exterior material of stucco or masonry such that trim is impractical or inappropriate to the design of the building.
(2) All roof eaves must project at least twelve inches (12") from the building wall.
(3) Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any building wall that faces a street-side lot line.
(4) If four (4) or more dwelling units are attached, the units must be articulated by at least one of the following means in order to prevent monotony,
but the units should be consistent in architectural style and proportion. Figure 4B.3, located at the end of this subsection A3d, provides some
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 410/715
examples of acceptable building articulation. However, other designs meeting the standards listed below are acceptable.
(A) Construct front and side elevations of the building of at least fifty percent (50%) brick, stone, or other masonry product. For the purpose of
this provision, masonry shall not include concrete block or poured concrete materials, except when rusticated concrete block or decorative
concrete is used as a base or exposed foundation material.
(B) Construct front and side elevations of the end units of one hundred percent (100%) brick, stone, or other masonry product. For the purpose
of this provision, masonry shall not include concrete block or poured concrete materials, except when rusticated concrete block or decorative
concrete is used as a base or exposed foundation material.
(C) Distinguish each unit architecturally through a change in the roofline and a jog in the street-facing wall plane. The jog must be at least
eighteen inches (18") deep and a minimum of eight feet (8') wide; the change in the roofline must be in concert with the jog in the wall plane,
which may be accomplished by the addition of a gable, hip or similar roof that is perpendicular to the primary roof.
Figure 4B.3 - Examples Of Facade Articulation
For Attached Single-Family Dwellings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 411/715
e. Vehicular Access:
(1) Vehicular access points and garage entrances must comply with the provisions of article 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this
title and the single-family site development standards as set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title. Attached single-family dwellings located in
the MU zone are also subject to the standards of subsection 14-2C-9N, "Single-Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone", of this title.
(2) If the lot width is less than forty five feet (45'), vehicular access is restricted to an alley or private rear lane.
f. Utilities: Each dwelling unit must have a separate utility service from the street or rear lot line.
g. Maintenance: A permanent access and maintenance easement must be secured from the owner of the lot that abuts the zero lot line side of the
dwelling. The easement must ensure access for maintenance of the exterior portion of the building wall located on the lot line and other common
elements, such as drives and aisles. This easement must be recorded as a covenant on the applicable lots. Proof of such recording must be
submitted prior to issuance of a building or occupancy permit.
4. Detached Zero Lot Line Dwellings:
a. Procedure: Any restrictions or easements required in subsections A4b through A4e of this section must be recorded as a covenant on the
applicable lots. Proof of such recording must be submitted prior to issuance of a building or occupancy permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 412/715
b. Setbacks: The side setback on one side of the dwelling may be reduced to zero. The other side setback must be at least ten feet (10'). A
restriction must be recorded on the deed of each applicable lot to ensure that these setbacks are retained in perpetuity. A zero side lot line is not
permitted for a side lot line that is also a street lot line or for side setbacks adjacent to lots that are not part of the zero lot line project. (See figure
4B.4 below.) Figure 4B.4 - Setbacks For Detached Zero Lot Line Dwellings
c. Vehicular Access: Vehicular access points and garage entrances must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management
Standards", of this title and the single-family site development standards as set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title. In the MU zone, more
restrictive standards apply. (See subsection 14-2C-9N of this title.)
d. Maintenance: A permanent access and maintenance easement shall be secured from the owner of the lot that abuts the zero lot line side of the
dwelling. The easement must ensure access for maintenance of the exterior portion of the building wall located on the lot line and other common
elements, such as drives and aisles.
e. Privacy: On the zero lot line side of the dwelling, windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are not
allowed. Clerestory windows or translucent windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are allowed.
5. Two-Family Uses In RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, RNS-12, RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, And MU Zones:
a. Location Limitation In RS-5 And RS-8 Zones: In the RS-5 and RS-8 zones, two-family uses are only allowed on corner lots.
b. Central Planning District: Two-family uses located in the central planning district must comply with the provisions of subsection 14-2B-6I,
"Additional Standards In Central Planning District", of this title, which will be administered through the design review process as set forth in chapter
8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
c. Entrances:
(1) In the RS-5 and RS-8 zones, to give the structure the overall appearance of separate dwellings, each dwelling unit must have its main entrance
oriented towards a different street than the main entrance of the other dwelling unit.
(2) The main entrance must be visible from and oriented towards the street. To meet this standard, the main entrance must face the street, be at
an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street, or open onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an alley or private rear lane.
(3) Each dwelling must have a paved connection between the main pedestrian entrance and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in cases
where a sidewalk is not provided.
(4) If parking is located at the rear of a dwelling, a second entrance to the dwelling must be provided within twenty feet (20') of the rear facade of
the dwelling on either the rear or side facade of the dwelling.
d. Design Features:
(1) All windows, doors, and roof eaves, including roof eaves on porches, must be demarcated with trim. The city may waive this requirement in
cases where the building has an exterior material of stucco or masonry such that trim is impractical or inappropriate to the design of the building.
(2) All roof eaves must project at least twelve inches (12") from the building wall.
(3) Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any building wall that faces a street-side lot line.
e. Garages:
(1) In the RS-5 and RS-8 zones, the garage entrance for a dwelling unit must be oriented towards the same street as the dwelling unit's main
entrance, unless the garage is oriented toward an alley or private rear lane.
(2) The length of any garage wall that faces a street-side lot line may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total length of the building facade that
faces the same street-side lot line. On corner lots, only the garage wall(s) containing a garage door must meet this standard. In the MU zone,
garages are exempt from this standard, but are subject to the standards of subsection 14-2C-9N, "Single-Family Uses And Two-Family Uses In
MU Zone", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 413/715
f. Access:
(1) Access points must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title and the single-family site
development standards as set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title. Two-family uses located in the MU zone are also subject to the standards
of subsection 14-2C-9N, "Single-Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone", of this title.
(2) If the lot width is less than eighty feet (80'), vehicular access is restricted to an alley or private rear lane. Corner lots and double frontage lots
are exempt from this standard if the vehicular access for one of the dwelling units is located along a different street than the vehicular access of
the other dwelling unit, or if vehicular access for both dwelling units is located along a street where the front setback line is at least eighty feet
(80') in length. (See definitions of "lot width" and "setback line, front" in section 14-9A-1 of this title.)
g. Figure 4B.5 - Examples Of Two-Family Uses In The RS-5 And RS-8 Zones:
6. Group Households: Group households are permitted within any housing type allowed in the base zone, provided the following conditions are met:
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
a. The proposed use must meet the definition of "elder group home", "elder family home", "parental group home", or "family care home". (Ord. 11-
4443, 9-6-2011)
b. The proposed use must comply with all the approval criteria and base zone standards for the housing type within which the group household is
located. For example, a group household located within a two-family use in the RS-8 zone must comply with the conditions listed in subsection A5
of this section.
c. All the individuals residing in the proposed use must live as one household or family. The dwelling may not contain separate apartments.
d. The owner of the dwelling within which the group household is located must obtain a rental permit from the city. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
7. Multi-Family Uses In CO-1, CN-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones:
a. Location: The proposed dwelling units must be located above the street level floor of a building, except as provided in subsections A7e and A7f of
this section. (Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016)
b. Maximum Density: The residential density standards for multi-family uses in commercial zones are stated in section 14-2C-4, "Dimensional
Requirements", table 2C-2(c) of this title. (Ord. 12-4482, 5-15-2012)
c. Residential Entrances:
(1) To provide safe access for residents within a mixed use building, any building containing a residential use must have at least one door on the
exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to the dwelling units within the building. Said entrance must be located on a building wall
that faces a street, public sidewalk, or pedestrian plaza and is visible from and easily accessed from said street, sidewalk, or plaza. Access to
dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage or from an alley. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
(2) Access to entrance doors of any individual dwelling units located above the ground level floor of a building must be provided from an enclosed
lobby or corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways are prohibited. However, the city may allow exterior fire
egress structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not
located on a wall of a building that faces a street.
(3) To facilitate commercial uses at the street level, the ground level floor height should be no more than one foot (1') above the level of the
abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust this requirement. However, on
sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above the level of
the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than three feet (3') above
the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
d. Standards For Ground Level Floor Of Building:
(1) On the ground level floor, the floor to ceiling height must be at least fourteen feet (14').
(2) For the ground level floor of the building, construction must meet the building code specifications for commercial uses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 414/715
(3) In the CB-10 zone, for the first two (2) floors of a building, construction must meet the building code specifications for commercial uses. (Ord.
11-4450, 10-18-2011)
e. CB-5 And CB-10 Exception: In the CB-5 and CB-10 zones, except as provided in subsection A7e(4) of this section and except as allowed by
subsection A7f of this section, the board of adjustment may grant a special exception for multi-family dwellings to be located on or below the street
level floor of a building, provided that the following criteria are met: (Ord. 13-4522, 4-23-2013; amd. Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016)
(1) The proposed dwelling will be located on a property designated as an Iowa City historic landmark. A rehabilitation plan for the property has
been reviewed and approved by the Iowa City historic preservation commission. The rehabilitation of the property must be completed according
to this plan before an occupancy permit is granted.
(2) The proposed dwellings will not significantly alter the overall commercial character of the subject CB-5 or CB-10 zone.
(3) There are site conditions or building characteristics that make the street level of the subject building or buildings unsuitable for other uses
allowed in the CB-5 or CB-10 zone.
(4) If an existing building on a landmark property includes three (3) or more of the following commercial storefront characteristics, dwellings are
prohibited on or below the street level floor of that building:
(A) The main entrance to the building is at or near grade;
(B) The front facade of the building is located within ten feet (10') of the front property line;
(C) The front facade of the building contains ground floor storefront or display windows; and
(D) The street level floor of the building was originally constructed to accommodate sales oriented and personal service oriented retail uses
and/or has historically been used for these purposes. (Ord. 13-4522, 4-23-2013)
f. CB-5 Form Based Code Exception: For properties zoned CB-5 located within the area bounded by Gilbert Street, Van Buren Street, Burlington
Street and the midblock alley south of Jefferson Street, residential uses are allowed on the ground level floor of buildings, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) In lieu of the standards in subsections A7c and A7d of this section, the proposed ground level dwelling units must be located within one of the
following building types, as described in the form based zoning standards in section 14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this title:
(A) Apartment building;
(B) Multi-dwelling building;
(C) Liner building;
(D) Townhouse.
(2) Building frontage(s) must be designed to meet the requirements of section 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this title, as applicable for
the chosen building type. (Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016)
(3) In lieu of the dimensional requirements and central business site development standards that generally apply in the CB-5 zone, buildings must
comply with the same zoning standards that apply in the south Gilbert subdistrict of riverfront crossings as set forth in chapter 2, article G,
"Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development Standards", of this title, including all general requirements in
section 14-2G-7 of this title. If the ground level dwelling units are proposed as an integral part of a larger project on the same property that
includes a mix of building types, the standards that apply in the south Gilbert subdistrict shall apply to the entire project in lieu of the dimensional
requirements and central business site development standards of the CB-5 zone. (Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016; amd. Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
(4) Buildings are subject to design review. Minor adjustments may be allowed by the design review committee as warranted according to the
provisions of subsection 14-2G-7H of this title. (Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016)
8. Assisted Group Living:
a. Maximum Density: Maximum density within an assisted group living use is as follows. For purposes of calculating maximum density, staff and livein
staff of a facility are not considered roomers.
(1) In the RM-12 zone: One roomer per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of lot area.
(2) In the RM-20, RNS-20, and MU zones: One roomer per five hundred fifty (550) square feet of lot area.
(3) In the RM-44, PRM, CO-1, and CI-1 zones: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of lot area.
b. Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title 17, "Building
And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants may have access to a communal kitchen, dining room, and other common facilities and
services. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
9. Independent Group Living: The maximum density and maximum occupancy standards for an independent group living use are as follows. Both
density and occupancy limitations apply in all cases.
a. Maximum Density:
(1) In the RM-20 zone: One roomer per nine hundred (900) square feet of lot area.
(2) In the RM-44 and PRM zones: One roomer per five hundred (500) square feet of lot area.
b. Maximum Occupancy: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area within the independent group living use.
c. Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title 17, "Building
And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants shall have access to kitchen facilities, a dining room, and other shared living spaces and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 415/715
common facilities related to the use. (Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013)
d. Additional Approval Criteria For Special Exceptions: The proposed use must be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of
adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use such as the location, site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale,
setbacks, landscaping and amount of paved areas to ensure that the proposed use is compatible with other residential uses in the neighborhood.
The board may prohibit certain aspects of a use or impose conditions or restrictions to ensure compatibility. These conditions or restrictions may
include, but are not limited to, additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian facilities; setbacks; location and design of parking facilities; location
and design of buildings; establishment of a facilities management plan. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
10. Fraternal Group Living: The maximum density and maximum occupancy standards for a fraternal group living use are as follows. Both density and
occupancy limitations apply in all cases. (Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013)
a. Maximum Density:
(1) In the RM-20 and RNS-20 zones: One roomer per nine hundred (900) square feet of lot area.
(2) In the RM-44 and PRM zones: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of lot area. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
b. Maximum Occupancy: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area within the fraternal group living use.
c. Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title 17, "Building
And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants shall have access to kitchen facilities, a dining room, and other shared living spaces and
common facilities related to the use.
d. Additional Approval Criteria For Special Exceptions: The proposed use must be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of
adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such as the location, site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale,
setbacks, landscaping and amount of paved areas to ensure that the proposed use is compatible with other residential uses in the neighborhood.
The board may prohibit certain aspects of a use or impose conditions or restrictions to mitigate any incompatibilities. These conditions or
restrictions may include, but are not limited to, additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking
facilities, location and design of buildings, establishment of a facilities management plan, and similar. (Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013)
B. Commercial Uses:
1. Adult Business Uses:
a. The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any property containing an existing daycare use, educational facility use,
parks and open space use, religious/private assembly use, or residential use.
b. The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any single-family or multi-family residential zone.
c. The proposed use will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any other adult business use.
2. General Animal Related Commercial In CN-1, CO-1, CC-2, CB-2, And CB-5 Zones: All aspects of the operation of the facility, including any
accessory uses must be conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building.
3. General And Intensive Animal Related Commercial In ID, RR-1 And CI-1 Zones:
a. In the ID zones and the RR-1 zone, any outdoor facilities, including unenclosed stable areas, outdoor dog runs and animal exercise areas must be
set back at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot line. Overnight boarding facilities must be located completely indoors within a soundproof
building. If all aspects of the operation, including any accessory uses, are conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building, then the
setback requirements of this provision do not apply. However, the use is subject to any setback requirements of the base zone.
b. In the CI-1 zone, any facility with outdoor runs or exercise areas must be located at least four hundred feet (400') from any residential zone.
Overnight boarding facilities must be located completely indoors within a soundproof building. If all aspects of the operation, including any
accessory uses, are conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building, then the setback requirements of this provision do not apply.
However, the use is subject to any setback requirements of the base zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Building Trade Uses In The CC-2 Zone:
a. All aspects of the operation must be conducted indoors; and
b. Except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor storage of materials or equipment is not allowed. (Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
5. Outdoor Commercial Recreational Uses In ID Zones And CC-2 Zone:
a. The proposed use will be designed and developed with adequate separation between outdoor activity areas and surrounding properties. Outdoor
activity areas must be set back and separated from other uses or surrounding properties by distance, landscaping and/or screening as deemed
appropriate for the intensity of the use.
b. The proposed use will be in compliance with title 6, chapter 4, "Noise Control", of this code. If the proposed use is located within four hundred feet
(400') of a residential zone, the proposed use may not use sound amplifying equipment as a regular part of its operation.
c. The proposed hours of operation will be similar to or complementary to other uses in the area based on the projected intensity of the use, the
specific characteristics of the locale, and the existing and future uses intended for the area according to the comprehensive plan.
6. Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In CO-1 Zone: Indoor commercial recreational uses are limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area. The maximum size may be increased by special exception; provided, that the following criteria are met:
a. The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by employees of the surrounding businesses and by nearby residents.
b. The proposed use will be designed to be of similar scale and character to surrounding businesses and residences.
c. The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated intent of the CO-1 zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 416/715
7. Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In CN-1 Zone: Indoor commercial recreational uses are limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
8. Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In RDP And ORP Zones:
a. The proposed use will primarily serve employees of the firms located within the subject RDP or ORP zone.
b. The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of office, light
industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily intended.
c. The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
9. Commercial Parking In CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10 Zones: Commercial parking is limited to parking facilities owned and operated by the municipal
government.
10. Eating And Drinking Establishments In CN-1, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
a. The occupancy load for any one establishment will not exceed one hundred (100), except as allowed in subsection B10c of this section.
b. Drive-through windows and drive-through lanes are prohibited.
c. In the CN-1 zone, the maximum occupancy load may be increased to one hundred twenty five (125) by special exception; provided, that the
following criteria are met:
(1) The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by residents of the surrounding area.
(2) The proposed exception will result in a more attractive neighborhood commercial development due to the presence of outdoor eating areas that
enhance the pedestrian orientation of the development, additional parking lot landscaping, additional vegetative buffers, or other site
improvements.
(3) The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated intent of the CN-1 zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
d. Drinking establishments are not allowed in the MU and CO-1 zones. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
e. In any CN-1 zone within the university impact area, as illustrated in section 14-2B-6, map 2B.1 of this title, or the riverfront crossings district, as
illustrated in section 14-2C-11, figure 2C.8 of this title, a "drinking establishment", as defined in this title, must be separated by a minimum distance
of five hundred feet (500') from any other drinking establishment. Distance shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest property line
(or nearest point of the leased building space) of the proposed use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of
any other drinking establishment. For example, in the case of a drinking establishment that is located on a lot with multiple leased spaces, such as
a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the nearest point of the leased building space occupied by a drinking establishment to the nearest
property line or leased building space of any other drinking establishment. (Ord. 13-4544, 8-20-2013)
11. Drinking Establishments In The CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones: Within the university impact area, as illustrated in section 14-2B-
6, map 2B.1 of this title, or the riverfront crossings district, as illustrated in section 14-2C-11, figure 2C.8 of this title, a "drinking establishment", as
defined in this title, must be separated by a minimum distance of five hundred feet (500') from any other drinking establishment. Distance shall be
measured along a straight line from the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of the proposed use to the nearest
property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of any other drinking establishment. For example, in the case of a drinking establishment
that is located on a lot with multiple leased building spaces, such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the nearest point of the leased
building space occupied by a drinking establishment to the nearest property line or leased building space of any other drinking establishment. (Ord.
13-4550, 9-17-2013)
12. Quick Vehicle Servicing:
a. All vehicular use areas, including parking and stacking spaces, drives, aisles, and service lanes, must be screened from the public right of way to
the S2 standard and to the S3 standard along any side or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone boundary. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening
And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
b. Sufficient vehicle stacking spaces must be provided to prevent congestion and vehicle conflicts along abutting streets.
c. Unenclosed canopies over gas pump islands must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any street right of way. Fuel dispensing equipment must
be set back at least ten feet (10') from any street right of way and at least one hundred feet (100') from any residential zone boundary, except in
the CB-2 zone. In the CB-2 zone, fuel dispensing equipment must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any street right of way and at least
seventy feet (70') from any residential zone boundary.
d. All lighting must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title.
e. In the CN-1, CB-2, and CB-5 zones, the proposed use will be designed and developed with adequate separation and screening between vehicular
use areas and adjacent residential zones.
f. In the CN-1, CB-2, and CB-5 zones, car washes may contain no more than one bay and are permitted only if built in conjunction with another quick
vehicle servicing use. The car wash must be located adjacent to and on the same property as the other quick vehicle servicing use and must be
set back an adequate distance and screened to the S3 standard along any side or rear lot line that abuts a residential zone boundary.
g. In the CN-1 zone, no light source on the property, except for internally lit signs, shall be higher than fifteen feet (15') above finished grade. (Ord.
13-4520, 4-9-2013)
h. For properties located in the towncrest design review district, quick vehicle servicing uses are only allowed by special exception and must comply
with the central business site development standards, as they would be applied to a property in the CB-5 zone, except as otherwise allowed by
subsection B12j of this section. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
i. For properties located in the riverfront crossings district and eastside mixed use district, quick vehicle servicing uses are only allowed by special
exception in certain locations and must comply with the standards set forth in chapter 2, article G, "Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use
Districts Form Based Development Standards", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 417/715
j. For properties located in the CB-2 zone, CB-5 zone, riverfront crossings district, eastside mixed use district, or towncrest design review district,
where it can be demonstrated that the proposed quick vehicle servicing use cannot comply with a specific standard as indicated in subsections
B12h and B12i of this section, the board of adjustment may grant a special exception to modify or waive the provision, provided that the intent of
the development standards is not unduly compromised. The board of adjustment may impose any condition or conditions that are warranted to
mitigate the effects of any variation from these development standards. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
13. Office Uses In CN-1 Zone: Each office use is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. Of this five thousand (5,000) square
feet, no more than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet may be located on the ground floor of a building.
14. Personal Service Oriented Retail In PRM Zone:
a. The proposed use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of gross floor area.
b. The proposed use will be supportable primarily by residents of the surrounding area.
c. The proposed use will not be contrary to the intent of the PRM zone.
d. Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B14.
15. Sales Oriented, Personal Service Oriented, And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail Uses In The CN-1 Zone:
a. Each such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of gross floor area, except as follows:
(1) Drugstores and hardware stores may contain up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Grocery stores, including sales of specialty food items, such as bakery and delicatessen goods, may contain up to thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet of gross floor area. Grocery stores that include other departments for goods and services allowed in the CN-1 zone may contain up
to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area; provided, that any floor area that exceeds thirty thousand (30,000) square feet is
departmentalized for nonfood products and services.
(3) Except for the uses listed in subsections B15a(1) and B15a(2) of this section, the limit on floor area for any one use may be increased from two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet up to five thousand (5,000) square feet by special exception; provided, that the following criteria are
met:
(A) The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by residents of the surrounding area.
(B) The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated intent of the CN-1 zone.
b. Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B15.
16. Sales Oriented, Personal Service Oriented, And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail Uses In The MU Zone:
a. Any such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of gross floor area.
b. The limit on floor area for any one use may be increased from two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet up to five thousand (5,000) square
feet by special exception; provided, that the following criteria are met:
(1) The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by residents of the surrounding area.
(2) The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated intent of the MU zone.
c. Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B16. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
17. Sales Oriented, And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail In The CH-1 Zone: Sales oriented and alcohol sales oriented retail uses are limited to
convenience stores associated with quick vehicle servicing uses. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011)
18. Hospitality Oriented Retail In The RM-44, PRM, MU, CO-1, And CN-1 Zones:
a. Hospitality oriented retail is limited to "guesthouses" as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
b. Any accessory dining and/or bar service is limited to guests only and may not be open to the general public. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord.
11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013)
19. Hospitality Oriented Retail In RDP And ORP Zones:
a. The proposed use will be located on a lot along the periphery of the ORP or RDP zone such that traffic to and from the proposed use will not
adversely affect the office, light industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily intended.
b. The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of office, light
industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily intended.
c. The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
20. Outdoor Storage And Display Oriented Retail In CC-2 Zone:
a. Outdoor storage of materials must be concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it is not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind
buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right of way, including public trails and open space, and
screened from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built
around the storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and the public right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 418/715
b. All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the
required screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
c. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence
that a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built
to the S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
d. Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale must be set back at least ten feet (10') from public rights of way and landscaped to at least the
S1 standard.
e. Any outdoor display area located along a side or rear lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet (10') from
said lot line and screened to at least the S2 standard. If the display area is adjacent to a residential zone boundary, it has to be screened to the S3
standard.
f. The landscape screening requirement for outdoor display may be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011;
Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013)
21. Vehicle Repair In CC-2, CI-1, CH-1, And CB-2 Zones:
a. The property containing the vehicle repair use must be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any residential zone boundary, except in the
CB-2 and CI-1 zones. In the CB-2 zone, the property containing the vehicle repair use must be located at least seventy feet (70') from any
residential zone boundary. In the CI-1 zone, if a vehicle repair use is located on a property that abuts a residential zone boundary, the use must
comply with the following additional standard:
(1) In addition to the applicable noise control provisions set forth in section 6-4-2 of this code, all outdoor work operations are prohibited between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Any indoor operations that result in noise exceeding sixty (60) dBA as
measured at the residential zone boundary are prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 11-
4448, 10-18-2011; amd. Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013)
b. No vehicle shall be stored on the property for more than forty five (45) continuous days.
c. The site must be designed to minimize views of vehicular use areas from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties.
(1) Outdoor storage areas, including storage of vehicles to be repaired, must be concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it is not
feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right-of-way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from public view to at least the S3 standard.
(2) Other vehicular use areas that abut the public right-of-way, including parking and stacking spaces, driveways, aisles, and service lanes, must
be set back at least ten feet (10') from the public right-of-way and landscaped according to the S2 standard.
(3) All outdoor storage areas that abut other properties must be fenced to the S5 standard and screened to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) Landscape screening must be located between the fence and the abutting
property. The landscape screening requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment (in the case of a special exception) or by the building
official, upon presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions,
or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013)
22. Delayed Deposit Service Uses In The CC-2 Zone:
a. The use is licensed by the State of Iowa; and
b. The use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any property containing any existing daycare use, educational facility use, parks
and open space use, religious/private assembly use, or residential use;
c. The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any other delayed deposit service use.
23. Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail Uses In The CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones: An alcohol sales oriented retail use must be separated by a minimum
distance of one thousand feet (1,000') from any other alcohol sales oriented retail use. Distance shall be measured along a straight line from the
nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of the proposed use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased
building space) of any other alcohol sales oriented retail use. For example, in the case of an alcohol sales oriented retail use that is located on a lot
with multiple leased spaces, such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the nearest point of the leased building space occupied by an
alcohol sales oriented retail use to the nearest property line or leased building space of any other alcohol sales oriented retail use. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-
19-2019)
C. Industrial Uses:
1. Technical/Light Manufacturing And General Manufacturing In CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones:
a. The proposed use is limited to a "cottage industry" as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
b. The proposed use is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, excluding floor area devoted to other principal or accessory
uses, except as provided in subsection C1e of this section.
c. The proposed use meets the performance standards for off site impacts contained in chapter 5, article H, "Performance Standards", of this title.
The City may require certification of compliance from a registered professional engineer or other qualified person.
d. The following general manufacturing uses are prohibited:
(1) The manufacturing of chemicals and allied products.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 419/715
(2) Any manufacturing establishment that includes milling or processing of grain.
(3) Leather tanning.
(4) Manufacturing of motor vehicles.
(5) Manufacture or processing of rubber or plastics.
(6) Textile mills.
e. The limit on floor area for a proposed use may be increased from five thousand (5,000) square feet up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet by
special exception.
2. Technical/Light Manufacturing And General Manufacturing In CI-1 Zone:
a. The proposed use is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, excluding floor area devoted to other principal or accessory
uses, except as provided in subsection C2d of this section.
b. The proposed use meets the performance standards for off site impacts contained in chapter 5, article H, "Performance Standards", of this title.
The city may require certification of compliance from a registered professional engineer or other qualified person.
c. The following general manufacturing uses are prohibited in the CI-1 zone:
(1) The manufacturing of chemicals and allied products.
(2) Any manufacturing establishment that includes milling or processing of grain.
(3) Leather tanning.
(4) Manufacture of motor vehicles.
(5) Manufacture or processing of rubber and plastics.
(6) Textile mills.
d. The limit on floor area for a proposed use may be increased from five thousand (5,000) square feet up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet by
special exception.
3. General Manufacturing In I-1 Zone: Any manufacturing establishment that includes milling or processing of grain must comply with the following
standards:
a. All manufacturing, processing, storage, and packaging must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
b. All transferring of raw materials and finished products must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, by pneumatic tubes, or by sealed
containers.
c. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the grain milling and processing operation must submit documentation demonstrating that the Iowa
department of natural resources (IDNR) or its successor has approved the application and permit to install or alter equipment or control equipment
if the IDNR or its successor requires such a permit.
4. Heavy Manufacturing In CI-1 And I-1 Zones: Heavy manufacturing uses in the CI-1 and I-1 zones are limited to concrete batch/mix plants. Concrete
batch/mix plants must meet the following standards:
a. The proposed use must be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any residentially zoned property.
b. All proposed outdoor storage and work areas must be located and screened to adequately reduce the noise, dust, and visual impact of the
proposed use from surrounding properties.
c. Traffic circulation and access points must be designed to prevent hazards to adjacent streets or property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
5. Salvage Operations:
a. The proposed use must be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any residentially zoned property.
b. All outdoor storage and work areas must be completely enclosed by a fence built to at least the S5 standard such that outdoor storage or salvage
operations are not visible from adjacent properties, streets, or highways. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this
title.) Salvage materials may not be piled against the fence or piled higher than the height of the fence. In areas that are not visible from streets,
other public rights of way, or the Iowa River, and where nearby uses will not be harmed, the board of adjustment may approve a semiopaque or
open pattern fence in certain situations as described below:
(1) Where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade features, such that the screening is
effectively provided or the intent of the standard is met; or
(2) Where the adjacent property is unlikely to be developed, is not visible to the public, and is unlikely to be harmed by an alternative fencing
requirement; or
(3) Where the adjacent property is zoned industrial and the area on the adjacent property that abuts the fence is or is likely to be an outdoor work
or storage area rather than a part of the property that would be highly visible to the public or to customers or clients of adjacent businesses.
c. For fire protection, a fifteen foot (15') wide, unobstructed firebreak, which completely surrounds the use, must be established and maintained.
d. The storage of rags, paper and similar combustible waste may not be stored closer than one hundred feet (100') from any property line unless
enclosed in a masonry building of not less than four (4) hour, fire resistive construction. (Ord. 09-4364, 12-1-2009)
6. Warehouse And Freight Movement In RDP And ORP Zones:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 420/715
a. The proposed use must be associated with a technical/light manufacturing or office use allowed in the RDP or ORP zone.
b. Warehouse facilities may occupy up to sixty percent (60%) of the total gross floor area of the building or buildings on the site.
c. Warehouse and freight movement facilities may not be located between the building(s) that house the technical/light manufacturing or office use
and any street right of way.
d. Outdoor storage of products or merchandise is not permitted. Outdoor work areas and loading areas must be screened from public view to at least
the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
7. Waste Related Uses In I-1 And I-2 Zones: Waste related uses are limited to recycling processing facilities. Recycling processing facilities must meet
the following standards:
a. All unloading, processing, and storage of materials, including discarded, recyclable, or processed materials, must be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings, except as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage is limited to those materials that are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution, and not for final disposal in a landfill,
by incineration, or by other means. If outdoor storage is proposed, a management plan to control the spread of litter and debris must be
submitted and approved as a part of site plan review. The screening standards referenced in subsections C7a(2) through 7Ca(6) of this section
are minimum standards and may be supplemented with additional walls, fencing, or landscaping to control the spread of litter and debris.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, including the storage of empty waste containers and collection vehicles, must be screened from view of adjacent
commercially zoned properties to at least the S3 or S5 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
Outdoor storage areas within view of property in a residential zone or within public view, as defined in this title, must be screened from public
view to at least the S3 standard.
(3) Paper products, cardboard, plastic, and other similar materials may not be stored outdoors unless they have been processed by baling,
palletizing, or other means to control the spread of litter.
(4) Outdoor storage of unprocessed materials is limited to glass, metal, or other materials that are not easily dispersed by wind. If stored outdoors,
these materials must be stored in containers or structures designed to control the spread of litter and debris.
(5) Collection containers for recyclable materials that are open to the public may be located outdoors; provided, that the containers are designed to
control the spread of litter and debris. Any public collection area located within public view, as defined in this title, or within view of residentially
zoned property must be screened to at least to the S3 standard.
(6) Outdoor storage of discarded tires or appliances is limited to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area. The storage area must
be located and fenced according to the S5 standard such that it is not visible from any adjacent property or street. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) Materials may not be piled against the fence or higher than the height of the fence. Tires may
not be stored closer than one hundred feet (100') to any property line. Mosquito abatement measures must be incorporated into the design of
any outdoor storage area that contains tires.
b. In the I-1 zone, outdoor storage areas and public collection areas may not be located between any building and the street right of way. In cases
where an outdoor storage area cannot physically be located anywhere but between a building and the street right of way, the city may approve the
location if properly screened.
8. Wholesale Sales In RDP And ORP Zones: In the RDP and ORP zones, Wholesale sales is permitted, provided that the products sold are produced
by an office or technical/light manufacturing use located on the same property.
9. Wholesale Sales In CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones:
a. Wholesale sales (as a principal or accessory use) is allowed if in conjunction with a retail use or an eating and drinking establishment.
b. Any on site accessory storage or warehouse facilities must not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the principal uses on the property as
stated in subsection 14-4C-2W, "Storage Buildings And Warehouse Facilities", of this title.
D. Institutional And Civic Uses:
1. Basic Utilities In Commercial And Industrial Zones And ID-C, ID-I, And ID-RP Zones:
a. Basic Utilities Within Enclosed Buildings: In all commercial, industrial, and research zones, and in the ID-C, ID-I, and ID-RP zones, basic utilities
are permitted within a building that houses another principal use allowed in the zone, provided the facility is completely enclosed, and there is no
visible indication of the existence of the facility from the exterior of the building.
b. Basic Utilities Not Enclosed Within A Building:
(1) In the ID-I, I-1 and I-2 zones, basic utilities not enclosed within a building are permitted, provided the use is located at least two hundred feet
(200') from any residential zone and is screened from view of public rights of way to at least the S3 standard. To ensure public safety, the city
may also require that the use be enclosed by a fence. Basic utilities that cannot meet the two hundred foot (200') separation requirement may
apply for a special exception from the board of adjustment as described in subsection Db(2) of this section.
(2) In all commercial zones, the RDP and ORP zones, and the ID-C and ID-RP zones, basic utilities not enclosed within a building are permitted
only by special exception. Proposed uses must be screened from public view and from view of any adjacent residential zones to at least the S3
standard. In addition, the applicant must provide evidence that the proposed use will be compatible with surrounding structures and uses with
regard to safety, size, height, scale, location, and design, particularly for facilities that will be located close to or within view of a residential zone.
For uses located in highly visible areas, the board may consider additional design elements such as masonry or brick facades, and walls or
fencing to improve public safety and to soften the visual impact of the proposed use. Water and sanitary sewer pumps or lift stations approved
by the city as part of subdivision or site plan approval do not require special exception approval from the board of adjustment.
(3) In the ID-RP and the ORP zone, the board of adjustment may grant a special exception to reduce the minimum lot size for a basic utility use;
provided, that the applicant demonstrates that the facility will be located, screened, and landscaped in a manner that will not detract from
surrounding properties or prevent development of an attractive entranceway to an existing or future office research park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 421/715
2. Private Colleges And Universities In RDP And ORP Zones:
a. The proposed use will be located such that traffic to and from the proposed use will not adversely affect the office, light industrial, and research
firms for which the zone is primarily intended.
b. The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of office, light
industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily intended. The board will consider such factors as size and scale of the development,
projected traffic generation, and whether adequate transportation, transit, and pedestrian facilities exist to support the proposed use.
c. The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
3. General Community Service Uses In RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, And CN-1 Zones:
a. Community service uses are limited to "neighborhood centers", as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
b. If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development standards
as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title.
4. General Community Service Uses In CI-1 And I-1 Zones: The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall character of the zone and will not
inhibit future development of uses for which the zone is primarily intended. The board will consider such factors as size and scale of the
development, projected traffic generation, and whether adequate transportation, transit, and pedestrian facilities exist to support the proposed use.
Community service uses that are industrial or repair oriented in nature or that include operations that require outdoor work areas may be particularly
suited to these zones.
5. Community Service - Shelter Uses:
a. Maximum Density:
(1) In the RM-12 and MU zones: Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of lot area per permanent resident and two hundred (200) square feet of lot
area per temporary resident.
(2) In the RM-20, RNS-20, and CO-1 zones: Five hundred fifty (550) square feet of lot area per permanent resident and two hundred (200) square
feet of lot area per temporary resident.
(3) In the RM-44, PRM, CI-1, CC-2, and CB-2 zones: A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of lot area per permanent resident and two
hundred (200) square feet of lot area per temporary resident is required.
b. Nuisance Issues: The proposed use will not have significant adverse effects on the livability of nearby residential or commercial uses due to
loitering, noise, glare from lights, late night operations, odors, outdoor storage, and litter. The applicant must submit a site plan and a shelter
management plan that address these issues. The management plan must include a litter control plan, a loitering control plan, a plan for on site
security, and a conflict resolution procedure to resolve nuisance issues if they occur. The site plan and shelter management plan must be
submitted along with the application for a special exception, or if allowed as a provisional use, such plan must be included with the materials
submitted for site plan review.
c. Site Development Standards:
(1) If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title.
(2) In the CB-5 and CB-10 zones, community service/shelter uses must be located above the street level floor of a building.
(3) The proposed facility must comply with the minimum standards as specified in the Iowa City housing code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
6. Community Service - Long Term Housing:
a. Maximum Density:
(1) In the CO-1, CI-1 and CC-2 zones: A minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit is required. Dwelling units must
be efficiency and/or one bedroom units.
(2) In the CB-2 and CB-5 zones: Density standards for multi-family dwellings in commercial zones in chapter 2, article C of this title.
b. Management Plan Required: The applicant must submit a site plan and a management plan that addresses potential nuisances such as loitering,
noise, lighting, late night operations, odors, outdoor storage and litter. The management plan must include plans for controlling litter, loitering and
noise; provisions for 24/7 on site management and/or security, and a conflict resolution procedure to resolve nuisances if they occur. The site plan
and management plan must be submitted concurrently to the city, or if permitted as a special exception said plans must be submitted with the
special exception application.
c. Special Exception Required: A special exception is required if the proposed use is in a CO-1, CI-1 or CC-2 zone and is across the street from or
adjacent to a single-family residential zone.
d. Neighborhood Meeting Required: Prior to a building permit being issued, the owner or operator of the community service - long term housing use
must hold a neighborhood meeting inviting all property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed use. At the neighborhood meeting,
the owner or operator must provide copies of the management plan, and contact information for the management team of the proposed use.
e. Site And Building Development Standards:
(1) If the proposed use is located in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development standards as set forth in
section 14-2B-6 of this title.
(2) In the CB-2 and CB-5 zones, community service - long term housing uses must be located above the street level floor of a building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 422/715
(3) The proposed facility must comply with the minimum standards as specified in the Iowa City housing code, as amended, and maintain a rental
permit.
(4) In the CO-1, CI-1, and CC-2 zones up to fifty percent (50%) of the first floor of the building may be occupied by residential uses. (Ord. 16-4667,
7-5-2016)
7. Daycare Uses:
a. Required Interior Activity Areas: Child daycare centers must contain at least thirty five (35) square feet of usable interior floor space per child.
Adult daycare centers must contain a minimum of sixty (60) square feet of usable floor area per adult client. An additional twenty (20) square feet
of floor area is required for every adult client who uses ambulatory aids. Reception areas, kitchens, storage areas, offices, bathrooms, hallways,
treatment rooms, and specialized areas used for therapy are excluded when calculating the required floor area. The dining area may only be
included in the square footage calculation if used by daycare participants for activities other than meals. When collocated in a facility that houses
other uses or services, the proposed daycare use must have its own separate identifiable space for program activities during operational hours.
b. Required Outdoor Areas: Child daycare uses must provide a fenced outdoor play area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child
based on the maximum number of children that will be using the outdoor play area at any given time. The outdoor play area must meet the
following standards:
(1) Playground equipment is not permitted within the front and side setbacks.
(2) Outdoor play areas must be well drained, free from hazards, and readily accessible to the daycare center. In residential zones, outdoor play
areas must be completely enclosed by a fence at least four feet (4') in height. In commercial and industrial zones, the outdoor play area must be
completely enclosed by a fence built to the S4 standard and be screened along the perimeter of the fence to the S3 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The city may waive the screening requirement if it is determined that land uses
surrounding the daycare use will not pose a nuisance or safety hazard to the children such that a screening buffer is necessary. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
c. Vehicular Circulation: The use must provide a drop off/pick up area in a location that is convenient to or has good pedestrian access to the
entrance to the facility. This drop off/pick up area must contain sufficient stacking spaces and/or parking spaces to ensure that traffic does not
stack into adjacent streets or other public rights of way. (See minimum parking requirements for daycare in section 14-5A-4, table 5A-2 of this title.)
To promote safe vehicular circulation, one-way drives are encouraged. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord. 16-4667,
7-5-2016)
d. Pedestrian Circulation: A sidewalk must be constructed connecting the main entrance of the center to the adjacent public right of way. Pedestrian
access must be clearly separated or distinguished from vehicular circulation areas to minimize the extent to which users of the facility are required
to walk across drives or aisles to gain access to the daycare center.
e. Site Development Standards: If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multifamily
site development standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. Daycare facilities that are accessory uses are exempt from this
provision. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
8. Detention Facilities:
a. The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any property containing an existing daycare use, educational facility use,
parks and open space use, religious/private group assembly use or residential use.
b. The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential zone.
c. The proposed use will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any other detention facility.
d. The facility and its operations will not pose an unreasonable safety risk to nearby uses and residents. The applicant must submit to the board of
adjustment a detailed plan for on site security. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
9. General Education Facilities In The CC-2 Zone:
a. The use will be functionally compatible with surrounding uses and will not inhibit retail and service uses for which the zone is primarily intended.
The board may consider such factors as site layout, size and scale of the development, and traffic circulation.
b. The use must provide a drop off/pick up area in a location that is convenient to, or has good pedestrian access to, the entrance to the facility. The
drop off/pick up area must contain sufficient stacking spaces and/or parking spaces to ensure that traffic does not stack into adjacent streets or
other public rights of way.
c. The site must be designed to promote safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation to the school according to the standards
set forth in subsection 14-2C-6F, "Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation", of this title. Pedestrian walkways must be established connecting
the main entrance(s) of the school to adjacent public sidewalks and trails. (Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; amd. Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
10. General Educational Facilities In RR-1, RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
a. The number of off street parking spaces provided may not exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required, unless
granted a special exception to do so. The board of adjustment will carefully review any requests for parking spaces beyond the maximum allowed,
particularly in areas where large parking lots will erode the residential character of the neighborhood. The board may limit the number of parking
spaces and the size and location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the estimated parking demand, and
opportunities for shared parking with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
b. If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord. 13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord.
16-4667, 7-5-2016)
11. General Educational Facilities In RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, And RNS-12 Zones:
a. The following setbacks are required in lieu of the setbacks specified in the base zone. However, the board of adjustment may reduce these
setbacks, subject to the approval criteria for setback adjustments as specified in subsection 14-2A-4B5, "Adjustments To Principal Building
Setback Requirements", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 423/715
(1) Front: Twenty feet (20').
(2) Side: Twenty feet (20').
(3) Rear: Fifty feet (50').
b. The proposed use will be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such
as the site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale, setbacks, landscaping, and location and amount of paved areas. The
board of adjustment may deny the use or aspects of the use that are deemed out of scale, incompatible, or out of character with surrounding
residential uses, or may require additional measures to mitigate these differences. Additional requirements may include, but are not limited to,
additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking facilities, and location and design of buildings.
c. Given that large parking lots can seriously erode the single-family residential character of these zones, the board of adjustment will carefully
review any requests for parking spaces beyond the minimum required. The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and
location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking
with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
d. The proposed use will not have significant adverse effects on the livability of nearby residential uses due to noise, glare from lights, late night
operations, odors, and litter.
e. The building official may grant approval for the following modifications to an educational facility, without approval from the board of adjustment,
upon written findings that the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the other property or
improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located:
(1) An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500) square feet in size.
(2) A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the building.
f. If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord. 13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord.
16-4667, 7-5-2016)
12. Specialized Educational Facilities In PRM, MU, And CN-1 Zones:
a. Any such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of gross floor area.
b. If the proposed use is located in the PRM or MU zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
13. Specialized Educational Facilities In The CI-1 Zone: The use will be functionally compatible with surrounding uses, such that the health and safety
of clients/students are not compromised. The board will consider factors such as the types of businesses that predominate in the immediate vicinity,
whether there are any significant negative externalities created by these uses, such as excessive noise, dust, or vibrations from outdoor work areas
that may pose a health or safety risk to clients/students of the proposed use; and where such negative externalities exist, whether the building(s) and
site can and will be designed to mitigate the harmful effects. (Ord. 09-4363, 12-1-2009; amd. Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
14. Hospitals In CO-1 Zone: Hospitals that existed prior to 1963, are exempt from and may expand without compliance with the maximum height and
FAR standards of the CO-1 zone.
15. Parks And Open Space:
a. Any new cemetery use must be located on a site containing at least five (5) acres. Other shared private open space uses are exempt from the
minimum lot requirements of the base zone in which they are located.
b. The following uses and facilities are regulated as accessory uses and are subject to the regulations of article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings",
of this chapter:
(1) Accessory uses within shared private open space areas: Swimming pools, tennis courts, boat ramps, and other recreational facilities. These
are recreational facilities that are shared among residents of the surrounding properties and are maintained and operated by a common
homeowners' or residents' association. Recreational, sports, or athletic clubs operated as a commercial business and open to the general public
to join are classified as commercial recreational facilities and are regulated as a principal use.
(2) Accessory uses within cemeteries: Mausoleums, chapels, and similar accessory facilities associated with funerals or burial.
(3) Accessory uses within golf courses: Clubhouses and driving ranges. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4363, 12-1-2009; Ord. 13-4543,
8-20-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
16. Religious/Private Group Assembly In ID-RM, ID-C, RR-1, RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
a. Religious institutions in existence prior to 1963, that are located in the RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, and CO-1 zones are exempt
from and may expand without compliance with the required number of parking spaces.
b. Religious institutions located in the PRM zone that have parking areas that existed prior to March 1, 1992, and if such parking areas are within
three hundred feet (300') of a commercial zone, the religious institution may lease up to and including two-thirds (2/3) of the required parking
spaces within said parking areas to other users.
c. The number of off street parking spaces provided may not exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required, unless
granted a special exception to do so. The board of adjustment will carefully review any requests for parking spaces beyond the maximum allowed,
particularly in areas where large parking lots will erode the residential character of the neighborhood. The board may limit the number of parking
spaces and the size and location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the estimated parking demand, and
opportunities for shared parking with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
d. If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 09-4363, 12-1-2009; Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord.
13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 424/715
17. Religious/Private Group Assembly In ID-RS, RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, And RNS-12 Zones:
a. The following setbacks are required in lieu of the setbacks specified in the base zone. However, the board of adjustment may reduce these
setbacks, subject to the approval criteria for setback adjustments as specified in subsection 14-2A-4B5, "Adjustments To Principal Building
Setback Requirements", of this title.
(1) Front: Twenty feet (20').
(2) Side: Twenty feet (20').
(3) Rear: Fifty feet (50').
b. The proposed use will be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such
as the site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale, setbacks, landscaping, and location and amount of paved areas. The
board of adjustment may deny the use or aspects of the use that are deemed out of scale, incompatible, or out of character with surrounding
residential uses, or may require additional measures to mitigate these differences. Additional requirements may include, but are not limited to,
additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking facilities, and location and design of buildings.
c. Given that large parking lots can seriously erode the single-family residential character of these zones, the board of adjustment will carefully
review any requests for parking spaces beyond the minimum required. The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and
location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking
with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
d. The proposed use will not have significant adverse effects on the livability of nearby residential uses due to noise, glare from lights, late night
operations, odors, and litter.
e. The building official may grant approval for the following modifications to a religious/private group assembly use, without approval from the board
of adjustment, upon written findings that the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the other
property or improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located:
(1) An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500) square feet in size.
(2) A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the building.
f. If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site development
standards as set forth in section 14-2B-6 of this title. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 09-4363, 12-1-2009; Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord.
13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016)
E. Other Uses:
1. Animal Related Agriculture In ID Zones:
a. Livestock feedlots must be located no closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile from any residential zone boundary.
b. Confinement feeding operations are prohibited.
2. Extraction:
a. Extraction is not permitted within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential zone.
b. Proof of compliance with all state requirements, including all approvals and licenses referenced in subsections E2c through E2e of this section
must be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to commencing extraction operations.
c. Approval for the withdrawal of water must be obtained from the Iowa department of natural resources, or its successor.
d. Approval for operation in a floodplain must be obtained from the Iowa department of natural resources, or its successor.
e. A license to operate the extraction use must be obtained from the Iowa department of agricultural and land stewardship, division of soil
conservation, or its successor. Failure to maintain said license shall constitute abandonment.
3. Helicopter Landing Facilities In I-1, I-2, RDP, And ORP Zones:
a. The proposed landing facility must be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential zone.
b. The landing facility must meet all applicable federal regulations. Documentation of compliance with federal regulations must be submitted to the
board of adjustment with the application for a special exception. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
4. Communication Transmission Facilities In Residential Zones And In ID-RS And ID-RM Zones:
a. Communications antennas are permitted in all residential zones and in the ID-RS and ID-RM zones, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The antenna is mounted on an existing communications tower, on the roof of a principal building that contains a nonresidential use or on the
roof of a building that is accessory to a nonresidential use, or on another tall structure that is permitted in the zone. Examples include church and
school buildings, water towers and clock towers. A maximum of two (2) antennas is permitted per building or structure.
(2) The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of the existing structure or building to which it is attached by more than twenty feet (20').
If it exceeds this limit, a special exception is required to ensure that the antenna and any associated structure is designed to blend into its
surroundings, or be camouflaged so as not to be obtrusive or detract from neighboring properties.
(3) Strobe lighting is prohibited in residential zones. Therefore, any antenna that requires such illumination is prohibited.
(4) Any equipment associated with an antenna must be located within the exterior walls of the building to which the antenna is attached. No
separate equipment shed is permitted, except if the antenna is attached to a tall structure that is not a building. In such a case, a separate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 425/715
equipment shed is only allowed by special exception if it can be demonstrated that the shed can be adequately screened or designed in a
manner that blends in with the residential character or future residential character of the surrounding area.
b. Communications towers are allowed by special exception in the ID-RS and ID-RM zones and must comply with the following approval criteria:
(1) The proposed tower serves an area that cannot be served by an existing tower or industrial property or by locating antennas on existing
structures in the area. The applicant must document attempts to utilize existing structures, towers, and commercial and industrial properties
within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed tower. Such documentation must include maps illustrating the location of existing towers and potential
alternative sites for antenna and towers that have been explored by the applicant and the applicant must state the reasons that these locations
were not feasible.
(2) The proposed tower will be designed and constructed in a manner that will camouflage the structure and reduce its visual impact on the
surrounding area. Examples of camouflage design include monopoles, which do not have guywires or support trusses and that are painted to
blend in with the sky or surroundings, towers camouflaged as flagpoles, monuments, steeples, or the integration of rooftop towers onto existing
buildings, water towers, etc. Rooftop towers must use materials similar to or that blend in with the structure to which it is attached. Other
camouflaged tower structures must be of similar height and appearance as other similar structures allowed in the zone, e.g., towers
camouflaged as light poles or utility poles must be of similar height and appearance as other such poles. The applicant must include an
illustration of how the tower would appear in the proposed location.
(3) The proposed tower will be no taller than is necessary to provide the service intended. Evidence presented should include coverage maps
illustrating current gaps in coverage and changes to coverage with the proposed tower. Communications towers are exempt from the maximum
height standards of the base zone, but under no circumstance may the tower be taller than one hundred twenty feet (120') from grade. If a
communications tower is camouflaged to appear similar to another common structure allowed in the zone, it must comply with the same height
standards that would apply to the type of structure that it emulates. For example, if the tower is camouflaged as a light pole, flagpole, or utility
pole it must not exceed the height limitation for such structures as specified in the base zone. If no height standard exists in the code for such a
structure, it must be designed to be of similar height and appearance to other similar or typical structures. If the tower is camouflaged as a
chimney, steeple, or other similar rooftop structure, the board may exempt it from the base zone height standards if it is designed as if it were an
integral part of the building and is not out of scale or proportion to other similar rooftop structures.
(4) The proposed tower will be set back from the property line at least a distance equal to the height of the tower.
(5) Any equipment associated with the tower facility will be enclosed in an equipment shed, cabinet, or building, which must be adequately
screened from view of the public right of way and adjacent properties and designed in a manner that will be compatible and blend in with future
residential development.
(6) The proposed tower will not utilize a backup generator as a principal power source. Backup generators may only be used in the event of a
power outage. The board of adjustment may require that the electric distribution line necessary to furnish electric service to the tower be made
underground from existing systems, however, this requirement would not apply to electrical transformers, meter pedestals, switchgear and other
appurtenances impractical to bury.
(7) Strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any tower that requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones.
(8) The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to accommodate at least one additional user, unless in doing so the tower will exceed
the one hundred twenty foot (120') height limitation or if the board of adjustment determines that allowing the additional height needed to
accommodate another user will detract from the area to the extent that it will prevent future development as envisioned in the comprehensive
plan. The applicant shall provide a certification by a professional engineer licensed in this state that the proposed tower will be designed to
permit a second antenna system of comparable size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the original antenna system.
(9) If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator, or the
owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present
a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation.
5. Communication Transmission Facilities In Commercial Zones And ID-C Zone; Privately Owned Communication Transmission Facilities In Public
Zones:
a. Communications antennas are permitted in all commercial zones, the ID-C zone, and in public zones, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The antenna must be mounted on another structure allowed in the zone, such as a rooftop, light pole, or utility pole.
(2) In the CN-1 and CO-1 zones and in any ID-C zone that is intended for a future CN-1 zone, strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any antenna
that requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones.
(3) In public zones and in the CC-2, CH-1, CI-1, CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones and in any ID-C zone not intended for a future CN-1 zone,
antennas may not be illuminated by strobe lights unless required by federal regulations. If alternatives are allowed under federal guidelines,
strobe lights may not be used.
(4) Any equipment associated with an antenna must be located within the exterior walls of the building to which the antenna is attached or
screened from view of the public right of way and any adjacent property to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And
Buffering Standards", of this title.) If the equipment is located on the roof, it must be set back and screened so that it is not within public view or
appears to be part of the building.
b. Communications towers are allowed by special exception in public zones, the ID-C, CO-1, CN-1, CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10
zones, and must comply with the following approval criteria:
(1) If the proposed tower will be located in an ID-C zone that is intended for a future neighborhood commercial zone according to the
comprehensive plan, as amended, then it must comply with any specific standards listed below for CN-1 zones.
(2) The proposed tower serves an area that cannot be served by an existing tower or industrial property or by locating antennas on existing
structures in the area. The applicant must document attempts to utilize existing structures, towers, and industrial properties within one-half (1/2)
mile of the proposed tower. Such documentation must include maps illustrating the location of existing towers and potential alternative sites for
antenna and towers that have been explored by the applicant and the applicant must state the reasons that these locations were not feasible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 426/715
(3) The proposed tower will be constructed in a manner that will camouflage the structure and reduce its visual impact on the surrounding area.
Examples of camouflage design include monopoles, which do not have guywires or support trusses and that are painted to blend in with the sky
or surroundings, towers camouflaged as flagpoles, monuments, steeples, or the integration of rooftop towers onto existing buildings, water
towers, etc. Rooftop towers must use materials similar to or that blend in with the structure to which it is attached. Other camouflaged tower
structures must be of similar height and appearance as other similar structures allowed in the zone, e.g., towers camouflaged as light poles or
utility poles must be of similar height and appearance as other such poles. The applicant must include an illustration of how the tower would
appear in the proposed location.
(4) The proposed tower will be no taller than is necessary to provide the service intended. Evidence presented should include coverage maps
illustrating current gaps in coverage and changes to coverage with the proposed tower. In the ID-C (except areas intended for CN-1), CH-1, CC-
2, CI-1, CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones, communications towers are exempt from the maximum height standards of the base zone, but under no
circumstance may the tower be taller than one hundred twenty feet (120') from grade. In the CO-1, CN-1, and any ID-C zone intended for CN-1,
communications towers must comply with the same height standards that would apply to the type of structure to which they are attached or if a
communications tower is camouflaged to appear similar to another common structure allowed in the zone, it must comply with the same height
standards that would apply to the type of structure that it emulates. For example, if the tower is camouflaged as a light pole, flagpole, or utility
pole it must not exceed the height limitation for such structures as specified in the base zone. If no height standard exists in the code for such a
structure, it must be designed to be of similar height and appearance to other similar or typical structures. If the tower is camouflaged as a
chimney or other similar rooftop structure, the board may exempt it from the base zone height standards if it is designed as if it were an integral
part of the building and is not out of scale or proportion to other similar rooftop structures.
(5) The proposed tower will be set back at least a distance equal to the height of the tower from any residential zone, ID-RS zone, and ID-RM
zone.
(6) Any equipment associated with the tower facility will be enclosed in an equipment shed, cabinet, or building, which must be adequately
screened from view of the public right of way and any adjacent residential or commercial property.
(7) The proposed tower will not utilize a backup generator as a principal power source. Backup generators may only be used in the event of a
power outage.
(8) In the CN-1 and CO-1 zones and in any ID-C zone that is intended for a future CN-1 zone, strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any tower
that requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones. The tower will not be illuminated by strobe lights unless required by federal
regulations. If alternatives are allowed under federal guidelines, strobe lights may not be used.
(9) The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to accommodate at least one additional user, unless in doing so the tower will exceed
the one hundred twenty foot (120') height limitation or if the board of adjustment determines that allowing the additional height needed to
accommodate another user will detract from the area to the extent that it will prevent future development intended in the zone. The applicant
shall provide a certification by a professional engineer licensed in this state that the proposed tower will be designed to permit a second antenna
system of comparable size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the original antenna system.
(10) If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator, or the
owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present
a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation.
6. Communication Transmission Facilities In Industrial And Research Park Zones And ID-RP And ID-I Zones:
a. Communications antennas are permitted in all Industrial and Research Park Zones and in the ID-I and ID-RP Zones, provided the antenna is
mounted on another structure allowed in the zone, such as a rooftop, light pole, or utility pole.
b. Communications towers are allowed in the ID-I, I-1 and I-2 Zones and by special exception in the ID-RP, RDP and ORP Zones, provided the
following conditions are met:
(1) The proposed tower will be set back at least a distance equal to the height of the tower from any residential zone, ID-RS Zone, and ID-RM
Zone.
(2) The tower and any associated equipment, buildings, or structures must be screened from the public right-of-way and any bordering residential
or commercial zone to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
(3) The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to accommodate at least two (2) additional users. The applicant shall provide a
certification by a professional engineer licensed in this State that the proposed tower will be designed to permit two (2) additional antenna
systems of comparable size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the original antenna system.
(4) If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator, or the
owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present
a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation. (Ord. 09-4358, 10-
20-2009)
7. Consumer Fireworks Sales In The I-1 And I-2 Zones: In the I-1 and I-2 Zones, consumer fireworks sales, as defined in this title, are permitted,
subject to the restrictions and dates of sale set forth in title 661 Iowa Administrative Code chapter 265, Consumer Fireworks Sales Licensing and
Safety Standards. (Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
ARTICLE C. ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS
14-4C-1: GENERAL APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use, provisional use or special exception
are permitted, provided they are operated and maintained according to the following standards:
A. The accessory use is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers,
or employees of the principal use;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 427/715
B. The accessory use, building or structure is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the property;
C. The accessory use, building or structure does not include structures, structural features, or activities inconsistent with the uses to which they are
accessory; (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
D. Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved according to the provisions set forth in subsection 14-5A-4F, "Alternatives To
Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title, the accessory use, building, or structure is located on the same lot as the principal use or uses to which it
is accessory; and (Ord. 11-4449, 10-18-2011)
E. The accessory use, building, or structure conforms to the applicable base zone regulations and to the specific approval criteria and development
standards contained in this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4C-2: SPECIFIC APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Any accessory uses listed in the following subsections must comply with the conditions listed. As noted, some require special exception approval from the
Board of Adjustment. If a regulation in the base zone chapter conflicts with a regulation contained in this article, the regulation that is more specific to the
situation applies. When regulations are equally specific or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the more restrictive regulation will govern.
A. Accessory Apartments: Accessory apartments are permitted in the RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, RM-12, RM-20, and RNS-20 Zones in owner occupied detached
single-family dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings and in buildings accessory to these same dwelling types, provided the following conditions
are met:
1. Permit Required: Prior to the establishment of any accessory apartment, the owner of the principal dwelling unit must obtain a rental permit from the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services according to the applicable procedures set forth in chapter 8, "Review And Approval Procedures", of
this title.
2. Ownership And Occupancy:
a. The owner of the property on which an accessory apartment is located must occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises as the
permanent legal resident.
b. The accessory apartment and the principal dwelling must be under the same ownership. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
c. The total number of individuals that reside in the accessory apartment may not exceed two (2). (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
3. Site Requirements:
a. Only one accessory apartment may be established per single-family lot.
b. In addition to the parking required for the principal dwelling unit, one off street parking space is required for the accessory apartment.
c. The minimum lot area per unit requirement of the underlying base zone does not apply to an accessory apartment, i.e., no additional lot area is
required beyond that which is required for the principal dwelling unit.
4. Design Requirements:
a. The accessory apartment may be located within the principal dwelling or within an accessory building.
b. The accessory apartment must be a complete, separate dwelling unit that functions independently from the principal single-family dwelling unit. It
must contain its own kitchen and bathroom facilities.
c. When located within the principal dwelling, the accessory apartment must be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a
single-family residence. Any new entrances should face the side or rear yard of the building, and any addition for an accessory apartment may not
increase the floor area of the original dwelling by more than ten percent (10%). Exterior finish materials, trim, windows, and eaves must visually
match the principal dwelling unit.
5. Apartment Size: The accessory apartment must be clearly subordinate in area to the principal dwelling unit or to the accessory building in which it is
located. Accordingly, it must comply with the following standards:
a. For an accessory apartment located within a principal dwelling unit, the floor area of the accessory unit may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
total floor area of the principal dwelling, excluding the area of an attached garage, or six hundred fifty (650) square feet, whichever is less.
b. For an accessory apartment located within an accessory building, the floor area of the accessory apartment may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the total floor area of the accessory building or six hundred fifty (650) square feet, whichever is less.
c. The accessory apartment may contain no more than one bedroom.
B. Accessory Retail Sales: For nonresidential uses, accessory retail sales is permitted, provided the following conditions are met. Retail sales associated
with home occupations is addressed in the subsection M, "Home Occupations", of this section.
1. Accessory retail sales must clearly be subordinate to the use to which it is accessory. The floor area devoted to accessory retail sales may not
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet or forty percent (40%) of the total floor area of the principal use to which the retail sales is accessory,
whichever is less. The floor area devoted to accessory uses is included when calculating the total floor area of the principal use. For example, a
small manufacturing establishment contains a total of two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area. Under this provision, the establishment may
include up to eight hundred (800) square feet of accessory retail space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 428/715
2. The operation of and area devoted to retail sales must meet the performance standards for commercial zones as specified in chapter 5, article H of
this title.
3. The products sold must be manufactured, processed, or fabricated on the property or must be associated with the principal use of the property.
C. Accessory Uses Within Parks And Open Space Uses:
1. Within cemeteries, all structures, including, but not limited to, mausoleums, columbariums, crematoriums, permanent monuments and maintenance
buildings, must be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line or street right of way line. Such structures must be screened from
view of abutting residential properties to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If such
structures are located such that they are not visible from residential properties, then screening is not required.
2. Playground equipment, picnic facilities, shelters, and gazebos are permitted within parks and open space uses, provided they are set back a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line or street right of way line.
3. Uses, buildings and structures devoted to active recreational activities, such as clubhouses, driving ranges, swimming pools, recreation buildings,
sports fields, and tennis courts, which are located within private, shared open space, are permitted by special exception and are subject to the
following approval criteria, except for uses approved through a planned development process. Uses, buildings, and structures devoted to active
recreational activities approved through a planned development process are not initially required to obtain special exception approval. However, any
expansion or enlargement of such a use, building, or structure requires special exception approval from the board of adjustment, except as permitted
in subsection C3g of this section. A special exception is not required for buildings or structures devoted to active recreational activities within public
parks.
a. The proposed use is properly located to provide adequate separation between properties and between uses within the parks and open space
area. Any buildings associated with the proposed use must comply with the setback requirements for principal buildings in the underlying base
zone. Other structures and facilities must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any property line. The board of adjustment may reduce or
increase the setback requirements; provided, that adequate separation is established based on the specific use proposed and the nature of the
surrounding properties.
b. The proposed use is consistent with the intended character of the specific parks and open space area.
c. The location or operation of the proposed use will not compromise any designated environmental conservation areas adjacent to or within the
parks and open space area.
d. The transportation system is capable of safely supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include
street capacity and level of service, access requirements, on street parking impacts, neighborhood impacts, and pedestrian safety.
e. Adequate public services are available or will be made available to serve the proposed use.
f. The proposed use will not have significant adverse impacts on the livability of nearby residential properties due to noise, glare from lights, late night
operations, odors, and litter.
g. The building official may grant approval for the following minor modifications to accessory uses within parks and open space uses without approval
from the board of adjustment, according to the procedures and approval criteria for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this
title:
(1) An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500) square feet in size.
(2) A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the building.
D. Bed And Breakfast Homestays: Bed and breakfast homestays are allowed in owner occupied detached single-family dwellings, provided the following
conditions are met:
1. The principal use of the property must be an owner occupied detached single-family dwelling.
2. No more than three (3) bedrooms are provided to guests who stay for periods not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
3. A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces must be provided in addition to the parking spaces required for the dwelling. Parking spaces may be
located one behind the other.
4. Nonresident employees are prohibited, except as approved by the building official as a minor modification, according to the procedures and approval
criteria for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
5. If a dwelling contains rooming units for permanent roomers, the number of permitted bedrooms for a bed and breakfast homestay is reduced by the
number of rooming units.
6. Fire protection equipment must be installed and maintained according to the currently adopted international residential code.
7. Signage identifying the bed and breakfast homestay is limited to one nonilluminated sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
8. Every two (2) years, the operator must obtain a rental permit authorizing this use from the city after establishing compliance with city ordinances.
E. Bed And Breakfast Inns: Bed and breakfast inns are allowed in owner occupied detached single-family dwellings, subject to approval of a special
exception by the board of adjustment, and provided the following conditions are met:
1. The principal use of the property must be an owner occupied detached single-family dwelling.
2. No more than five (5) bedrooms are provided to guests who stay for periods not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
3. A minimum of three (3) off street parking spaces must be provided in addition to the parking spaces required for the dwelling. Parking spaces may
be located one behind the other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 429/715
4. Nonresident employees are prohibited, except as approved by the building official as a minor modification, according to the procedures and approval
criteria for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this chapter.
5. If dwellings contain rooming units for permanent roomers, the number of permitted bedrooms for a bed and breakfast inn is reduced by the number
of rooming units.
6. Fire protection equipment must be installed and maintained according to the currently adopted international residential code.
7. Signage identifying the bed and breakfast inn is limited to one nonilluminated sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
8. Every two (2) years, the operator must obtain a rental permit authorizing this use from the city after establishing compliance with city ordinances.
F. Caretaker Residences In Industrial And Research Park Zones: In the industrial and research park zones, a maximum of one residence for a proprietor,
caretaker, or watchperson is permitted, provided it is located on the same property as the commercial or industrial use.
G. Childcare Homes:
1. "Childcare homes", as defined in this title, that provide care for up to eight (8) children, are permitted in any zone that allows household living uses,
provided the operation and maintenance of the childcare home meets all applicable state requirements. A childcare home is permitted one
nonresident caregiver in addition to the primary resident caregiver.
2. "Childcare homes", as defined in this title, that provide care for nine (9) to sixteen (16) children, are permitted in any zone that allows household
living uses, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The home must provide a fenced outdoor play area of not less than fifty (50) square feet per child based on the maximum number of children that
will be using the outdoor play area at any given time.
b. The home must contain thirty five (35) square feet of interior floor space per child, excluding kitchen, bathrooms, and halls.
c. The home must have a working fire extinguisher, smoke detectors, and two (2) direct exits.
d. The operation and maintenance of the home must meet all applicable state requirements.
e. The home is permitted one nonresident caregiver in addition to the primary resident caregiver.
H. Communication Towers, Antennas, And Satellite Receiving Devices:
1. Accessory communications antennas and satellite receiving devices, one meter or smaller in diameter, are permitted in any zone; provided, that
such a device is in compliance with the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
2. Accessory satellite receiving devices larger than one meter in diameter are permitted in all commercial and industrial zones; provided, that no such
device is located in violation of the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. In residential zones, including the
ID-RS and ID-RM zones, such devices are permitted, provided they are not located in the area between the street and the principal building, within
the required principal building, front or side setback area, or on the roof of any building.
3. Communications towers, other than amateur radio and citizen band transmitters, are permitted according to the requirements for communications
transmission facilities as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
4. Amateur radio and citizen band transmitters, antennas, and supporting structures are permitted in any zone, provided they are not located in the
area between a street and a principal structure or within the required side setback.
I. Daycare: Daycare accessory to institutional, commercial, or industrial uses is permitted according to the approval criteria for daycare uses as set forth in
article B of this chapter. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
J. Decks And Patios, Uncovered:
1. In residential zones:
a. Uncovered patios and decks constructed two feet (2') or less above grade must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front or street-side lot
line and set back at least two feet (2') from any alley right of way. No side setback is required.
b. Uncovered patios and decks constructed more than two feet (2') above grade must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front or street-side
lot line, at least five feet (5') from any side lot line, and at least two feet (2') from any alley right of way. (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
2. In riverfront crossings zones and the eastside mixed use district:
a. Decks are not allowed in private frontage areas, as defined in subsection 14-2G-7A, "Streetscape And Frontage Area Improvements", of this title.
b. Patios are not allowed in private frontage areas unless expressly permitted according to the standards for the applicable frontage type, as
specified in section 14-2G-4 of this title.
c. Uncovered patios and decks constructed two feet (2') or less above grade must be set back at least two feet (2') from any alley right of way. No
side setback is required.
d. Uncovered patios and decks constructed more than two feet (2') above grade must be set back at least five feet (5') from any side lot line and at
least two feet (2') from any alley right of way. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
3. In all other zones:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 430/715
a. Uncovered patios and decks must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front or street-side lot line and set back at least two feet (2') from any
alley right of way. No side setback is required.
b. Decks and patios in any zone where there is no front setback requirement for principal buildings are exempt from the front setback requirement in
subsection J3a of this section. (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
K. Drive-Through Facilities:
1. Allowed Facilities: Drive-through facilities are allowed according to table 4C-1 of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 4C-1: Drive-Through Facilities
Zone
Drive-Through
Facilities Allowed Additional Requirements
ID zones None permitted Not applicable
Residential
zones
None permitted Not applicable
CO-1 zone Limited to facilities that are accessory
to financial institutions
Special exception required. See additional approval criteria listed below
CH-1 zone Permitted Drive-through lanes must be set back at least 10 feet from property lines and must be
screened from view of any abutting residential zone to the S3 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title)
CN-1 zone Limited to facilities that are accessory
to financial institutions and
pharmacies
Maximum of 2 lanes allowed for a
financial institution
Maximum of 1 lane allowed for a
pharmacy
Special exception required. See additional approval criteria listed below
CI-1, CC-2, CB-
2, and riverfront
crossings zones
Permitted by special exception.
Limitations apply in the riverfront
crossings zones, as specified below
Special exception required. See additional approval criteria listed below
CB-5, CB-10
zones
None permitted Not applicable
Eastside mixed
use district
None permitted Not applicable
(Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
2. Riverfront Crossings Zones; Limitations And Restrictions:
a. In all riverfront crossings subdistricts, except for the west riverfront and south Gilbert subdistricts, drive-throughs are limited to facilities that are
accessory to financial institutions and pharmacies.
b. In the south Gilbert subdistrict, drive-through facilities are not allowed along frontages designated as required retail storefronts or required Ralston
Creek frontages, or along the required pedestrian streets that extend east-west through the block to provide connections to the riverfront park, all
as illustrated in section 14-2G-2, figure 2G-1, "Regulating Plan", of this title. Otherwise, drive-through facilities are allowed by special exception for
any use allowed in the subdistrict.
c. In the west riverfront subdistrict, drive-through facilities are allowed by special exception for any use allowed in the subdistrict according to the
provisions set forth in this section.
d. Principal buildings to which a drive-through is accessory must comply with all standards of the applicable riverfront crossings subdistrict as
specified in chapter 2, article G of this title, unless a minor adjustment is approved by the FBC committee according to the provisions in subsection
14-2G-7H, "Minor Adjustments", of this title.
3. Special Exception Approval Criteria:
a. Access And Circulation: The transportation system should be capable of safely supporting the proposed drive-through use in addition to the
existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, effects on traffic circulation, access requirements,
separation of curb cuts, and pedestrian safety in addition to the following criteria:
(1) Wherever possible and practical, drive-through lanes shall be accessed from secondary streets, alleys, or shared cross access drives. If the
applicant can demonstrate that access from a secondary street, alley, or shared cross access drive is not possible, the board may grant access
to a primary street, but may impose conditions such as limiting the width of the curb cut and drive, limiting the number of lanes, requiring the
drive-through bays and stacking lanes to be enclosed within the building envelope, and similar conditions.
(2) To provide for safe pedestrian movement, the number and width of curb cuts serving the use may be limited. A proposal for a new curb cut on
any street is subject to the standards and restrictions in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 431/715
(3) An adequate number of stacking spaces must be provided to ensure traffic safety is not compromised. A minimum of six (6) stacking spaces is
recommended for drive-through facilities associated with eating establishments and a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces for banking,
pharmacies, and similar nonfood related drive-through facilities. "Stacking spaces" shall be defined as being twenty feet (20') in length and the
width of a one lane, one-way drive. The board may reduce the recommended number of stacking spaces if the applicant can demonstrate that
the specific business has unique characteristics such that the recommended number of parking spaces is excessive (i.e., a drive-through that is
to be used for pick up only and not ordering).
(4) Sufficient on site signage and pavement markings shall be provided to indicate direction of vehicular travel, pedestrian crossings, stop signs, no
entrance areas, and other controls to ensure safe vehicular and pedestrian movement.
b. Location:
(1) In the CB-2 zone and in all subdistricts of the riverfront crossings district located east of the Iowa River, drive-through lanes and service
windows must be located on a nonstreet-facing facade. In all other locations where drive-throughs are allowed, this location standard must be
met, unless the applicant can demonstrate that a street-facing location is preferable for the overall safety and efficiency of the site, does not
conflict with adjacent uses or pedestrian access, and does not compromise the character of the streetscape or neighborhood in which it is
located.
(2) Drive-through lanes must be set back at least ten feet (10') from adjacent lot lines and public rights of way and screened from view according to
the design standards below.
c. Design Standards: The number of drive-through lanes, stacking spaces, and paved area necessary for the drive-through facility will not be
detrimental to adjacent residential properties or detract from or unduly interrupt pedestrian circulation or the commercial character of the area in
which the use is located. The board of adjustment may increase or reduce these standards according to the circumstances affecting the site.
(1) To promote compatibility with surrounding development, the number of drive-through lanes should be limited such that the amount of paving
and stacking space does not diminish the design quality of the streetscape or the safety of the pedestrian environment.
(2) Drive-through lanes, bays, and stacking spaces shall be screened from views from the street and adjacent properties to the S2 standard. If the
drive-through is located adjacent to a residential use or property zoned residential, it must be screened from view of these properties to at least
the S3 standard. To preserve the pedestrian oriented character of streets in the CB-2 zone and the riverfront crossings district, the board may
require the drive-through to be incorporated within the building or be screened with masonry street walls and landscaping. Street walls shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') in height and shall be designed to complement the principal building on the site.
(3) Multiple windows servicing a single stacking lane (e.g., order board, payment window, pick up window) should be considered to reduce the
amount of idling on the site.
(4) Stacking spaces, driveways, and drive-through windows shall be located to minimize potential for vehicular and pedestrian conflicts and shall
be integrated into the surrounding landscape and streetscape design of the neighborhood in which it is located.
(5) Lighting for the drive-through facility must comply with the outdoor lighting standards set forth in chapter 5, article G of this title and must be
designed to prevent light trespass and glare onto neighboring residential properties. (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
(6) (Rep. by Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
(7) Loudspeakers or intercom systems, if allowed, should be located and directed to minimize disturbance to adjacent uses. Special consideration
should be given to locations adjacent to residential uses to ensure such systems do not diminish the residential character of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
L. Fences, Walls, And Hedges:
1. Permit Required: A permit is required for all of the following:
a. Electric fences;
b. Barbed wire fences;
c. Any fence or wall over six feet (6') in height;
d. Any retaining wall over four feet (4') in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall; and
e. A retaining wall of any height that supports a surcharge or impounds flammable liquids. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
2. Location And Height Requirements: All fences, walls, and hedges located within a principal building front, side, or rear setback area or within five
feet (5') of a lot line, are subject to the following location and height requirements: (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
a. Except as otherwise allowed or required in chapter 2, article G, "Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development
Standards", of this title, no portion of a fence or wall more than ten percent (10%) solid shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. The solidity is the
percent of the fence over a random area which is made up of solid, opaque material, and which does not allow light or air to pass through.
Retaining walls are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
b. Fences, walls, and hedges must be set back at least two feet (2') from any alley or street right of way line.
c. On corner lots, fences, walls, and hedges over two feet (2') in height must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility
Standards", of this title. (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014)
d. Fences and walls that exceed four feet (4') in height are not permitted in the principal building, front setback area on properties zoned residential
or on properties located within fifty feet (50') of any property along the same frontage that is zoned residential. However, this height limit is
increased to six feet (6') for lots with frontages along an expressway or an arterial street; provided, that the lot is a double frontage lot or a
reversed corner lot. Retaining walls are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. A minor modification may be requested to adjust the height
of an entranceway gate in a fence located within a front yard setback area according to the procedures and approval criteria for minor
modifications contained in article B of this chapter. (Ord. 14-4587, 6-3-2014; amd. Ord. 14-4595, 8-19-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 432/715
e. In riverfront crossings zones and the eastside mixed use district, fences and walls located within private frontage areas are strictly regulated and, if
allowed, must comply with the applicable frontage type standards as specified in chapter 2, article G of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
3. Regulations For Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: Barbed wire and electric fences are subject to the following regulations:
a. Barbed wire consists of twisted wires with barbs on each wire. The barbs on each wire must be at least four inches (4") apart. Any barbed wire
that does not meet this description is prohibited. Concertina wire is prohibited.
b. Except when used for the enclosure of livestock associated with an allowed agriculture use, barbed wire fences are permitted only in the
commercial, industrial, and research zones, provided the bottom strand of barbed wire is not less than six feet (6') above grade.
c. Except for the enclosure of livestock associated with an allowed agriculture use, electric fences are not permitted in any zone.
d. No electric fence shall carry a charge greater than twenty five (25) milliamperes nor a pulsating current lower than one-tenth (1/10) second in a one
second cycle. All electric fences must carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
e. Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited within five feet (5') of a public sidewalk or within four feet (4') of a street right of way line where a
public sidewalk does not exist. In the latter case, however, a barbed wire or electric fence may be installed or constructed along the right of way
line if the property owner agrees to move the fence back the required distance within two (2) months after the installation of a public sidewalk. Said
agreement must be submitted with the application for a fence permit.
M. Home Occupations: There are two (2) categories of home occupations, type A and type B. Type A home occupations are permitted, provided the use
complies with the standards in subsections M3 through M9 of this section. Type B home occupations are permitted, provided the use complies with the
standards in subsections M3 through M9 of this section, and the operator of the use obtains a home occupation permit from the city as described in
subsection M2 of this section. The standards for bed and breakfast homestays, bed and breakfast inns, and childcare homes are specified in other
subsections of this section and are, therefore, not subject the provisions of this subsection.
1. Home Occupation Types:
a. Type A: A "type A home occupation" is one where a resident or residents of a dwelling use the dwelling as a place of work, but no employees or
customers come to the site. Examples include artists, craftspersons, writers, and consultants. Type A home occupations also provide an
opportunity for a home to be used as a business address but not as a place of work. No permit is required for these uses, but they must comply
with all of the other regulations stated herein.
b. Type B: A "type B home occupation" is one where a nonresident employee works at the site or where customers frequent the site on a regular
basis. Examples include counseling, tutoring, and hair cutting and styling. A home occupation permit is required for these uses.
2. Permit Required For Type B Home Occupations: Prior to establishment of a type B home occupation, a home occupation permit must be obtained
from the department of housing and inspection services according to the procedures set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title. A home occupation permit is required in order to ensure that the applicant is aware of the provisions governing home
occupations and that the city has all information necessary to evaluate whether the proposal initially meets and continues to meet the provisions of
this subsection.
3. Location And Occupancy:
a. The home occupation use must be located within a dwelling unit or within a building that is accessory to a dwelling unit.
b. The dwelling unit must be the bona fide primary residence of the owner and operator of the home occupation during nonbusiness hours.
4. Prohibited Uses: In addition to the uses that would be excluded based on the conditions specified in this subsection, the following uses are
specifically prohibited as home occupations:
a. Adult business uses.
b. Veterinary clinics and kennels.
c. Commercial recreational uses.
d. Commercial parking.
e. Eating and drinking establishments.
f. Medical/dental offices, except for psychiatrists, psychologists, chiropractors, and physical therapists.
g. Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as automobiles, motorcycles, scooters,
snowmobiles, outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines,
dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to automobiles and their parts.
h. Self-service storage.
i. Industrial service.
j. Any use which changes the fire safety rating of the occupancy separation classification requirements of the structure.
5. Commercial Activity:
a. No commodities may be sold on the premises except for those produced on the premises or those associated with the home occupation
conducted on the premises.
b. Type B home occupations are limited to ten (10) clients or customers per day.
6. Traffic And Parking:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 433/715
a. The proposed use will not generate a greater volume or type of traffic than what is normally expected in the zone in which it is located; nor will it
necessitate parking in excess of what is normally expected in the zone in which it is located. Vehicles used for delivery and pick up are limited to
those normally servicing residential neighborhoods.
b. No more than one truck associated with the home occupation may be parked at the site. Only light trucks that are less than seven feet (7') in
height are permitted. Medium and heavy trucks are prohibited. A "light truck" is a truck with a single rear axle and a single set of rear wheels. The
home occupation use must comply with regulations in chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title, regarding the
parking and storage of special vehicles and commercial vehicles and the provisions of title 9, chapter 4, "Parking Regulations", of this code.
7. Off Site Impacts: Except for a permitted sign, there must be no indication from the exterior of the dwelling unit or accessory building, such as noise,
odor, smoke, dust, excessive outdoor lighting, or outdoor storage of materials, that there is a home occupation use on the premises. No visitors or
deliveries to the home occupation use are permitted before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
8. Size: For a home occupation located within a principal dwelling unit, the floor area devoted to the home occupation may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the total floor area of the principal dwelling (the floor area of an attached garage is not included in the calculation of total floor area
of the dwelling). This twenty five percent (25%) limit applies regardless of whether the home occupation is located within the principal dwelling unit or
within an accessory building. For example, for a property where the principal dwelling contains two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area, a
home occupation would be limited to five hundred (500) square feet regardless of whether it was located within the dwelling or within an accessory
building.
9. Nonresident Employees: Nonresident employees are prohibited, except as approved by the building official as a minor modification to the home
occupation use, according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
10. Signage: Home occupations are permitted one nonilluminated fascia sign, not to exceed one square foot in size.
N. Mechanical Structures:
1. Screening:
a. All ground level mechanical and utility equipment, such as heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps, must be
screened from public view to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If it is not
feasible to use landscape screening, the mechanical equipment must be screened using wall or fencing materials complementary to the principal
structure. Single-family uses are exempt from this standard.
b. In all zones except I-1 and I-2, rooftop mechanical equipment must be concealed from public view by integrating equipment into the design of the
building, screening equipment behind building features, such as parapets, or by setting the equipment back from the edge of the roof so that it is
not visible from ground level.
2. Setbacks:
a. Single-Family Residential Zones: Mechanical structures must be set back at least two feet (2') from the side and rear lot lines. However,
mechanical structures may not be located between the principal dwelling and the street.
b. All Other Zones: Mechanical structures must be set back at least two feet (2') from any lot line. Additional location standards may apply in certain
zones or for certain uses.
O. Off Street Loading: Off street loading is permitted in the multi-family, commercial, industrial, and research zones according to the provisions of chapter
5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
P. Off Street Parking: Off street parking must comply with the provisions of the base zone in which it is located and the provisions of chapter 5, article A,
"Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
Q. Outdoor Dumpster Areas:
1. Outdoor recycling, trash, solid waste and dumpster areas must be in compliance with the applicable provisions of title 16, chapter 3, article H, "Solid
Waste", of this code.
2. Any such area must be screened from view of adjacent properties and from the public right of way to the S3 or S5 standard. (See chapter 5, article
F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
R. Outdoor Lighting: Outdoor lighting must comply with the provisions of the base zone in which it is located and the provisions of chapter 5, article G,
"Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title.
S. Outdoor Storage And Display: Any use with permanent outdoor storage or outdoor display areas must comply with the standards for the base zone in
which the use is located, the relevant performance standards as specified in chapter 5, article H of this title, and any additional standards required for
the use in article B of this chapter. Uses with temporary outdoor storage and display areas must comply with the regulations in article D, "Temporary
Uses", of this chapter.
T. Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, And Tennis Courts: Swimming pools, hot tubs, and tennis courts intended for private use by persons that reside on the
property or their guests are permitted, provided the following conditions are met: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
1. Setbacks:
a. Residential Zones, Riverfront Crossings Zones, And The Eastside Mixed Use District:
(1) The use must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 434/715
(2) The use may not be located in the front yard (see definition of "front yard" in chapter 9, article A of this title) unless the use is set back at least
forty feet (40') from the front property line. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
b. Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zones, the use must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side, rear, or front property line,
unless the property on which the use is located is directly abutting or across the street from a property zoned residential. In the case of such an
adjacency, the use must comply with the setback requirements for residential zones as stated in subsection T1a of this section.
2. Lighting Standards: Lighting for such facilities must comply with the standards specified in chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this
title.
3. Fence Requirement: Swimming pools, with a depth of eighteen inches (18") or more and the edge of which is less than four feet (4') above grade,
must be completely enclosed by a fence according to the following specifications:
a. The fence must be at least four feet (4') in height and must be constructed so that a sphere, five inches (5") in diameter, cannot pass through the
fence.
b. A principal or accessory building may be used as part of the enclosure.
c. All gates and doors opening through the enclosure must be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not in use, except the door of any building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
d. The building official may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute
device or structure is not less than the protection afforded by an enclosure built to the specifications of this subsection T3.
U. Roadside Stands For The Sale Of Produce: Roadside stands for the sale of produce grown on the premises are permitted in the ID zones and the RR-1
zone, provided the following conditions are met:
1. The stand contains no more than six hundred (600) square feet of floor area;
2. The stand is set back at least ten feet (10') from any lot line and at least twenty feet (20') from any street right of way; and
3. Access to the stand is from an entrance to the farm or residence. Additional street access will not be granted for such a use.
V. Signs: Signs are allowed according to the regulations in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
W. Storage Buildings And Warehouse Facilities:
1. In residential zones and for residential building types in the riverfront crossings and eastside mixed use district, accessory storage and accessory
storage buildings are allowed as follows:
a. Accessory storage and storage buildings are permitted for the storage of personal vehicles, wood, lumber, gardening equipment and other
materials and equipment used exclusively by residents of the premises or by persons affiliated with a permitted use.
b. On properties where the principal use is household living, storage buildings for commercial purposes are prohibited.
2. In commercial, industrial, and research zones, and for nonresidential uses allowed within commercial and mixed use buildings in the riverfront
crossings zones and eastside mixed use district, accessory storage and warehouse facilities are permitted, provided the floor area devoted to such a
use does not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total floor area of the buildings on the property. If storage and warehousing exceeds this floor area
limit, it is considered a principal use and is subject to the base zone regulations and any relevant approval criteria in article B of this chapter. (Ord.
16-4675, 9-20-2016)
3. Accessory storage buildings and warehouse facilities must meet the development standards for accessory buildings as specified in section 14-4C-3
of this article.
X. Structures For Shelter Of Household Pets, Horses And Ponies:
1. Structures for the shelter of household pets are permitted, provided the following conditions are met. "Kennels", as defined in this title, are regulated
as a principal use, intensive animal related commercial, and are subject to the base zone regulations and the relevant approval criteria in article B of
this chapter.
a. Dog runs, built solely for the purpose of exercising and feeding of dogs, must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any front or street side lot
line, at least ten feet (10') from any side lot line, at least ten feet (10') from the rear lot line.
b. Dog runs must be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient height and construction to contain the dog at all times.
c. A principal or accessory building may be used as part of the enclosure.
d. All gates and doors opening through the enclosure must be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not in use, except the door of any building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
e. The building official may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute
device or structure is not less than the protection afforded by an enclosure built to the specifications of this subsection X1.
2. Structures for the shelter of horses and ponies are permitted in the ID zones and the RR-1 zone, but not in other zones. A minimum lot area of two
(2) acres is required for the first horse or pony, plus one acre for each additional horse or pony. Commercial stables are regulated as a principal use,
intensive animal related commercial, and are subject to the base zone regulations and the relevant approval criteria in article B of this chapter. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 435/715
Y. Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems: Small wind energy conversion systems (SWECS) are allowed as accessory uses in certain zones subject to
the applicable approval process, standards and restrictions as set forth in this subsection.
1. Permit Required:
a. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate a SWECS within the city of Iowa City, unless the owner/operator has obtained a
building permit from the city of Iowa City.
b. The owner/operator of the SWECS shall obtain all applicable permits required by federal and state law prior to constructing the system.
2. Applicability And Approval Process:
a. Building mounted SWECS are allowed in the CI-1, CC-2, CH-1, CB-5, CB-10, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P-1, P-2, and ID zones, in accordance with the
standards and restrictions set forth in this subsection.
b. Freestanding SWECS that do not exceed a total extended height of forty five feet (45') are allowed in the I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P-1, P-2, ID-I, and IDRP
zones, in accordance with the applicable standards and restrictions set forth in this subsection. A special exception is required, however, for
any freestanding SWECS proposed within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zone boundary.
c. A special exception is required for any freestanding SWECS that exceed a total extended height of forty five feet (45') in the I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P-
1, P-2, ID-I, and ID-RP zones.
3. Feasibility Study Recommended:
a. It is highly recommended that a feasibility study be made of any site prior to installing a wind turbine. The feasibility study should include
measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed turbine site for at least three (3) months. The applicant for a SWECS building permit shall indicate
whether a feasibility study has been conducted and the results of any such study.
b. The grant of a special exception or issuance of a building permit for a SWECS does not constitute the granting of an easement by the city of Iowa
City. The SWECS owner/operator shall have the sole responsibility to acquire any covenants, easements, or similar rights to assure or protect
access to sufficient wind as may not be necessary to operate the SWECS.
4. Size And Number Of Systems Per Lot:
a. If allowed in the subject zone, no more than one freestanding SWECS that is taller than the tallest existing principal building on the property may
be permitted. If allowed in the subject zone, additional freestanding SWECS that conform to setback requirements and other standards contained
herein and that are no taller than the tallest existing principal building located on said property may be permitted. Additional building mounted
SWECS may be allowed within the parameters of this subsection.
b. Any one SWECS proposed for the subject property may not exceed a nameplate rated capacity greater than one hundred (100) kilowatts.
However, in no case shall the generating capacity of aggregated SWECS on a property exceed anticipated energy needs for on site consumption.
5. Lot Size Standards:
a. The minimum lot size for a freestanding SWECS shall be one acre.
b. The minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS shall be one acre if mounted on a building five (5) stories or less in height.
c. There shall be no minimum lot size for building mounted SWECS if mounted on a building six (6) or more stories in height.
6. Setbacks:
a. The minimum distance between any freestanding SWECS and any property line or any existing, proposed, planned, or anticipated public street
right of way or public trail shall be a distance that is equivalent to one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the total extended height. If the certificate
of insurance for the SWECS requires a greater setback than the setback required herein, the setback shall be increased to meet the insurance
requirement. The setback shall be measured from the point of the SWECS closest to the property line or existing, proposed, planned, or
anticipated public street right of way or public trail, including the blade at its greatest horizontal extension.
b. The required setback for any building mounted SWECS shall be equal to the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS is to
be attached.
7. Additional Siting Standards:
a. No portion of a vertical axis SWECS blade shall extend within twelve feet (12') of the ground.
b. No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall extend within thirty feet (30') of the ground.
c. The blades of any freestanding SWECS may not extend within twenty feet (20') of a parking area, driveway, tree, structure, outdoor use area,
pedestrian walkway, or aboveground utility structure or facility.
d. No part of a SWECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements.
e. No SWECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can extend within twenty feet (20') laterally of an overhead electrical power line
(excluding secondary electrical service lines or service drops). The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet
(5').
f. A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of applicable federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations as amended.
8. Height Standards: Small wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the maximum height standards of the base zone, however the following
height restrictions apply:
a. For freestanding SWECS, the total extended height of SWECS shall not exceed the following:
(1) For lots of one but fewer than three (3) acres: Sixty five feet (65') maximum.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 436/715
(2) For lots of three (3) to seven (7) acres: Eighty feet (80') maximum.
(3) For lots more than seven (7) acres, but less than fifteen (15) acres: One hundred feet (100') maximum.
(4) For lots more than fifteen (15) acres: One hundred fifty feet (150') maximum.
b. For building mounted SWECS, the hub height shall not be more than ten feet (10') higher than the point of attachment to the building on which it is
attached.
9. Design Standards:
a. Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding SWECS. Lattice or guyed towers of any other type are prohibited.
b. Freestanding SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white, sky blue or light gray. Building mounted SWECS shall match or be complementary in
color to the building to which it is attached. Other colors may be allowed at the discretion of the board of adjustment. The surface shall be
nonreflective.
c. No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA regulations.
d. No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the tower or any associated structures.
e. The tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first twelve feet (12') of height above grade.
10. Coordination With Local Utility Company:
a. Utility Notification: The city of Iowa City shall notify the applicable utility company of receipt of an application to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this notification requirement.
b. Interconnection: The SWECS, if not off grid, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility and the Iowa
utilities board. No permit of any kind shall be issued until the city of Iowa City has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection
agreement. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
c. Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: A SWECS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on site consumption,
except that excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not presently needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company
in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code, as may be subsequently amended.
11. Performance Standards: An applicant shall provide evidence to the city that the following standards will be met:
a. Noise: A SWECS shall be designed, installed and operated so that the noise generated does not exceed fifty (50) decibels (dBA) when measured
from the nearest point on property line to the SWECS.
b. Shadow Flicker: No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to cause a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
c. Safety Controls: Each SWECS shall be equipped with both automatic and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled
rotation, overspeeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking system shall
also be capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to prevent backfeeding of the grid.
d. Structural Integrity: Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited unless the owner has obtained a written analysis from an Iowa licensed
structural engineer determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause damage to the structure and that the SWECS can be securely fastened
so as to not pose a hazard caused by detaching from the structure.
e. Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and shall remain in an operational condition that
poses no potential safety hazard nor is in violation of any provisions contained within this article or elsewhere within this Code.
f. Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for the wind turbine will be required as determined by the building official.
g. Electromagnetic Interference: All SWECS shall be designed and constructed to not cause radio and television interference. If it is determined that
the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner/operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference
including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the building official. A special exception or permit granting a SWECS may
be revoked if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
h. Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the
electrical components, as supplied by the manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the design and manner of installation
conforms to the State National Electric Code.
i. Insurance: A person seeking a building permit to erect a small wind energy system shall provide evidence, in the form of a certificate of insurance
satisfactory to the City of Iowa City, showing general liability insurance coverage for the installation and operation of the system under a standard
business owner's insurance policy, separate and distinct from any insurance requirements of a public utility.
j. Engineer Certification: Applications for any SWECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower,
base, and footings. An engineering analysis of all components of the SWECS showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by
an Iowa licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
k. Installation: Installation must be done according to manufacturer's specifications. All wiring and electrical work must be completed according to the
applicable Building and Electric Codes. All electrical components must meet code recognized test standards.
l. Removal: If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of six (6) months, the system shall be deemed to be
abandoned. The SWECS owner and/or the owner of the property shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. To comply with this
requirement, the entire structure, transmission equipment and any surrounding fencing must be removed from the property, excluding foundations.
Nonfunction or lack of operation may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. For off grid systems the City of Iowa City shall have the
right to enter the property at its sole discretion to determine if the off grid system is generating power. Such generation may be proven by use of an
amp meter. The SWECS owner/operator and any successors shall make available to the Director of Housing and Inspection Services or designee
any and all reports or documents needed to determine functionality, if requested. If removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is required, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 437/715
Director of Housing and Inspection Services Department or designee shall notify in writing the SWECS owner and/or the owner of the property on
which the SWECS is located. Removal shall be completed within six (6) months of the date of said written notice. (Ord. 12-4497, 10-2-2012)
Z. The Keeping Of Chickens And Structures For The Shelter Of Chickens: The keeping of chickens and structures for the shelter of chickens is permitted
for detached single-family uses subject to the restrictions and provisions set forth in title 8, chapter 4, "Animal Services", of this Code. (Ord. 12-4503,
12-4-2012)
AA. Rooftop Service Areas (RSAs): Rooftop service areas (RSAs), as defined in chapter 9, article A of this title, are allowed in accordance with the
regulations indicated in this subsection and table 4C-2 of this section. Where an RSA is allowed as a provisional use, the application for such approval
shall be administered through the design review process. Where an RSA is allowed only by special exception, an application for such approval must be
reviewed and approved by the board of adjustment. Any RSA accessory to a use that is licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages is considered
a type of "outdoor service area", as defined in section 4-1-1 of this code, and is subject to the applicable regulations in title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of
this code. Additional approval criteria apply to RSAs proposed for nonconforming drinking establishments, as set forth in subsection AA2 of this
section.
TABLE 4C-2
ROOFTOP SERVICE AREAS (RSAs)
Zone General Rules Requirements
ID zones,
I-1, I-2
None permitted Not applicable
Residential
zones
None permitted Not applicable
CO-1, CN-
1, MU,
RFC-G
Allowed as provisional uses Compliance with approval criteria listed below.
For RSAs serving alcohol, compliance with applicable
regulations for outdoor service areas in title 4, "Alcoholic
Beverages", of this code.
Maximum occupancy: 30, or the maximum occupancy for
the principal use, whichever is less.
Hours of operation limited to: 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. or
when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more restrictive.
CI-1, CC-
2, CH-1,
CB-2, CB-
5, RDP,
ORP
Allowed as provisional uses within the hours of operation and occupancy
limits stated in this table.
An RSA operating outside of the hours of operation or occupancy limits
set forth in this table may be allowed by special exception. However, if
located within 100 feet of a residential zone, no special exception is
allowed.
Compliance with approval criteria listed below.
For RSAs serving alcohol, compliance with applicable
regulations for outdoor service areas in title 4, "Alcoholic
Beverages", of this code.
Maximum occupancy: 30, or the maximum occupancy for
the principal use, whichever is less.
Hours of operation limited to: 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. or
when the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
For RSAs that require a special exception, compliance with
the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
section 14-4B-3 of this chapter.
RFC
zones,
except
RFC-G
If accessory to:
Hospitality oriented retail use: Allowed as a provisional use in
accordance with the hours of operation set forth in this table. An RSA
operating outside these hours may be allowed by special exception.
Commercial recreational use or eating establishment: Allowed as a
provisional use, provided the RSA has an occupancy limit of 30 people
or less and is in accordance with the hours of operation set forth in this
table. An RSA operating outside of these hours of operation or
occupancy limits may be allowed by special exception.
Drinking establishment or other principal use not listed above: Allowed
only by special exception.
Compliance with approval criteria listed below.
For RSAs that require a special exception, compliance with
the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
section 14-4B-3 of this chapter.
For RSAs serving alcohol, compliance with applicable
regulations for outdoor service areas in title 4, "Alcoholic
Beverages", of this code.
Hours of operation limited to:
10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. - Sunday - Thursday.
10:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight - Friday, Saturday, or when
the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
If located within 100 feet of a residential zone, the
maximum occupancy shall be 30 and the hours of
operation shall be limited to 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. daily
or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier. These
limits may not be exceeded by special exception.
CB-10 If accessory to:
Compliance with approval criteria listed below.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 438/715
Hospitality oriented retail use: Allowed as a provisional use.
Commercial recreational use or eating establishment: Allowed as a
provisional use, provided the RSA has an occupancy limit of 50 people
or less. A special exception is required for RSAs proposed to exceed this
occupancy limit.
Drinking establishments or other principal uses not listed above: Allowed
only by special exception.
For RSAs that require a special exception, compliance with
the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
section 14-4B-3 of this chapter.
For RSAs serving alcohol, compliance with applicable
regulations for outdoor service areas in title 4, "Alcoholic
Beverages", of this code.
If located within 100 feet of a residential zone, maximum
occupancy is 30 and hours of operation limited to 10:00
A.M. to 10:00 P.M. daily or when the kitchen is closed,
whichever is more restrictive. These limits may not be
exceeded by special exception.
1. Approval Criteria For Rooftop Service Areas:
a. Accessibility: The RSA shall meet all building and fire code requirements, be ADA compliant, include elevator service, and have accessible
restrooms provided.
b. Design: The RSA shall be designed in an attractive manner that will not detract from adjacent uses, and will prevent nuisance and safety issues.
The applicant shall submit a design plan with the application for an RSA that, at a minimum, specifies and illustrates the proposed size,
dimensions, setbacks from adjacent buildings and roof edges, occupancy load, layout, landscaping elements, access routes, elevator, and
accessible bathrooms. RSAs shall meet the following minimum standards. If a special exception is required, the board of adjustment may impose
additional or more restrictive conditions to mitigate any anticipated externalities, including, but not limited to, restrictions on hours of operation,
lighting, size, occupancy load, and setback and screening requirements.
(1) The RSA shall be located directly adjacent to or above the use to which it is accessory and there shall not be other uses located on floors in
between the RSA and the use to which it is accessory.
(2) The RSA must be set back from adjacent upper floor uses and the edge of the roof and screened and completely enclosed within a decorative
fence or wall built of high quality, durable materials. Landscaping elements, such as planters and green roofs, may be used to soften views or
provide a buffer. The setback and screening must be established in a manner that will not unduly block light, air, or outdoor views from upper
floor windows on abutting buildings.
(3) The RSA must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the street facing edge of the roof. A smaller buffer between the RSA and the roof
parapet or guardrail may be allowed, provided the buffer is determined to adequately address public safety. The buffer and screen wall shall be
of a sufficient depth and/or height and constructed of attractive, durable materials that may also include landscaping elements to prevent
persons from leaning or dropping things over the parapet or guardrail that encloses the terrace or rooftop. A design of the proposed buffer and
screen wall shall be submitted with the application.
(4) The lighting must comply with chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title. Except for any lighting required by the building
code, lights must be turned off when the RSA is not in operation. A lighting plan shall be submitted that illustrates compliance with these
standards.
(5) No signs shall be allowed in or on the exterior wall or fence of the RSA that are within public view, as defined in chapter 9, article A of this title.
c. Management:
(1) For RSAs that are also outdoor service areas, as defined in title 4 of this code, there must be an RSA management plan in place and at least
one employee must be designated to monitor the safety and compliance of the RSA during hours of operation. The proposed management plan
shall be submitted with the application. If nuisance or safety issues arise, the city may require immediate changes to the management plan
and/or the number of monitors to remedy the situation and reserves the right to suspend or revoke the RSA permit.
(2) In the CB-10 zone, where the building containing the RSA abuts or is directly across a public alley from a property containing upper floor
residential uses or hotel rooms that have windows facing the RSA, the hours of operation of the RSA are limited to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Friday and Saturday.
d. Food Service: If alcohol is being served, food service must be provided. Prior to approval of an RSA, the applicant must submit evidence indicating
how this requirement will be met.
e. Noise: The design of the RSA must minimize the carry of noise across property boundaries. Use of specialized screen wall materials, sound
deadening techniques, or similar, may be required. Evidence of such a noise mitigation plan must be included with an RSA application. In addition,
after an RSA is established, the city reserves the right to require additional measures to remedy any violation of the city's noise or nuisance
ordinance, as determined by the city.
f. Amplified Sound: Due to the potential nuisance to neighboring properties and the general public in the surrounding neighborhood, amplified sound
is only allowed for RSAs associated with hospitality oriented retail uses in the RFC-SD subdistrict and for RSAs in the CB-10 zone, subject to the
limitations set forth below. RSAs accessory to hospitality oriented retail uses are not required to obtain a temporary use permit, but must comply
with the city's noise and nuisance ordinance, and the standards stated below. Amplified sound is only allowed for an RSA in the CB-10 zone upon
receipt of a seasonal temporary use permit, unless it is accessory to a hospitality oriented use. Permits for amplified sound are subject to the
standards and restrictions set forth below and the general approval criteria for temporary uses as set forth in article D of this chapter. A temporary
use permit may be denied or rescinded at the discretion of the city if noise becomes a nuisance or terms of the temporary use permit or the special
exception conditions are violated.
(1) If an RSA is located within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zone, amplified sound is prohibited;
(2) The city may restrict the hours when amplified sound may be used. However, in no case shall amplified sound be permitted between the hours
of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.;
(3) No live entertainment using amplification shall be allowed;
(4) Amplified sound may be restricted or prohibited during public events, festivals or concerts;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 439/715
(5) The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the design of the RSA will minimize carry of noise across property
boundaries. Use of specialized screen wall materials, sound deadening techniques, control of volume, or similar may be required.
2. Additional Special Exception Approval Criteria For Nonconforming Drinking Establishments: An RSA accessory to a nonconforming drinking
establishment may be allowed by special exception provided it meets the general approval criteria for special exceptions set forth in section 14-4B-3
of this chapter, the approval criteria stated above for all RSAs and the additional approval criteria listed below:
a. The RSA shall be located directly above and contiguous to the licensed drinking establishment. Contiguous means there may not be other uses
located on floors in between the drinking establishment and the accessory RSA.
b. There shall be no horizontal expansion of the licensed drinking establishment;
c. There shall be no increase in interior floor area or interior occupant load of the existing drinking establishment, except if necessary for required
bathrooms, elevator, stairs, kitchen equipment, or other essential elements necessary to meet accessibility, building code requirements or to meet
the requirements or conditions of the special exception. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015)
14-4C-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following development standards help to ensure that accessory structures and buildings remain secondary to the principal uses and buildings on a
site. The standards provide for necessary access around structures, help maintain privacy to abutting lots, and maintain open front setback areas. In
addition to any requirements in the base zone and any specific approval criteria in section 14-4C-2 of this article, accessory structures are subject to the
following requirements:
A. Time Of Construction: Accessory structures may not be constructed prior to the start of construction of the principal building on a site; except, that
temporary construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site clearance and grading begins and may remain on the site only for the duration
of construction.
B. Setbacks:
1. Accessory Structures Other Than Buildings: Allowed accessory structures, other than buildings, may be located anywhere on a lot, provided the
structure complies with any specific setback standards listed in section 14-4C-2 of this article, and provided that on corner lots, such a structure is
located in compliance with the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
2. Detached Accessory Buildings:
a. Corner Lot Setback Requirements: On corner lots, detached accessory buildings must be located in compliance with the provisions of chapter 5,
article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
b. Front Setback Requirements:
(1) Except for roadside stands, detached accessory buildings must comply with the principal building, front setback requirements of the base zone
in which the building is located. Roadside stands, when allowed, are exempt from this requirement. In addition, garages and carports must
comply with subsections B2b(2) and B2b(3) of this section.
(2) Garages and carports must be located pursuant to the site development standards of the applicable base zone.
(3) For single-family and two-family uses, a garage or carport must be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from any street-side lot line that the
garage or carport entrance faces. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
c. Side And Rear Setback Requirements:
(1) Residential Zones:
(A) Along street-side lot lines, accessory buildings must comply with the front, principal building setback requirement. Along side or rear lot lines
that are not street-side lot lines, accessory buildings must be set back at least five feet (5') from the side or rear lot line. This five foot (5') setback
requirement may be reduced if an accessory building is set back at least sixty feet (60') from the edge of the street pavement. In such cases, the
building may be located within three feet (3') of a side or rear property line. However, garages and carports entered directly from an alley must
be set back at least five feet (5') from the alley right-of-way line, regardless of how far back the structure is from the street.
(B) A detached accessory building for a zero lot line dwelling must comply with the same side setback requirements as the principal dwelling.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
(2) Nonresidential Zones: Along street-side lot lines, accessory buildings must comply with the front, principal building setback requirement. Along
side or rear lot lines that are not street-side lot lines, detached accessory buildings do not have a required side or rear setback, unless the
detached building is a parking garage that is accessed from an alley. In such a case, the garage must be set back at least five feet (5') from the
alley right-of-way line.
3. Attached Accessory Buildings:
a. An attached accessory building must comply with the setback requirements applicable to the principal building to which it is attached. In addition,
attached garages and carports must comply with subsections B3b and B3c of this section.
b. Attached garages and carports must be located pursuant to the site development standards of the base zone.
c. For single-family and two-family uses, a garage or carport must be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from any street-side lot line that the
garage or carport entrance faces. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
d. For purposes of determining setbacks, garages located in the rear yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a (non-habitable) breezeway (8
feet or narrower in width) will be considered detached accessory buildings and, therefore, are subject to the setback requirements for detached
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 440/715
accessory buildings, rather than principal building setback requirements. Similarly, subject breezeways shall be treated as detached accessory
structures/buildings. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
4. Adjustments To Setback Requirements:
a. A minor modification to reduce setback requirements for an accessory use, building, or structure may be requested according to the approval
criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
b. A special exception may be requested to reduce setback requirements for an accessory use, building, or structure beyond what is allowed by
minor modification. The Board of Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that the
general special exception approval criteria and the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
(1) The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
(2) There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback requirements;
(3) Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of the setback regulations; and
(4) Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
(5) The accessory use, building or structure will be located no closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear
property line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
C. Building Separation And Lot Coverage:
1. In residential zones, the combined footprint of all detached accessory buildings may not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area. The area
of any outdoor special vehicle storage area must also be included as a part of this fifteen percent (15%) lot coverage limitation.
2. No portion of a detached accessory building may be located closer than three feet (3') to the principal building.
3. There must be at least three feet (3') between all unattached accessory buildings.
D. Height:
1. In residential zones, one story accessory buildings and structures, except for those specifically exempted, may not exceed a height of fifteen feet
(15'). One and one-half (11/2) story and two (2) story accessory buildings may not exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
2. In nonresidential zones, accessory buildings and structures, except for those specifically exempted, may not exceed the maximum height standard
of the base zone in which the structure is located.
3. Structures and building features that are exempt from the maximum height standards of the base zone are also exempt from the applicable height
standards listed in subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
4. A minor modification may be requested adjusting the maximum height for an accessory building according to the procedures and approval criteria for
minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. TEMPORARY USES
14-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the temporary use regulations is to allow short term and minor deviations from the requirements of this title for uses which are truly
temporary in nature, will not adversely impact the surrounding area and land uses, and which can be terminated and removed immediately. Temporary
activities are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses
have no inherent rights within the zone in which they locate. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4D-2: TEMPORARY USES ALLOWED:
The following temporary principal and accessory uses are allowed, subject to approval by the building official through the temporary use permit process
described in this article and any conditions specified herein:
Christmas tree sales lots; however, a permit is not required when such sales are in conjunction with an established commercial business, provided such
activity occurs only from November 1 through December 31.
Circuses, rodeos and carnivals.
Construction activities pursuant to a valid building permit that temporarily violate the performance standards contained in chapter 5, article H of this title.
Fairs, festivals and concerts, when not held within premises designed to accommodate these types of events, such as auditoriums, stadiums, or other
public assembly facilities.
Football game day commercial use.
Halloween haunted houses for fifteen (15) to forty five (45) days, one event per year.
On and off site contractors' construction yards in conjunction with an approved development project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 441/715
Outdoor display and sale of first-class and/or second-class consumer fireworks, as defined by the American Pyrotechnics Association, according to the
restrictions and dates of sale set forth in title 661 Iowa Administrative Code chapter 265, Consumer Fireworks Sales Licensing and Safety Standards.
Outdoor display and sales of such fireworks are only allowed in industrial zones.
Outdoor display and sales of merchandise within commercial districts, including merchandise customarily sold on the premises by a permanently
established business.
"Outdoor service area", as defined in title 4 of this Code, operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment that is a nonconforming eating
establishment, an eating establishment allowed pursuant to a Residential Planned Development Overlay Zone, or an eating establishment located in the
Mixed Use Zone.
Real estate sales centers and model homes, provided the center or use of a home as a model is discontinued when the number of dwelling units
remaining to be sold is less than ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units approved for the development or five (5) units, whichever is less.
Employees at the approved real estate center are limited to the minimum number necessary to show and sell the dwelling units within the same
development. The hours of operation are limited to the hours between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Seasonal permit for any proposed amplified sound for rooftop service areas (RSAs) located in the Central Business District (CB-10), subject to the
standards and restrictions set forth in subsection 14-4C-2AA, "Rooftop Service Areas (RSAs)", of this chapter, and any other conditions deemed
appropriate by the City to ensure the general comfort, welfare and safety of the public.
Seasonal permit for limited use of amplified background music in outdoor service areas associated with eating or drinking establishments located in the
Riverfront Crossings - South Gilbert (RFC-SG) or Riverfront Crossings - West Riverfront (RFC-WR) Zones, according to the approval criteria set forth in
section 14-4D-4 of this article and any associated conditions deemed appropriate by the City to advance the purpose of the approval criteria.
Temporary auto sales lots.
Temporary parking areas in conjunction with a permitted use.
Other temporary uses which, in the determination of the building official, are compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005; amd. Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011; Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; Ord. 17-4694, 3-7-2017; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
14-4D-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A temporary use permit is required for all temporary uses listed in section 14-4D-2 of this article, unless specifically exempted. Tailgating and tailgate
parking held on home Iowa football game days do not require a temporary use permit. Procedures for obtaining a permit are contained in chapter 8, article
B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011)
14-4D-4: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A temporary use permit will be approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the building official within ten (10) business days after submittal of a
complete application. A temporary use must meet the following approval criteria:
A. The proposed use is temporary or seasonal in nature and will not continue for more than the time period specified in the application. Except for
temporary uses specifically approved for longer periods, such as model homes or real estate sales offices, temporary uses must not continue for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days for outdoor temporary uses or one year for temporary uses within a building;
B. The proposed temporary use will not necessitate permanent improvements to the site;
C. The site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of the proposed use;
D. The proposed temporary use is compatible with the land uses presently on the site and with existing land uses in the general area;
E. There is adequate provision for public and private utilities and services to ensure that the proposed temporary use will not be detrimental to public
health and safety;
F. There is adequate provision for public and emergency access to serve the proposed temporary use; and
G. Any impacts of the proposed temporary use are mitigated. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
H. Football game day commercial use:
1. Display Permit: Vendors must prominently display the permit and it must be clearly viewable from the public right-of-way.
2. Assignment And Use By Others: A vendor may not assign its space/permit to any other vendors.
3. Location: Vendors are only allowed to locate along the Melrose Avenue street frontage between the Iowa Interstate Railway right-of-way and
Melrose Circle.
4. Setup/Teardown: Vendors are not allowed to set up before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the day before game day and must tear down/remove all
equipment and materials after each game.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 442/715
5. Cleanup Responsibility: All vendors must keep any area where they vend litter free and shall remove litter from any adjacent public property/right-ofway.
Vendors shall provide a trash container with unfilled capacity at all times. Vendors with liquid waste (oil, grease, gray water, etc.) must provide
disposal units for the waste. Commercial liquid waste shall not be placed in gutters, port-a-johns or on the ground.
6. No Blocking Of Sidewalk/Right-Of-Way: No vendor shall block or obstruct the free movement of pedestrians or vehicles on a sidewalk, street, or
other public right-of-way. Tents/stands must be set back at least two feet (2') from the back edge of public sidewalks.
7. Signage: Vendor signage is only allowed on the vendor's stand/vehicle/tent and is not allowed on utility poles across the public sidewalk, on
buildings or as yard signs. No electrically lit signs will be allowed.
8. Sales Tax Permit: Each vendor whose sales are subject to sales tax must provide a copy of their sales tax permit.
9. Insurance/Indemnification: All vendors must provide to the city evidence of comprehensive general liability insurance of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate and must indemnify the city against all damages that may
result from the vendor's permitted temporary commercial use and/or the vendor's use of the public right of way.
10. Fire Extinguishers: All vendors must provide at least one 5-pound, 2A 10 BC extinguisher that is functional and accessible at all times.
11. Health Permits: All food vendors must secure necessary health permits from the Johnson County department of health and prominently display the
permit so it is clearly viewable from the public right of way.
12. Cooking Tents: All tents used for cooking (regardless of size) must be approved by the fire code/building official. Cooking tents will be required to
be separated from other tents, parked vehicles and lot lines. LP containers exceeding ninety six (96) pounds require approval from the fire
code/building official.
13. Tent Size: All tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet shall not be erected or operated for any
purpose without first obtaining approval from the fire code/building official.
14. Alcohol: No alcohol is allowed to be sold, dispensed or otherwise made available to the public in conjunction with any temporary commercial use.
15. Utility Location: Any tents and membrane structures using stakes or similar ground attachments must call the city for utility location at least twenty
four (24) hours before setup. Vendors must comply with "One Call" utility location requirements.
16. Violation Of These Provisions: Any violation of the temporary use permit conditions will result in a civil citation and loss of the temporary
commercial use permit for a minimum of seven (7) home games. The city also reserves the right to deny a temporary use permit for the same
location for a minimum of seven (7) home games. (Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011)
I. Where an outdoor service area is allowed only as a temporary use pursuant to this article, a temporary use permit may be granted upon satisfaction of
the following additional approval criteria:
1. The outdoor service area is operated in conjunction with a "restaurant" as defined in title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of this code.
2. The outdoor service area shall only be operational while the establishment is serving food from an on premises kitchen and the outdoor service area
must be closed to all patrons by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
3. The outdoor service area occupancy limit shall not exceed thirty (30) persons.
4. A lighting plan for the outdoor service shall be filed with the application and approved by the building official.
5. The outdoor service area is located on the street facing side of the building, or in an enclosed courtyard.
6. Conformance with all other criteria in title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of this code. (Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014)
J. Where amplified sound is allowed in an outdoor service area as a temporary use pursuant to section 14-4D-2 of this article, a temporary use permit may
be granted upon satisfaction of the following additional approval criteria and shall be operated accordingly:
1. Amplified sound is only allowed if the outdoor service area is located more than three hundred feet (300') from any residential zone.
2. Amplified sound shall be limited to background music intended to enhance the outdoor dining experience associated with an eating or drinking
establishment and therefore should be kept at a low volume that will not inhibit normal conversation within the outdoor service area and will minimize
carry to areas outside the outdoor service area.
3. Amplified background music is only allowed if the outdoor service area is located more than one hundred feet (100') from any other outdoor service
area, unless it can be demonstrated that the amplified sound from the outdoor service area is not audible within the other outdoor service area.
4. The city may restrict the hours when amplified sound may be used. However, in no case shall amplified sound be permitted between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
5. Amplified sound may be restricted or prohibited during public events, festivals or concerts.
6. The applicant must submit a sound mitigation plan in accordance with subsection 4-3-1C5 of this code.
7. Live entertainment, movies, DJs, or presentations using amplification are not allowed under this permit. A separate temporary use permit is required
for these types of special events. (Ord. 17-4694, 3-7-2017)
14-4D-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the building official may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the
permit will be in accordance with the approval criteria required by this article and to satisfy public needs directly caused by the proposed temporary use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 443/715
These conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of such temporary event or use, and may include, but are not limited to: (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
A. Provision for a fixed period of time, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days, for a temporary use not occupying a structure, including
promotional activities; or one year for outdoor service areas, all other uses, and structures; or for a shorter period of time as determined by the building
official; (Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014)
B. Provision for temporary parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress and appropriate circulation. Parking required for temporary and
principal commercial uses may be reduced up to ten percent (10%) if sufficient evidence is presented that parking will be adequate to meet the demand
for the proposed temporary use and any permanent uses on the site;
C. Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, prevention of glare, light trespass, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, or heat
that create a nuisance or safety hazard for neighboring properties;
D. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas
and other yards;
E. Provision for sanitary and medical facilities;
F. Provision for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection and disposal;
G. Provision for security and safety measures;
H. Provision for regulation of signs;
I. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use;
J. Submission of a performance bond or other surety device to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a
reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition;
K. A requirement that the approval of the requested temporary use permit is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of the federal, state
and city codes; and
L. Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the intent
and purpose of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
14-4E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming situations. Nonconforming situations are created when the zoning designation is changed or the
zoning regulations are changed such that an existing lawfully established use, structure, lot, or development no longer complies with the zoning
regulations. The intent of these regulations is not to force all nonconforming situations to be immediately brought into conformance. Rather, the intent is to
guide future uses and development in a direction consistent with City policy, to protect the character of an area by reducing the potential negative impacts
from nonconforming situations, and, over time, to bring development into compliance with the City's regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-2: TYPES OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
A. Nonconforming Use: A "nonconforming use" is a use that, when established, was a permitted use, was allowed as a provisional use, or was approved
as a special exception, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer allowed. This
definition includes residential uses that exceed the allowable residential density of a zone (minimum lot area per unit requirements) and uses that
exceed the maximum floor area ratio or maximum floor area standards specified for a particular use or zone.
B. Nonconforming Structure: A "nonconforming structure" is a structure or portion of a structure that was established in conformance with the setback,
building height, building width, lot coverage standards, or other requirements or standards of the Zoning Code that relate to the design of the building or
structure, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in conformance with one or
more of these standards.
C. Nonconforming Development: "Nonconforming development" is an element of a development, such as a parking area, a loading area, outdoor lighting,
landscaping, screening, or signage, that was established in conformance with the Zoning Code, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or
to the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 444/715
D. Nonconforming Lot: A "nonconforming lot" is a lot of record that was established in conformance with the minimum lot area, width, and frontage
requirement of the Zoning Code, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in
conformance with one or more of these requirements. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Continuation Of Nonconforming Situations: Legal nonconforming situations are allowed to continue in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Continuance Of Unlawful Uses: Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as authorization for the continuance of the use of a structure or land
established unlawfully in violation of the regulations in effect at the time that the use or structure was established.
C. Determination Of Nonconforming Status: The burden of establishing that a nonconforming situation is a legal nonconforming situation rests solely upon
the owner of such nonconformity.
D. Repairs And Maintenance: Incidental repairs and routine maintenance of a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure is permitted unless such
repairs increase the extent of nonconformity or are otherwise expressly prohibited by provisions of this title. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prevent structures from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance with an official order of a public official. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-4: NONCONFORMING SINGLE-FAMILY USES:
Except with regard to the occupancy, any single-family use, structure for a single-family use, including any accessory structures, and any lot on which a
single-family use is located, that was established lawfully prior to the establishment of the currently applicable development regulations and, due to a
change in the regulations, is no longer in conformance with the provisions of this title, will generally be treated as conforming for as long as the dwelling is
used for a single-family use. Accordingly, the following rights are granted under this article:
A. A nonconforming single-family use may be reestablished and its structure reconstructed if the structure for the nonconforming single-family use is
destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy.
B. A nonconforming single-family use may also be expanded, repaired and structurally altered, provided such expansion or alteration does not increase or
extend any other nonconforming situation on the property. However, if a nonconforming single-family use is changed in order to increase the
occupancy beyond that of a family or group household, the property must be brought into full compliance with the number of required off street parking
spaces.
C. A nonconforming structure that contains a single-family use may be restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by
fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy. Such a structure may also be repaired or structurally altered, provided such construction does not
increase or extend the degree of nonconformity and does not increase or extend any other nonconforming situation on the property.
D. A nonconforming accessory structure to a single-family use may be restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by
fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy. Such a structure may also be repaired and structurally altered, provided such construction does not
increase or extend the degree of nonconformity and does not increase or extend any other nonconforming situation on the property.
E. A nonconforming lot that contains a single-family use is granted the same rights as listed in subsections A, B and C of this section, and will be treated
as if the lot were conforming. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-5: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, nonconforming uses shall be regulated as follows: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
A. Enlargement Or Alteration:
1. A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, except as set forth in this section. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015)
2. A structure that contains or is accessory to a nonconforming use shall not be constructed or altered in such a way as to enlarge the nonconforming
use.
3. Ordinary repair, maintenance, and remodeling are allowed as long as the nonconforming use is not enlarged. For purposes of this provision,
changes made to provide safe access to a building for persons with disabilities is not considered an enlargement.
B. Change Of Use:
1. A nonconforming use may be converted only to another use in the same use category and subgroup or to a conforming use, except as provided in
subsection B2 of this section.
2. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a nonconforming use, which is located in a structure not designed for a use allowed
in the zone, to be converted to a nonconforming use in a different use category or subgroup that is the same or lesser in intensity than the existing
use, provided the following conditions are met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 445/715
a. The proposed use will be located in a structure that was designed for a use that is currently not allowed in the zone, for example a storefront
commercial building located in a single-family residential zone.
b. The proposed use is of the same or lesser level of intensity and impact than the existing use. The Board of Adjustment will make a determination
regarding the relative intensity of the proposed use by weighing evidence presented by the applicant with regard to such factors as anticipated
traffic generation, parking demand, hours of operation, residential occupancy, noise, dust, and customer and/or resident activity. The Board of
Adjustment may also consider qualitative factors such as whether a proposed use will serve an identified need in the surrounding neighborhood.
c. The proposed use is suitable for the subject structure and site.
d. The structure will not be structurally altered or enlarged in such a way as to enlarge the nonconforming use. Ordinary repair and maintenance and
installation or relocation of walls, partitions, fixtures, wiring, and plumbing is allowed, as long as the use is not enlarged.
3. Once a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, it may not be converted back to a nonconforming use.
4. Once a nonconforming use is converted to a less intensive nonconforming use in accordance with subsection B2 of this section, it may not be
converted back to the prior nonconforming use.
5. A use is deemed "converted" when an existing nonconforming use is terminated and a new use commences and continues for a period of seven (7)
consecutive days. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C. Occupancy Of A Nonconforming Use: (Rep. by Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
D. Accessory Uses:
1. A nonconforming use is permitted to have the same amount and type of signage as would be allowed for such a use in the most restrictive zone in
which the use is allowed.
2. No use, including parking and signage, that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after the principal use has ceased or been
terminated unless the accessory use thereafter conforms to all provisions of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Damage Or Destruction:
1. Any structure for a nonconforming use which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of
less than seventy five percent (75%) of the assessed value of the structure at the time of damage or destruction, may be restored for the same
nonconforming use as existed before such damage. However, the nonconforming use must not be enlarged to more than what existed before such
damage occurred. Any such restoration must be completed within two (2) years of the date the structure was destroyed or damaged; otherwise, the
property must revert to a conforming use.
2. A lot or portion of a lot upon which is located a structure for a nonconforming use, or other unpermitted use, that has been previously established
and in existence for over twenty five (25) years that has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent
of seventy five percent (75%) or more of the assessed value of the structure at the time of damage or destruction, must revert to a conforming use,
unless a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment according to the provisions of subsection E4 of this section. The provisions for a
special exception as outlined in subsection E4 of this section shall not apply or be available to a nonconforming or illegal residential occupancy.
3. For purposes of this subsection, the extent of the damage will be determined by the building official based on credible evidence provided by the
property owner.
4. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for uses detailed in subsection E2 of this section provided the following conditions are met:
a. An application for the special exception to restore the use must be filed with the City within one year of the date the structure was destroyed or
damaged; and
b. The restored structure for the use may be redesigned or located on the property in order to increase the compatibility with surrounding uses, but
neither the structure nor use may be enlarged beyond what existed before such damage or destruction occurred; and
c. Prior to the damage or destruction, the intensity of the use and the activities, operations, buildings and other aspects of the use were generally
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; and
d. The proposal for the restored use will be equally or more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood as was the use prior to the damage or
destruction. The Board of Adjustment may consider such factors as traffic generation, parking, hours of operation, noise, dust, aesthetics,
screening, amount of customer traffic; number of employees, residents, or occupants of a building or business; and any other factors that relate to
the compatibility of the nonconforming or previously established use with the surrounding neighborhood and uses; and
e. Once restored/rebuilt, the nonconforming or previously established unpermitted use will retain or be conferred nonconforming status. The Board of
Adjustment may impose additional conditions such that the conference of nonconforming status is limited. (Ord. 13-4542, 8-20-2013)
F. Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: Except as allowed in subsection E of this section, a nonconforming use that is discontinued for a period of one
year must revert to a conforming use or, in qualifying situations, a special exception may be applied for according to the provisions of subsection B of
this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G. Nonconforming Drinking Establishments And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail Uses: In addition to the other provisions in this section, the following
provisions apply to nonconforming drinking establishments and nonconforming alcohol sales oriented retail uses:
1. Any "drinking establishment", as defined in this title, that was legally established prior to the effective date hereof and that is nonconforming with
regard to the separation requirement between said uses, as specified in this title, may continue unless one or both of the following situations occur. If
one or both of these conditions occur, then nonconforming rights cease and the use must convert to a conforming use:
a. The liquor license lapses, is revoked or is discontinued for a period of one year; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 446/715
b. There are changes to the use such that the use no longer meets the definition of "drinking establishment".
2. Any "alcohol sales oriented retail use", as defined in this title, that was legally established prior to the effective date hereof that is nonconforming with
regard to the separation requirement between said uses, as specified in this title, may continue unless one or both of the following situations occur. If
one or both of these conditions occur, then nonconforming rights cease and the use must convert to a conforming use:
a. The liquor license lapses, is revoked or is discontinued for a period of one year; or
b. There are changes to the use such that the use no longer meets the definition of "alcohol sales oriented retail use".
3. For purposes of this subsection, sidewalk cafes shall not be considered an expansion of a nonconforming use. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009)
4. Nonconforming drinking establishments may expand to include a rooftop service area upon approval of a special exception pursuant to the criteria
set forth in article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter. (Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015)
14-4E-6: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Enlargement Or Alteration:
1. A nonconforming structure may be structurally altered or enlarged, provided it is structurally altered or enlarged in a way that will not increase or
extend its nonconformity.
2. Any nonconforming structure that is relocated on the same lot must thereafter conform to the applicable setback, building height, building width, and
lot coverage standards.
B. Change Of Use:
1. Any nonconforming structure containing a conforming use may be converted to another conforming use, provided the conversion does not result in
an increase in the degree of nonconformity of the structure.
2. Any nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use may only be converted to another use in accordance with the provisions of section 14-
4E-5, "Regulation Of Nonconforming Uses", of this article, and provided the conversion does not result in an increase in the degree of nonconformity
of the structure. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C. Damage Or Destruction:
1. Any nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the assessed value of the structure, may be restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less. Any such
restoration must be completed within two (2) years of the date the structure was destroyed or damaged; otherwise the structure may not be restored,
except in compliance with the provisions of this title.
2. Except for designated historic landmarks or key or contributing structures in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, a nonconforming structure that
has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or more of the
assessed value of the structure, may not be restored except in compliance with the provisions of this title.
3. A nonconforming structure that is a designated historic landmark or a key or contributing structure in a historic preservation or conservation district
overlay zone may be reconstructed upon its original foundation or the site of the original foundation regardless of the extent of the damages,
provided it is reconstructed as nearly as possible to the original exterior design. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation
commission is required prior to commencing reconstruction.
4. For purposes of this subsection, the extent of the damage will be determined by the building official based on credible evidence provided by the
property owner. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-4E-7: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A. Any conforming use or structure for a conforming use may be established or installed on a lot of record that is nonconforming with regard to lot frontage
or lot width, provided the minimum lot area required for the use is met, and provided the use or structure meets all other requirements of this title.
B. Any use or structure for a use, either one of which requires more lot area than presently exists, is prohibited, except as provided in subsection C of this
section.
C. In any zone in which single-family uses are permitted, a single-family use and accessory structures may be established on any lot of record,
notwithstanding failure to meet the minimum lot area requirement of the zone in which the lot is located.
D. All existing conforming and nonconforming uses and structures located on a nonconforming lot will be treated as if such uses and structures were
established on a conforming lot. However, no use or structure for a use, either one of which requires more lot area than presently exists and the
structure of which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or
more of the assessed value of the structure, shall be restored, except in compliance with the provisions of this title.
E. If two (2) or more abutting lots (or portions thereof), one or more of which are nonconforming, become in single ownership, the land involved shall be
deemed a single parcel for the purposes of this article, and no portion of said parcel shall be sold or used in a manner which diminishes compliance
with lot frontage, width and area requirements, except as allowed in subsection F of this section by special exception.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 447/715
F. In cases where two (2) or more abutting lots of record have become in single ownership and are deemed a single parcel as set forth in subsection E of
this section, the board of adjustment may grant a special exception to reestablish a lot of record previously combined with an adjacent lot in order to
allow a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings to be installed on said lot, notwithstanding a failure to meet the requirements of the zone for lot
area or lot width, provided the following conditions are met:
1. Granting of the requested exception results in appropriate, compatible development with surrounding residential development;
2. The dwelling must be located on a lot of record that is at least forty feet (40') in width; and
3. The request meets all other standards and requirements of this title, including setback and frontage requirements. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-8: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT:
A. General Provisions:
1. Conversion: Except as otherwise restricted, prohibited or allowed in this article, a use or structure located on a lot that contains nonconforming
development may be converted to a different use or altered, provided such change in use or alteration does not increase or extend the nonconformity
and provided the applicable compliance standards listed in this section are met. (Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
2. Alterations: When structural alterations are made to a building or buildings on a property that contains nonconforming development, and said
structural alterations result in an increase in the occupancy load of a building or increase the number of bedrooms, number of dwelling units, or
otherwise increase the allowable residential occupancy of a building, the site must be brought into conformance with the development standards
listed in subsection A2b of this section, up to the cap stated in subsection A2c of this section. Certain structural alterations are exempt from the
requirements of this paragraph as listed in subsection A2a of this section.
a. Exemptions: Improvements for fire, life safety and accessibility shall not trigger a requirement to bring nonconforming development into
compliance.
b. Standards That Must Be Met: Development not in compliance with the development standards listed below must be brought into conformance or
be granted a minor modification. Requirements or standards that would not be feasible or practical or would unduly reduce the ability to use or
reuse the property due to topography, location of existing buildings, or other site constraints, may be modified or waived by minor modification. The
city, at its discretion, may also waive or modify by minor modification any standards that cannot be met due to a conflict with any other requirement
of this title.
(1) Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas, and outdoor storage and display areas along street side lot lines according to the
applicable screening standard. Setback requirements may be modified to address site constraints;
(2) Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas, and outdoor storage and display areas from the Iowa River or from any parks and
open space use, including trails, according to the applicable screening standard. Setback requirements may be modified to address site
constraints;
(3) Outdoor lighting standards;
(4) Bicycle parking requirements;
(5) Street and residential tree requirements;
(6) Design, layout, landscaping, and tree requirements within parking areas;
(7) Pedestrian circulation standards;
(8) Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas, and outdoor storage and display areas along side or rear lot lines. Setback
requirements may be modified to address site constraints;
(9) Access management standards.
c. Cap On The Cost Of Compliance: The standards listed in subsection A2b of this section must be met for the entire site. However, where the cost
of compliance with the standards enumerated in subsection A2b of this section exceeds ten percent (10%) of the value of the applicable structural
alterations, the site shall be brought into compliance with all site development standards up to this ten percent (10%) cap. The value of the
alterations is based on the entire project, not individual building permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to document that the cost of the
required site development improvements will be greater than ten percent (10%) of the value of the proposed structural alterations to the building or
buildings on the site. If not all site improvements are being made, due to the cost exceeding the cap, the extent and location of the site
improvements below the cap will be determined by the city and shall generally follow the order of priority listed in subsection A2b of this section.
However, at the discretion of the city, the order of priorities may be adjusted in response to specific site characteristics and traffic safety concerns
in order to maximize the benefits of site improvements for site users, adjacent properties, and the public.
3. Damaged, Demolished Or Destroyed Site:
a. Restoration of a structure, which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy shall not trigger a requirement to bring
nonconforming development into compliance.
b. When a use is proposed for a property where the principal building(s) have been demolished or destroyed, but that contains nonconforming
development, such as parking lot paving, exterior lighting, signage, etc., the property must be brought into compliance with all applicable site
development standards as set forth in the base zone and in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 13-4519, 4-9-2013)
4. New Site Development On Sites With Nonconforming Site Development: Any new site elements being constructed or established on the site, such
as new exterior lighting, new parking areas, new outdoor storage or display areas, new signage, etc., must comply with current applicable standards.
5. Reconstruction Or Reestablishment Of Site Development: Any nonconforming site elements that are being reconstructed or reestablished must be
brought into compliance with the current applicable standards. However, requirements or standards that would not be feasible or practical or would
unduly reduce the ability to use or reuse the property due to topography, location of existing buildings, or other site constraints may be modified or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 448/715
waived by minor modification. The city may also waive or modify by minor modification any standard that cannot be met due to a conflict with any
other requirement of this title.
B. Nonconformities With Regard To The Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces:
1. If a nonresidential use, which is nonconforming with regard to the required number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces, is modified, expanded or
enlarged such that there is an increase in the number of required spaces over the existing situation, only the number of spaces relating to the
modification, expansion or enlargement need to be provided. These spaces are in addition to any spaces already in existence on the site.
2. If a residential use, which is nonconforming with regard to the required number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces, is changed in any way such
that there is an increase in the number of required spaces over the existing situation, the property must be brought into full compliance with the
number of spaces required.
3. A use that is nonconforming with regard to the required number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces may be converted to a use in another use
category or subgroup without full compliance with the number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces, according to the following rules:
a. If the number of required spaces for the converted use is more than what was required for the established use, only the number of spaces beyond
what was required for the established use need to be provided. These spaces are in addition to any spaces already in existence on the site.
b. In addition to any additional spaces required in subsection B3a of this section, as many spaces as the lot will accommodate must be provided, up
to the number needed to fully comply with the standard.
C. Nonconforming Signs: It is the intent of these provisions that nonconforming signs be eliminated over time as set forth below:
1. All lawfully established signs that become nonconforming due to a change in zoning or a change in the development regulations are permitted to
remain as nonconforming signs.
2. The owner of a nonconforming sign is required to maintain the sign in such a manner as to avoid it becoming a hazardous sign.
3. Other than for routine maintenance, if a nonconforming sign is changed or altered in any way it must be brought into compliance with the provisions
of chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title with the following exceptions:
a. Nonconforming signs that are deemed historic, signs for a historic structure and signs on structures in a historic preservation overlay zone may
qualify for a special exception as described in subsection C4 of this section.
b. On signs located within one thousand feet (1,000') of an interstate highway that are legally nonconforming with regard to sign area or height
limitations, the existing sign face may be changed or replaced, provided the sign meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The sign is located on property that is zoned commercial;
(2) The sign is not a "hazardous sign", as defined in this title; and
(3) If the sign is located in an area subject to regulation due to its proximity to the Iowa City Municipal Airport, a determination of "no hazard to air
navigation" has been received from the FAA.
4. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow changes to a nonconforming sign, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The sign must be located on a property designated as a historic landmark, a property registered on the national register of historic places, or on a
property listed as a key or contributing property in a historic preservation or historic conservation overlay zone.
b. The sign must fall into one of the following categories:
(1) The sign is in keeping with the architectural character of a historic structure and is appropriate to a particular period in the structure's history; or
(2) The sign is an integral part of a property's historic identity; or
(3) The sign makes a significant artistic or historic contribution to the community or neighborhood in which the sign is located.
c. At the time of application for the special exception, changes to the subject sign must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission
through a certificate of appropriateness. If the Board of Adjustment grants a special exception for the sign, any subsequent changes to the sign do
not have to be approved by the Board of Adjustment, but do require a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
d. If the sign is not maintained according to the provisions of chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title and becomes hazardous, the City
may request that the Board of Adjustment revoke the special exception.
5. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow repair or reconstruction of a nonconforming sign that has been damaged or
destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy if the following approval criteria are met:
a. In order to qualify for this exception, the sign must fall into at least one of the following categories:
(1) The subject sign is an integral part of the historic identity of a property or use designated as a historic landmark, a property registered on the
National Register of Historic Places, or of a property listed as a key or contributing property in a Historic District or Conservation District Overlay
Zone; or
(2) The sign is an integral part of a property's historic identity such that it is generally recognized and associated with a longstanding business or
institution and makes a significant artistic, cultural, or nostalgic contribution to the community or neighborhood.
b. The sign must be reconstructed as nearly as possible to its historic design or to the design that is generally recognized and associated with the
longstanding business or institution such that it continues to make a significant artistic, cultural or nostalgic contribution to the community or
neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 449/715
c. The sign must be reconstructed such that it is not a hazardous sign. The sign must be located in a manner that complies with chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The board may require changes to the sign, to its structure or mounting, or its location in order to
improve public safety. If the sign is not maintained according to the provision of chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title and becomes
hazardous, the City may request that the Board of Adjustment revoke the special exception.
d. If the sign is located on a property designated as a historic landmark, a property registered on the National Register of Historic Places, or a
property listed as a key or contributing property in a Historic District or Conservation District Overlay Zone, the subject sign must be approved by
the Historic Preservation Commission and issued a certificate of appropriateness. If the Board of Adjustment grants a special exception for the
sign, any subsequent changes to the sign do not have to be approved by the Board of Adjustment, but do require a certificate of appropriateness
from the Historic Preservation Commission.
D. Nonconforming Outdoor Lighting:
1. Any existing light fixture that is nonconforming with regard to how the fixture is aimed must be brought immediately into compliance if it is possible to
re-aim the existing fixture.
2. Upon repair, replacement, or relocation of any luminaire, such luminaire must comply with any applicable requirement that it be fully shielded. (Ord.
12-4472, 4-3-2012)
Chapter 5
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
ARTICLE A. OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
14-5A-1: APPLICABILITY:
Unless specifically exempted or superseded by other provisions of this title, the regulations of this article apply to all parking spaces, stacking spaces,
aisles, and drives in all zones, whether required by this code or put in for the convenience of property owners or users. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5A-2: USE AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. The use of required off street parking is reserved for vehicle parking. Other uses of a required parking area are not permitted, except as approved for a
temporary use. (See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
B. Unless otherwise exempted, motor vehicles must be parked on an improved surface, as specified in this article.
C. The storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, refuse containers, obsolete or junk vehicles or the major repair of vehicles in required off street
parking and stacking spaces is prohibited.
D. Except for the purpose of making local deliveries, vehicles designed for the shipment of detonable or flammable solids, liquids or gases may not be
parked or stored in any residential zone.
E. Commercial vehicles more than seven and one-half feet (71/2') in height may not be stored in any residential zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5A-3: MAXIMUM PARKING ALLOWED:
A. Purpose: Certain areas and zones of the city are subject to a limit on the amount of parking provided due to a desire to foster compact, pedestrian
oriented areas close to the downtown, the university, and in neighborhood commercial areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods. The maximum
parking standards are a tool to prevent the development of excess parking capacity on a site. Limiting the amount of land devoted to parking will make
additional land available for building area, open space, pedestrian amenities, and other productive uses and will reduce stormwater runoff and protect
water quality by limiting the amount of impervious surface on a site. To further that goal, off street parking in the central business district is generally
provided in municipally owned parking facilities, rather than in private surface lots or structures. Providing conveniently located public parking facilities
reserves land in the downtown for more intensive commercial and civic uses and prevents large surface parking lots from damaging the pedestrian
friendly character of the central business district.
B. CN-1 Zone: In the CN-1 zone, the number of parking spaces provided may not exceed one hundred ten percent (110%) of the number of parking
spaces required, except if granted a special exception to exceed this limit by the board of adjustment. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C. CB-5 Zone: (Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
D. CB-10 Zone:
1. Off street parking is not required for any use, except household living uses, as specified in section 14-5A-4, table 5A-1 of this article.
2. Private, off street parking is permitted only after approval of a special exception, except for hospitality oriented retail uses and household living uses
as specified in the following subsections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 450/715
3. Hospitality oriented uses are allowed up to one and one-fourth (11/4) parking spaces for each guestroom and parking spaces equal to one-third (1/3)
the occupant load of any meeting or convention facilities without going through the special exception process. Any parking spaces allowed under this
maximum must meet the standards specified in subsections D5b through D5e of this section. Any parking spaces requested beyond this maximum
must be approved by the board of adjustment as a special exception and meet all of the approval criteria listed in subsection D5 of this section. (Ord.
08-4326, 12-22-2008)
4. Household living uses must provide parking according to section 14-5A-4, table 5A-1 of this article. The parking must meet the standards specified in
subsections D5b through D5e of this section. If there is practical difficulty providing the required parking for household living uses on site, off site
parking for household living uses may be approved according to the provisions of subsection 14-5A-4F, "Alternatives To Minimum Parking
Requirements", of this article. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
5. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria specified in chapter 4, article B of this title, applications for a special exception for
private off street parking in the CB-10 zone must meet the following specific approval criteria:
a. The applicant must demonstrate through a parking demand analysis that the number of parking spaces requested does not exceed the demand
for parking for the specific building or project proposed and that the parking demand cannot be satisfied through the public parking system. Short
term parking demand is preferred to be satisfied through the public parking system.
b. Surface parking is not permitted.
c. Underground parking is preferred over aboveground structured parking. The design of any underground parking must not detract from or prevent
active building uses on the ground level floor of the building. To that end, the ceiling height of any underground parking level may not extend more
than one foot (1') above the level of the adjacent sidewalk. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust this requirement.
However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above
the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than three feet
(3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
d. Aboveground structured parking may be approved only by special exception according to the standards in subsection D5e of this section.
e. Where parking is located within the exterior walls of a building, the following standards apply: (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
(1) The proposed structured parking will not detract from or prevent ground floor storefront uses. Structured parking may be permitted on the
ground level floor of a building, provided that a substantial portion of the ground level floor of the building is reserved for and built to
accommodate storefront uses. On the ground level floor of the building, parking is not allowed within the first fifty feet (50') of building depth as
measured from the front building line. The board of adjustment may reduce this storefront depth requirement if the applicant demonstrates that
conditions on the subject property create a practical difficulty in achieving full compliance. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that
the resulting alternative storefront space, both the interior and exterior, will be of a quality in both design and materials that will enhance the
commercial character of the central business district. To mitigate for loss of ground floor commercial space, the board may also require
additional quality commercial space be included on an upper floor or mezzanine level and said space be reserved for nonresidential uses. (Ord.
11-4450, 10-18-2011)
(2) Vehicular access to parking within buildings must be from a rear alley or private rear lane, whenever feasible. Garage openings along the
primary street frontage are not permitted if access is feasible from another street or from a rear alley, private street or private rear lane. If there is
no other feasible alternative, a garage opening may be allowed along the primary street frontage, if the board determines that the opening(s) will
not detract from or unduly interrupt pedestrian flow along the street and traffic and pedestrian safety will not be compromised. Garage openings
shall be built to the minimum width necessary for access.
(3) Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are visible from a public or private street must appear to be a component of the facade of the building
through the use of building materials, window openings and facade detailing that is similar or complementary to the design of the building.
(4) Each entrance and exit to the parking area must be constructed so that vehicles entering or leaving the parking area are clearly visible to a
pedestrian on any abutting sidewalk at a distance of not less than ten feet (10'). Stop signs and appropriate pedestrian warning signs may be
required. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
14-5A-4: MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Purpose: The minimum parking requirements are intended to ensure that enough off street parking is provided to accommodate most of the demand for
parking generated by the range of uses that might locate at a site over time, particularly in areas where sufficient on street parking is not available. The
minimum parking requirements are also intended to ensure that enough parking is provided on a site to prevent parking for nonresidential uses from
encroaching into adjacent residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
B. Minimum Requirements:
1. Table 5A-2 of this section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum bicycle parking requirements for the land use or uses on properties
in all zones except the CB-5, CB-10, Eastside Mixed Use and Riverfront Crossings Zones. For some land uses, the minimum parking requirements
differ based on the zone in which the property is located. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
2. For properties located within the Downtown Planning District, zoned CB-5 and, in part, Historic District Overlay, the bicycle parking requirement shall
be 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit. For such properties, there shall be no vehicular parking requirement. Except for the preceding, table 5A-1 of this
section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum bicycle parking requirements for all other properties within the CB-5 and CB-10 Zones,
where parking is only required for household living uses. (Ord. 17-4703, 5-2-2017)
3. Table 5A-3 of this section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum bicycle parking requirement for properties zoned Riverfront
Crossings and Eastside Mixed Use. Affordable housing dwelling units provided in accordance with section 14-2G-8 of this title shall not be required
to provide parking, and are therefore exempt from the minimum parking requirement calculation for the respective Riverfront Crossings zoning
classification. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
4. In the CB-10 Zone, off street parking must meet the standards specified in subsection 14-5A-3D of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 451/715
C. Parking For Persons With Disabilities: Where a use is required to provide accessibility for persons with disabilities, the number and design of such
parking spaces must be in accordance with State of Iowa Administrative Code, 661 IAC 18, parking for persons with disabilities, as amended.
D. Rules For Computing Minimum Parking Requirements:
1. Where a fractional space results, the number of parking and stacking spaces actually required will be the closest whole number, with a half space
rounded down.
2. Any use that is nonconforming with regard to the number of required parking spaces is subject to the applicable provisions of chapter 4, article E,
"Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
3. In the case of mixed uses, the number of parking and stacking spaces required is equal to the sum of the requirements for the various uses
computed separately, except for shopping centers, as specified in table 5A-2 of this section, and for reductions allowed under subsection F,
"Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements", of this section.
4. When the parking requirement is based on the number of residents or occupants, the number of residents or occupants shall be based on the
maximum occupancy of the use as determined by the City.
E. Rules For Computing Bicycle Parking Requirements:
1. In tables 5A-1 and 5A-2 of this section, the minimum bicycle parking requirements are expressed as a certain number of spaces per dwelling unit or
as a percentage of the required number of vehicle parking spaces. In table 5A-3 of this section, the minimum bicycle parking requirements are
expressed as a certain number of spaces per dwelling unit or per resident or, in the case of nonresidential uses, as a ratio based on the floor area of
the proposed use. When expressed as a number of spaces per resident, the number of residents shall be based on the maximum occupancy of the
use as determined by the City.
2. In all cases where bicycle parking is required, a minimum of four (4) spaces shall be provided.
3. After the first fifty (50) bicycle parking spaces are provided, additional spaces are required at fifty percent (50%) of the number required by this
section.
4. Where the expected need for bicycle parking for a particular use is uncertain due to unknown or unusual operating characteristics of the use or due
to a location that is difficult to access by bicycle, the building official may authorize that the construction of up to fifty percent (50%) of the required
bicycle parking spaces be deferred. The land area required for the deferred bicycle parking spaces must be maintained in reserve. If an enforcement
official of the City determines at some point in the future that the additional parking spaces are needed, the property owner will be required to install
the parking in the reserved area. The owner of the property on which the bicycle parking area is reserved must properly execute, sign, and record a
written agreement that is binding upon their successors and assigns as a covenant running with the land that assures the installation of bicycle
parking within the reserved area by the owner if so ordered by an enforcement official of the City.
Table 5A-1: Minimum Parking Requirements In The CB-5 And CB-10 Zones,
Except As Otherwise Set Forth In Subsection 14-5A-4B2 Of This Section
Residential uses:
Household living
uses
Multi-family
dwellings
CB-5 Zone
Efficiency, 1 bedroom units: 0.5 space per dwelling unit. 1.0 per dwelling
unit
2 bedroom units: 1 space per dwelling unit.
3 bedroom units: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Units with more than 3 bedrooms: 3 spaces per dwelling unit.
Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
CB-10
Zone
For buildings built on or before December 31, 2008: 1.0 per dwelling
unit
Bedrooms 1-10: No parking required.
All additional bedrooms: 0.5 space per bedroom.
(For purposes of this standard an efficiency apartment will be counted as
1 bedroom.)
For buildings built on or after January 1, 2009:
Efficiency and 1 bedroom units: 0.5 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedroom unit: 1 space per dwelling unit.
3 bedroom unit: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
(Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
Table 5A-2: Minimum Parking Requirements For All
Use
Categories
Subgroups
Parking Requirements
Bicycle Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 452/715
Zones, Except The CB-5, CB-10, Riverfront Crossings Zones
And Eastside Mixed Use District
Residential uses:
Household living
Single family and two family uses For 1-bedroom and 2-bedroom units: 1 parking space, plus 1 additional
parking space for each adult occupant beyond 3.
For units with 3 or more bedrooms: 2 parking spaces plus 1 additional parking
space for each adult occupant beyond 3.
None
required
Group households 3 spaces. None
required
Multifamily
uses
All zones, except PRM and
CB-2
Efficiency and 1 bedroom units: 1 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedroom units: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
3 bedroom units: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
4 bedroom units: 3 spaces per dwelling unit.
5 bedroom units: 4 spaces per dwelling unit.
University impact area: 1 space per bedroom (see section 14-2B-6, map 2B.1
of this title).
0.5 per
dwelling
unit
1.0 per
dwelling
unit
1.5 per
dwelling
unit
1.5 per
dwelling
unit
1.5 per
dwelling
unit
PRM Zone Efficiency and 1 bedroom units: 0.75 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedroom units: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
3 bedroom units: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Units with more than 3 bedrooms: 3 spaces per dwelling unit.
University impact area: 1 space per bedroom (see section 14-2B-6, map 2B.1
of this title).
1.0 per
dwelling
unit
CB-2 Zone Efficiency and 1 bedroom units: 0.75 space per unit.
2 bedroom units: 1.5 spaces per unit.
3 bedroom units: 2.5 spaces per unit.
1.0 per
dwelling
unit
Elder apartments 1 space per dwelling unit for independent living units and 1 space for every 2
dwelling units for assisted living units, except in the PRM and CB-2 Zones.
In the PRM and CB-2 Zones, 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
5
percent
Group living Assisted group living 1 space for every 3 beds, plus 1 space for each staff member determined by
the maximum number of staff present at any 1 time.
None
required
Independent group living 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area or 0.75 space per resident,
whichever is less.
25
percent
Fraternal group living 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area or 0.75 space per resident,
whichever is less.
25
percent
Commercial uses:
Adult business
uses
Retail type 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. 15
percent
Entertainment/nightclub type Parking spaces equal to 1/3 the occupant load of the largest assembly space
or seating area in the building.
10
percent
Animal related
commercial
General 1 space for each office, examining room, and treatment/grooming room, but
not less than 3 spaces.
None
required
Intensive 3 spaces. None
required
Building trade
uses
1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Use
Categories Subgroups
Parking
Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 453/715
Commercial
recreational
uses
Outdoor
Spectator type (major
event facilities, such as
arenas, stadiums, etc.)
Parking spaces equal to 1/4 the occupant load of the seating area. 10
percent
Participatory type (tennis
courts, swimming pools,
archery ranges, sports
fields, etc.)
Parking spaces equal to 2/3 the maximum number of participants likely at any
1 time.
10
percent
Indoor Parking spaces equal to 1/3 the occupant load of the area used for the
participatory activity.
10
percent
Commercial
parking
Not applicable. None
required
Eating and
drinking
establishments
1 space per 150 square feet of floor area, or parking spaces equal to 1/3 the
occupant load of the seating area, whichever is less. Carryout/delivery
restaurants that do not have a seating area must provide at least 4 spaces.
10
percent
Office uses General office 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area.
In the MU and CB-2 zones, no additional parking is required for that floor area
exceeding 8,000 square feet.
15
percent
Medical/dental office 1.5 spaces for each office, examining room and treatment room; provided,
however, there shall not be less than 5 spaces.
15
percent
Quick vehicle
servicing
For gas stations, 1 stacking space is required for every service stall or pump
station.
For car washes, 4 stacking spaces are required for each wash rack, bay, or
tunnel.
Parking for convenience retail must be calculated separately. Parking spaces
must be provided in lieu of stacking spaces in instances where egress from a
facility would require moving a motor vehicle waiting for entry.
None
required
Retail Shopping centers, where a mix of
uses, such as retail, office,
restaurants, theaters, commercial
recreational uses, etc., share the
same parking area. This parking
minimum may be used as an optional
alternative to calculating the parking
for each of the uses separately.
1 space per 250 square feet of floor area. Spaces for residential uses must be
calculated separately and must be provided in addition to the parking spaces
for the commercial uses.
15
percent
Sales oriented 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. 15
percent
Personal service oriented 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. 15
percent
Repair oriented 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. None
required
Hospitality oriented For hotels and motels, 1 space per guestroom.
For guesthouses, as defined in this title, 0.75 space per guestroom.
For meeting facilities and similar, spaces equal to 1/4 the occupant load of the
meeting area or 1/4 the occupant load of the seating area, whichever is most
applicable to the use.
None
required
Outdoor storage and display oriented
1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. 10
percent
Surface
passenger
services
No minimum requirement. None
required
Vehicle repair 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. None
required
Industrial uses:
Use
Categories Subgroups
Parking
Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 454/715
Industrial
service
1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Manufacturing
and production
Technical/light manufacturing 1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
General manufacturing 1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Heavy manufacturing 1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Salvage
operations
1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Self-service
storage
2 spaces per leasing office, plus 1 space per 100 leasable storage spaces. None
required
Warehouse and
freight
movement
For warehouses up to 25,000 square
feet
1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area up to a maximum of 5 spaces. None
required
For warehouses 25,000 square feet
or greater
5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 5,000 square feet above 25,000 square feet. None
required
Waste related
uses
1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Wholesale sales
1 space per 750 square feet of floor area. None
required
Institutional and civic uses:
Basic utilities No minimum requirement. None
required
Colleges and
universities
Public Based on parking demand analysis. 25
percent
Private Per special exception review based on parking demand analysis. 25
percent
Community
service
General community service 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. 10
percent
Community service - shelter 0.1 space per temporary resident based on the maximum number of
temporary residents staying at the shelter at any 1 time, plus 1 space per
employee based on the maximum number of employees at the site at any 1
time.
25
percent
Community service - long term
housing
1 space per 3 units, or 3 beds, whichever is greater. 25
percent
Daycare 1 space per employee based on the maximum number of employees at the
site at any 1 time, plus 1 parking space for each 10 children or clients served,
based on the maximum number of children present on the site at any 1 time,
plus 1 stacking space for each 20 children or clients served, based on the
maximum number of clients or children present on the site at any 1 time.
Additional parking spaces at a ratio of 1/20 clients or children served may be
substituted for the stacking spaces, if the city determines that such an
arrangement will not cause traffic to stack into adjacent streets or public rights
of way.
10
percent
Detention
facilities
No minimum requirement. None
required
Use
Categories Subgroups
Parking
Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 455/715
Educational
facilities
Elementary, middle, junior high
schools, and specialized educational
facilities
2 spaces per classroom. 25
percent
High schools 10 spaces per classroom. 25
percent
Hospitals 1.75 spaces per hospital bed. None
required
Parks and open
space
No minimum requirement, except for recreational uses within private open
space areas as follows:
For golf courses, 3 spaces for each green (hole).
For other recreational or public assembly type uses, parking is required at half
the minimum amount required for the most similar commercial recreational
use.
5
percent
Religious/private
group assembly
Parking spaces equal to 1/6 the occupant load of the main auditorium or the
largest room in the building, whichever is greater.
5
percent
Other uses:
Agriculture Animal related No minimum requirement. None
required
Plant related No minimum requirement. None
required
Aviation related
uses
Airports No minimum requirement. None
required
Helicopter landing facilities No minimum requirement. None
required
Communication
transmission
facilities
No minimum requirement. None
required
Extraction No minimum requirement. None
required
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4483, 5-15-2012; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013; Ord. 14-4586,
6-3-2014; Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
Table 5A-3: Minimum Parking Requirements In The
Riverfront Crossings District And Eastside Mixed Use District
Household living units within the
following building types:
apartment building, multidwelling
building, mixed use
building
South Downtown,
University
Efficiency, 1 bedroom: 0.5 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedrooms: 1 space per dwelling unit.
3 bedrooms: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
For multi-family dwelling units located within the University Subdistrict or
on property directly abutting or across the street from the UI campus as
illustrated on the regulating plan, section 14-2G-2, figure 2G-1 of this title,
the parking requirement is 0.25 per bedroom.
1 per
dwelling
unit
Park, South Gilbert,
Central Crossings,
Gilbert, West Riverfront,
Orchard, Eastside Mixed
Use
Efficiency, 1 bedroom: 0.75 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedrooms: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
3 bedrooms: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
1 per
dwelling
unit
Household living units within the
following building types: cottage
home, row house, townhouse,
live-work townhouse
All subdistricts where
said building types are
allowed.
For 1-bedroom and 2-bedroom units: 1 parking space, plus 1 additional
parking space for each adult occupant beyond 3.
For units with 3 or more bedrooms: 2 parking spaces plus 1 additional
parking space for each adult occupant beyond 3.
None
required
Use
Categories Subgroups
Parking
Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
Use
Categories Subdistricts
Minimum
Parking Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 456/715
Household living units within
liner buildings
All subdistricts Parking shall be provided within the associated parking structure using the
following ratios:
Efficiency, 1 bedroom: 0.5 space per dwelling unit.
2 bedrooms: 1 space per dwelling unit.
3 bedrooms: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
Specific parking spaces within the associated parking structure may or
may not be reserved for use by residents within the liner building.
1 per
dwelling
unit
Assisted group living All subdistricts where
said uses are allowed.
1 space for every 3 rooming units. None
Fraternal group living All subdistricts where
said uses are allowed.
0.50 space per resident.
If the use is located within the University Subdistrict or on property directly
abutting or across the street from the main UI campus as illustrated on the
regulating plan, section 14-2G-2, figure 2G-1 of this title, the parking
requirement is 0.25 per resident.
0.50
space
per
resident
Independent group living All subdistricts where
said uses are allowed.
0.50 space per resident.
If the use is located within the University Subdistrict or on property directly
abutting or across the street from the main UI campus as illustrated on the
regulating plan, section 14-2G-2, figure 2G-1 of this title, the parking
requirement is 0.25 per resident.
0.50
space
per
resident
Nonresidential uses South Downtown,
University
None required. 1/1,500
square
feet of
floor
area
Park, South Gilbert,
Central Crossings,
Gilbert, West Riverfront,
Orchard, Eastside Mixed
Use
1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. On street parking provided
along the frontage of a property may count toward this parking
requirement. Buildings with less than 1,200 square feet of nonresidential
floor area are exempt from this parking requirement.
1/1,500
square
feet of
floor
area
(Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; amd. Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
F. Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements:
1. Off Site Parking On Private Property: Off street parking may be located on a separate lot from the use served according to the following rules. When
the proposed off site parking is located in a residential zone or CB-10 Zone, or is intended for a use located in the CB-10 Zone, the Board of
Adjustment may grant a special exception for the proposed parking, provided the conditions contained in subsections F1a through F1f of this section
are met. When the proposed off site parking is located in the Eastside Mixed Use District, a Riverfront Crossings Zone, an industrial zone, research
zone, or commercial zone, except the CB-10 Zone, the Director of Neighborhood and Development Services may approve the proposed parking,
provided the conditions contained in subsections F1a through F1f of this section are met. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
a. Special Location Plan: A special location plan must be submitted with the application for off site parking. The location plan must include a map
indicating the proposed location of the off site parking, the location of the use or uses served by the parking, and the distance and proposed
walking route between the parking and the use(s) served. The map must be drawn to scale and include property boundaries, including boundaries
of any intervening properties. In addition, documentation must be submitted providing evidence deemed necessary to comply with the
requirements herein. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
b. Location Of Off Site Parking:
(1) In residential, commercial zones, Eastside Mixed Use District, and Riverfront Crossings Zones, any proposed off site parking space must be
located within three hundred feet (300') from an entrance to the use served.
(2) In industrial and research zones, any proposed off site parking space must be located within six hundred feet (600') from an entrance to the use
served.
c. Zoning: Off site parking spaces must be located in the same zone as the principal use(s) served, or located as follows:
(1) In a multi-family zone serving a use located in a different multi-family zone, Eastside Mixed Use District, or in the MU Zone or vice versa.
(2) In a commercial zone serving a use located in a different commercial zone, industrial zone, Eastside Mixed Use District, or Riverfront Crossings
Zone.
(3) In an industrial zone serving a use located in a different industrial zone or commercial zone.
(4) In a Riverfront Crossings Zone serving a use located in a different Riverfront Crossings Zone or commercial zone. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
d. Shared Use Of Off Site Parking: Where two (2) or more uses will jointly use the proposed off site parking, the number of parking spaces shall
equal the sum of off street parking spaces required, as indicated in tables 5A-1, 5A-2, and 5A-3 of this section, except for reductions approved
under the provisions of subsection F2, "Allowed Reductions For Shared On Site Parking", of this section.
e. Approval Criteria: In assessing a special location plan for off site parking, the Board of Adjustment or Director of Neighborhood and Development
Services, as applicable, will consider the desirability of the proposed off street parking and stacking spaces location; pedestrian and vehicular
Use
Categories Subdistricts
Minimum
Parking Requirement
Bicycle
Parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 457/715
traffic safety; any detrimental effects on adjacent property; the appearance of the streetscape as a consequence of the off street parking; and, in
the case of nonrequired parking, the need for additional off street parking.
f. Covenant For Off Site Parking: A written agreement between the property owners must be submitted with the application for off site parking. The
agreement must assure the retention of the parking and stacking spaces, aisles and drives and be binding upon their successors and assigns. The
agreement must provide that it cannot be released, and its terms and conditions cannot be modified in any manner whatsoever, without prior
written consent and approval from the City. The written agreement must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. Upon approval of the off
site parking, the applicant shall provide evidence to the building official confirming that the agreement has been properly executed and has been
recorded as a covenant running with the land before issuance of a building permit.
2. Allowed Reductions For Shared On Site Parking: The building official, in consultation with the Director of Neighborhood and Development Services,
may approve a minor modification as specified in section 14-4B-1 of this title to reduce the total number of parking spaces required by up to fifty
percent (50%) if the uses sharing the parking are not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours. To qualify for a reduction under this
provision, a parking demand analysis must be submitted that provides evidence that the amount of parking proposed for the shared parking area will
be sufficient to meet the parking demand. This reduction is not allowed for residential uses.
3. Land Banked Parking In The CN-1 Zone: The Director of Neighborhood and Development Services may reduce the minimum parking requirements
in the CN-1 Zone, if it is determined that the proposed reduction will further the intent of the CN-1 Zone. In such a case, to accommodate future
changes in land use, changes in ownership, and shifts in shared parking demand, up to thirty percent (30%) of the land area that would otherwise be
needed to provide the required amount of parking shall be land banked or set aside on the site to provide for the future construction of a parking
area. If an enforcement official of the City determines at some point in the future that additional parking spaces are needed, the property owner will
be required to construct parking on the land banked area. A written agreement between the property owner and the City must be properly executed
and recorded as a covenant running with the land and binding upon all successors and assigns, assuring the installation of parking within the land
banked area by the owner if so ordered by the enforcement official. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
4. Minor Modification For Parking Reduction In The Central Business Zones: In the CB-5 and CB-10 Zones, a minor modification may be granted as
specified in section 14-4B-1 of this title exempting up to thirty percent (30%) of the total number of dwelling units contained in a building from the
minimum parking requirements, provided that those dwelling units are committed to the City's assisted housing program or any other affordable
housing program approved by the City. (Ord. 16-4668, 7-5-2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
5. Downtown And Riverfront Crossings Parking District: For qualifying development as set forth below, the number of required on site parking spaces
may be reduced in order to facilitate said development according to the provisions of this subsection.
a. Qualifying Development: To qualify for a parking reduction under this subsection, the proposed development:
(1) Must be located in the downtown and Riverfront Crossings parking district;
(2) Must not result in the demolition of a property that is designated as an Iowa City landmark, registered on the National Register of Historic
Places, or individually eligible for the National Register of Historic Places; and (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
(3) Must include uses, elements or features that further housing, economic development, or other goals of the comprehensive plan, including the
downtown and Riverfront Crossings master plan. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
b. Parking District Boundaries: Properties described below shall be considered part of the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Parking District:
(1) Properties located within the area bounded by Burlington Street on the south, Van Buren Street on the east, Iowa Avenue on the north, and
Capitol Street on the west. For purposes of this subsection, this area shall be referred to as the Central Business District; and
(2) Properties zoned South Downtown Subdistrict (RFC-SD), University Subdistrict (RFC-U), and Central Crossings Subdistrict (RFC-CX) that are
located north of the Iowa Interstate rail line.
c. Reduction Of The On Site Parking Requirement:
(1) For qualifying development, the off street parking requirement may be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), provided a fee is paid in lieu based
on the number of parking spaces that would otherwise have to be provided.
(2) For qualifying development where it is infeasible to provide at least fifty percent (50%) of the required parking on site due to specific qualifying
site constraints as noted below, a developer may request a special exception to reduce the parking requirement by up to one hundred percent
(100%), provided a fee is paid in lieu of each parking space not provided on site and the following review and approval criteria are met. The
Board of Adjustment will review such a request according to the following approval criteria:
(A) Convincing evidence has been presented that it is not feasible to provide at least fifty percent (50%) of the required residential parking on
site due to a lack of alley access, a lot width narrower than sixty feet (60'), a lot orientation that makes it infeasible to provide on site parking and
meet storefront depth requirements of the zone, or other unique circumstance; and
(B) The proposed project will be designed in a manner that is sensitive and complementary to adjacent properties designated as Iowa City
landmarks, registered on the National Register of Historic Places, or individually eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. See
subsection 14-3C-3C, "Design Review Guidelines", of this title for guidance on the factors to be considered to comply with this standard. This
standard is not intended to impose any particular architectural style, but rather to foster a harmonious rhythm and proportion of building
elements along a street frontage and ensure that differences in mass and scale are mitigated through facade articulation and upper story
stepbacks; and
(C) The proposed project will be designed in a manner that will contribute to the pedestrian oriented, urban character of central Iowa City as
envisioned in the downtown and riverfront crossings master plan.
d. Payment Of Fee In Lieu Of Required Parking:
(1) Where the City has allowed up to a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the parking requirement, the developer shall pay a fee for each space
otherwise required in the amount of seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated cost of constructing a structured parking space.
(2) Where a special exception has been granted reducing the parking requirement by more than fifty percent (50%), the developer shall pay a fee
in lieu of the provision of each space otherwise required in the amount of ninety percent (90%) of the estimated cost of constructing a structured
parking space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 458/715
(3) The estimated cost of a structured parking space is twenty four thousand dollars ($24,000.00) in 2013 dollars. This fee shall be adjusted
annually based on the national historical cost indexes contained in the most recent edition of "Engineering News Record", as amended. In the
event the national historical cost index is negative in any edition, the fee shall remain at the amount previously set under this paragraph. (Ord.
14-4586, 6-3-2014)
(4) The City shall calculate and assess the entire fee upon issuance of a building permit. The fee payor shall pay the entire fee prior to the
issuance of the building permit. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
(5) All fees paid shall be deposited in the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Parking District Restricted Fund, as set forth in this subsection.
Monies held in the Restricted Fund, including any accrued interest, shall be used for the purpose of acquiring land for and constructing public
parking facilities located in the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Parking District.
(6) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for the acquisition or construction of the aforementioned property, infrastructure
or facilities within the Parking District, monies held in the Restricted Fund may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments.
6. Parking Reduction For Other Unique Circumstances: Where it can be demonstrated that a specific use has unique characteristics such that the
number of parking or stacking spaces required is excessive or will reduce the ability to use or occupy a historic property in a manner that will
preserve or protect its historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes, the Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to reduce the number of
required parking or stacking spaces by up to fifty percent (50%) (up to 100 percent for properties designated as a local historic landmark, listed on
the National Register of Historic Places, or listed as key or contributing structures in a Historic District or Conservation District Overlay Zone).
7. Parking Reduction For Liner Buildings: For liner buildings constructed to mask a Municipal parking facility, the private off street parking requirement
may be reduced by up to one hundred percent (100%) if parking for uses located within the liner building is provided within the associated public
parking facility. Monthly permits shall be made available for purchase to residents, businesses, or other tenants located within the liner building, but
specific parking spaces within the associated parking structure may or may not be designated for use by said permit holders, at the discretion of the
City. Compensation for construction of said parking shall be made to the City with the amount and terms of said compensation determined through
an agreement with the City, which shall be executed prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for the subject liner building.
8. Allowance For Scooter Or Motorcycle Parking: Up to ten percent (10%) of the parking spaces required for a use may be reconfigured to
accommodate motorized scooters or motorcycles. Conversion of a minimum of two (2) abutting standard parking spaces (an area equal to 18 feet by
18 feet) is required to ensure adequate access and vehicular movement for up to six (6) scooter/motorcycle spaces. Design of the
scooter/motorcycle parking shall be approved by the City. This provision shall not increase or decrease the allowed occupancy or residential density
of the uses on the property, i.e., each required vehicular space converted to scooter/motorcycle spaces shall still be counted as one required parking
space. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
14-5A-5: CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The construction and design standards are intended to ensure safe and efficient vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation on a site, and to
ensure that parking areas are designed with trees and landscaping in a manner that will break up the appearance of large expanses of paving, provide
shade coverage, and ensure appropriate screening and buffering from pedestrianways and adjacent streets and properties.
B. Paving Materials: All parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles must be constructed of asphaltic cement concrete, portland cement concrete or
manufactured paving materials, such as brick, except in the following situations:
1. Drives and aisles serving single-family dwellings or duplexes that abut and access historic Woodlawn Avenue or a nonhard surfaced alley are
exempt from this standard.
2. The City building official may permit materials other than those listed, but excluding crushed rock or chip seal surfaces, for parking spaces, aisles,
and drives if the use of such material provides a durable, permanent surface deemed suitable for the intended purpose and intensity of use.
3. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles must be paved with an approved surface as
specified above; except, that the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy in those instances where the building official finds
that the paving cannot reasonably be completed due to adverse weather conditions or settling of land on the site after demolition or filling. A
temporary certificate of occupancy will be effective only to a date specific. Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate, the property owner must
place in an escrow account established with the City an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of paving.
C. Parking, Stacking Space Size, And Drive Dimensions:
1. The minimum size of a standard off street parking space is nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), exclusive of aisle width.
2. The minimum size of a compact off street parking space is eight feet by fifteen feet (8' x 15'), exclusive of aisle width.
3. For all uses, except single-family and two-family uses, the following rules apply:
a. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the required number of parking spaces may be compact spaces. A "Compact Vehicles Only" sign must be posted on or
in front of each compact space.
b. All other spaces, both required and nonrequired, must meet or exceed the minimum size specification for standard spaces.
c. Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities must be sized and designed in accordance with State of Iowa Administrative Code, 661 IAC
18, "Parking for Persons With Disabilities", as amended.
4. For single-family and two-family uses, required parking spaces must be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in size.
5. Required stacking spaces must be at least nine feet (9') wide and nineteen feet (19') long.
6. In all required parking areas that contain more than four (4) parking spaces, such spaces must be visibly delineated on the surface by painted or
marked stripes. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 459/715
7. A drive providing access to any parking area, either structured or surface, with more than eighteen (18) spaces must be no less than eighteen feet
(18') in width if designed for two-way traffic or ten feet (10') in width if designed for one-way traffic. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
D. Drainage:
1. All parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles in parking areas must be pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of excess water from
such areas onto streets and alleys which do not have adequate drainage facilities as determined by the City Engineer.
2. Drives and aisles that are located within three feet (3') of a side or rear lot line must be pitched or curbed and drained to prevent flow of water onto
adjoining property. Alternatively, a drainage course must be established along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff.
E. Location:
1. Off street parking and stacking spaces must be located on the same lot as the use served except as allowed in subsection 14-5A-4F, "Alternatives To
Minimum Parking Requirements", of this article.
2. Off street parking spaces, stacking spaces, aisles and drives are subject to the location and setback requirements specified in the base zone and
any other location requirements of this title that specifically supersede or augment these general location standards.
3. Unless otherwise specified in this title, stacking spaces must be located in such a way that a required parking space or access to a required parking
space is not obstructed. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
F. Standards For Structured Parking In Multi-Family, Commercial Zones, The Eastside Mixed Use District, And The Riverfront Crossings Zones: The
following standards apply to structured parking in all Multi-Family Zones, all Commercial Zones, except the CB-10 Zone, and on property zoned
Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed Use. On properties zoned Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed Use, these standards apply to tuck under,
midblock structures, lined structures, integrated structures, and underground structures, as described in chapter 2, article G of this title. Standards for
structured parking in the CB-10 Zone are specified in subsection 14-5A-3D of this article. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
1. Parking Within Building: In Multi-Family, CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU Zones, the ground level floor of a building is reserved primarily for principal uses
allowed in the zone. Therefore, any parking located within the exterior walls of the building must meet the following standards: (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-
2014)
a. In the CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU Zones, structured parking is not permitted on the ground level floor of the building for the first thirty feet (30') of
lot depth as measured from the minimum setback line, except as allowed by subsection 14-4B-4A7f of this title. (Ord. 17-4703, 5-2-2017)
b. In Multi-Family Zones, structured parking is not permitted on the ground level floor of the building for the first fifteen feet (15') of building depth as
measured from the street-facing building wall. On lots with more than one street frontage this parking setback must be met along each street
frontage, unless reduced or waived by minor modification. When considering a minor modification request, the City will consider factors such as
street classification, building orientation, location of primary entrance(s) to the building, and unique site constraints such as locations where the
residential building space must be elevated above the floodplain.
c. In the CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU Zones, the ceiling height of any underground parking may extend no more than one foot (1') above the level of
the adjacent sidewalk. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the City may adjust this requirement by minor modification. However, on
sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above the level of the
abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than four feet (4') above the
level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
d. In Multi-Family Zones, the ceiling height of any underground parking may extend no more than three feet (3') above grade. For purposes of this
subsection, "grade" shall be defined as the average point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area
between the building and the streetside property line(s) or when the streetside property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between
the building and line five feet (5') from the building. A parking level that has more than three feet (3') of its floor to ceiling height above "grade" as
defined herein shall be considered ground level parking and therefore shall be subject to the setback stated in subsection F1b of this section. (Ord.
14-4586, 6-3-2014)
2. Riverfront Crossings Or Eastside Mixed Use Properties: On property zoned Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed Use, structured parking shall be
placed in accordance with the provisions set forth in chapter 2, article G, "Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based
Development Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
3. Parking Area To Be Enclosed: Except for garage openings, the parking area must be enclosed within the exterior walls of the building. In no case
shall a building have the appearance from the street or from abutting properties of being elevated above a parking level or "on stilts" (see figure 5A.1
of this subsection).
FIGURE 5A.1
STRUCTURED PARKING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 460/715
4. Exterior Walls: Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are visible from a public or private street or from an abutting property must appear to be a
component of the facade of the building through the use of building materials, window openings and facade detailing that is similar or complementary
to the design of the building and must comply with the other standards of this section (see subsection F3, figure 5A.1 of this section).
5. Parking Space Configurations: Parking spaces within the structure must be perpendicular to parking aisles. However, angled parking or parallel
parking configurations may be allowed if parking aisles are one-way.
6. Landscaping: In addition to the facade detailing noted above, the City may require landscaping as a means to soften the visual effect of any garage
walls located at the street level. Shrubs, small berms, and planters may be used to form a landscaped screen generally ranging between two feet (2')
and four feet (4') in height. Trees may also be incorporated into the landscaped area if sufficient area is available for tree growth. (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-
2014)
7. Garage Entrances/Exits:
a. Vehicular access to parking within buildings should be located and designed to minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians and to
preserve street frontages for active building uses.
b. Garage entrances/exits should be located along a building wall that does not face a public street and accessed from a private drive, private rear
lane or public alley. In the CB-2, CB-5, MU, Eastside Mixed Use, and Riverfront Crossings Zones, alley or rear lane access is preferred. If the
Form Based Code Committee, in consultation with the Director of Neighborhood and Development Services, determines that such access is not
feasible due to lack of alley access, topographical limitations, or other unique circumstances, or if allowing direct access from a street will better
meet the objectives as stated in subsection F7a of this section, garage openings may face a street, but must be designed in a manner that will best
meet the objectives listed in subsection F7a of this section, and must meet the standards listed in subsections F7b(1), F7b(2), and F7b(3) of this
section.
(1) If the structured parking is intended for residents or tenants of a building and not the general public, there may be no more than one
doublewide or two (2) singlewide garage openings per building. Doublewide openings may not exceed twenty feet (20') in width; singlewide
openings may not exceed ten feet (10') in width. For existing buildings where it is not possible to meet this standard due to structural constraints
of the building, the building official may adjust this provision to allow one additional garage entrance/exit that faces a street, provided that the
minor modification approval criteria are met and the garage opening is designed to minimize its effect on the streetscape and minimize hazards
to pedestrians.
(2) For structured parking intended for use by the general public, garage openings should be limited in width and number to only what is necessary
to provide adequate access for the types and numbers of vehicles using the parking facility.
(3) Except in the CN-1, CB-2, MU and CB-5 Zones, the opening(s) must occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the street-facing
building wall. On corner lots, only one street-facing garage wall must meet this standard. In the Eastside Mixed Use, Riverfront Crossings Zones
and in the CN-1, CB-2, MU and CB-5 Zones, garage opening(s) along the primary street frontage are not permitted if access is feasible from
another local or collector street or from a rear alley, private street or private rear lane. If there is no feasible alternative, garage opening(s) may
be allowed along the primary street frontage, provided that they occupy no more than thirty five percent (35%) of the length of the primary street
frontage of the lot and provided that all provisions of article C, "Access Management Standards", of this chapter are met. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016)
G. Standards For Structured Parking In Industrial And Research Zones: Where parking is located within the exterior walls of a principal building, the
following standards apply:
1. Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are visible from an arterial street must appear to be a component of the facade of the building through the
use of building materials, window openings and facade detailing that is similar or complementary to the design of the building. In no case shall a
building have the appearance from an arterial street of being elevated above a parking level or "on stilts". (See subsection F3, figure 5A.1 of this
section.)
2. Vehicular access to parking within buildings should be located and designed to minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians; and to
preserve street frontages for active building uses to the extent feasible. Garage openings should be limited in width and number to only what is
necessary to provide adequate access for the types and numbers of vehicles using the parking facility. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
H. Design And Layout Of Surface Parking Areas: Except for parking for single-family and two-family uses, all parking and stacking spaces, aisles and
drives must be designed as follows:
1. Minimum Dimensions: Parking areas must be configured according to the aisle and parking space angle dimensions as illustrated in subsection H2,
figure 5A.2 of this section. Where the edges of parking spaces are curved, as on a curved aisle, all angles are to be measured between the straight
edges of the parking spaces and tangents to the curved edges at their point of intersection.
2. Aisles:
a. All parking spaces must be connected to an aisle that has a minimum width as indicated in subsection H2, figure 5A.2 of this section. Aisles
designed for two-way traffic must be a minimum of twenty two feet (22') in width.
b. The greatest aisle width shown in subsection H2, figure 5A.2 of this section, must be provided when combining different parking space
configurations on the same aisle.
c. The maximum aisle width is twenty four feet (24').
Figure 5A.2 - Parking Configurations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 461/715
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. Circulation: Parking areas must be designed to promote safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation according to the following
standards and the standards of the base zone in which the property is located:
a. Parking areas must be set back from rights-of-way and abutting properties and properly screened from view as specified in the applicable base
zone regulations.
b. The drive(s) on a property should be designed to facilitate vehicular circulation and connect street access points to parking areas, loading and
unloading areas, drive-through facilities, and other vehicular use areas on a lot or tract. In general, drives should not be used as aisles. However,
the City may allow parking spaces along a drive in situations where vehicular and pedestrian safety will not be compromised. When determining
the length and location of drives and the configuration of parking spaces and aisles, the City will consider such factors as:
(1) Size and shape of the parking lot. Large parking lots with multiple aisles of parking may need a system of separated drives to facilitate traffic
circulation; parking spaces should not be located along main circulation routes where traffic speeds may be higher, but may be allowed in lower
traffic volume areas. In small parking areas, circulation drives may not be necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 462/715
(2) Proximity to street access points. Parking spaces should not be located so as to impede vehicles entering or exiting the site. The throat length
of drives at street access points must be sufficient in length to provide the necessary vehicle stacking based on the anticipated traffic volume.
Parking spaces and aisles will not be allowed in close proximity to the necessary driveway throats, as determined by the City.
(3) Proposed use of the drive. Parking spaces should not be located so as to impede drive-through lanes, loading and unloading areas, or higher
volume delivery or truck circulation routes.
c. To control vehicle speeds and facilitate traffic safety and circulation, drives must be separated from parking aisles by landscaped medians and
islands as illustrated in subsection H4, figure 5A.4 of this section.
d. When used, medians should be at least four feet (4') in width and be landscaped. If a median contains trees, it should be at least eight feet (8')
wide. If medians are intended for pedestrian circulation they should be approximately twelve feet (12') to twenty feet (20') wide to accommodate a
walkway and shrubs and/or trees to buffer pedestrians from surrounding vehicle areas.
e. To guide turning vehicles, maintain sightlines, and protect vehicles at row ends, the free end of all parking aisles must be capped with a
landscaped terminal island as illustrated in figure 5A.3 of this subsection. In the CN-1 Zone, at least one shade tree must be provided within each
terminal island. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
Figure 5A.3 - Terminal Parking Islands
f. Parking spaces within parking areas must be provided with car stops or curbing to prevent encroachment into landscaped setbacks, medians, and
islands.
g. Parking areas must be designed to permit ingress and egress of vehicles without needing to move any other vehicle occupying a parking space.
h. No parking area shall be designed in such a manner that exiting a parking area would require backing into a street.
i. If the number of parking spaces required or provided for a use or a combination of uses on a lot is greater than eight (8) spaces, none of those
spaces may be located in such a manner that would require backing into an alley. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
4. Partition Of Large Parking Areas: Surface parking areas that are larger than forty five thousand (45,000) square feet or that have any perimeter
dimension greater than three hundred feet (300') must be divided into smaller, connected lots to slow traffic movement, improve pedestrian safety,
and reduce the visual impact of large parking areas. The following design techniques must be utilized to meet this standard. These design
techniques may also be utilized as a means of meeting the pedestrian circulation standards of the base zone. (See figure 5A.4 of this subsection
H4.)
a. Divide the parking into separate areas with the use of drives and landscape medians. These "separate areas" should have no dimension greater
than approximately two hundred feet (200').
b. The parking layout should ensure that no aisle of parking is longer than approximately two hundred feet (200') without being end capped and
crossed by a drive or landscaped median.
c. Some parking areas may not easily accommodate the techniques described above, such as long and narrow parking lots, so other options may be
approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development, such as the use of landscaped islands to interrupt parking aisles and provide
opportunities for pedestrian crossings. (Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
Figure 5A.4 - Partition Of Parking Lots/Separation
Of Aisles And Drives
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 463/715
I. Landscaping And Tree Requirements Within Parking Areas:
1. Applicability:
a. Parking areas that contain more than eighteen (18) parking spaces must be designed to include trees and planting areas according to the
requirements of this subsection.
b. If the number of parking spaces in an existing parking area is increased to accommodate more than eighteen (18) parking spaces, then the newly
added parking area must comply with the requirements of this subsection.
c. If an existing parking area, which is not constructed with a permanent durable surface according to the construction and design standards above,
is subsequently required to be surfaced or altered in any way, the provisions of this subsection shall apply as if the parking area did not previously
exist.
d. Parking ramps, covered parking areas, and parking areas that are an integral part of a building are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. However, in such cases, certain perimeter landscaping may be required according to the provisions of the base zone.
2. Requirements:
a. Trees must be planted or preserved on the site so that every parking space or portion thereof is within forty feet (40') of a small tree or within sixty
feet (60') of a large tree.
b. In addition to the required trees, all medians, islands and other planting areas within the parking area must be landscaped with turf, grasses, low
shrubs or other living cover. Planting areas at the ends of parking aisles must consist of low growing varieties of shrubs, grasses, and ground
cover (2 feet in height or less) so as not to impede vehicular sight lines. Landscape medians along drives and pedestrian walkways may utilize
larger shrubs and plants to visually break up the appearance of large parking areas and buffer pedestrian walkways. Trees may be planted in any
median or planting island, provided the median or island meets the minimum planting area size specified in chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And
Tree Standards", of this title.
c. Planting areas must be separated from parking spaces, drives, aisles, and alleys with unmountable curbs or barriers at least five inches (5") in
height. Curbs and barriers must be constructed in a manner that will prevent salt and sand from storm water runoff from damaging trees and
plantings. The city may waive this requirement when drainage swales are utilized to facilitate storm water runoff.
d. The design of any drainage swales proposed must be approved by the city. Drainage swales must be planted with salt tolerant prairie grasses,
sedges and reeds that will slow runoff and allow ground infiltration. The plants used in such swales must be approved by the city.
e. Coniferous trees may not be used to satisfy parking lot coverage requirements.
f. Trees planted to meet the street tree requirements or to meet the tree requirements for residential uses (see chapter 5, article E of this title) may
also be used to fulfill the requirements of this subsection; provided, that no parking space is further than forty feet (40') from a small tree or sixty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 464/715
feet (60') from a large tree.
g. All trees and landscaping within parking lots are subject to the provisions of sections 14-5E-3, "General Requirements And Measurements", 14-
5E-4, "Tree Planting Requirements", 14-5E-5, "Protection And Maintenance", and 14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this title.
J. Screening And Setback Requirements: Parking areas must be set back from rights of way and abutting properties and screened from view according to
applicable setback and screening provisions of the subject base zone.
K. Design Of Bicycle Parking Areas:
1. Bicycle parking areas must be constructed of asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete or manufactured paving materials, such as brick.
However, the city building official may permit the use of rock or gravel areas for bicycle parking, provided edging materials are used so that the
bicycle parking area is clearly demarcated and the rock material is contained.
2. Required bicycle parking racks must be designed to support the bicycle by its frame and allow the use of either a cable lock or a U-shaped lock.
Bicycle lockers and secure indoor storage facilities are also allowed.
3. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in a clearly designated, safe and convenient location and shall be located so as not to impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. Bicycle parking is allowed in front and side building setbacks in all zones; provided, that such a parking area results in no more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the required setback area being paved.
L. Special Vehicle Parking And Storage Requirements In Single-Family Zones: The provisions of this subsection apply in all single-family residential zones.
For purposes of this subsection, a "special vehicle" is defined as any device, more than seven and one-half feet (7.5') in height and more than twenty
feet (20') in length, which is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, street, or body of water, including, without limitation, any motor vehicle,
truck, trailer, tractor, wagon, watercraft or any combination thereof exceeding these dimensions. A storage area for a special vehicle includes any
space equal in size to the outer perimeter of the subject special vehicle that is used for storage of such a vehicle. The following provisions apply to all
such special vehicles:
1. A special vehicle may be stored inside any building, provided it is not stored in a required parking space.
2. A special vehicle stored outside a building must comply with the following standards:
a. The vehicle must be in operational condition and properly licensed as required by state and federal law.
b. The special vehicle must belong to the owner or tenant of the property on which the vehicle is located, except for special vehicles of guests, as
provided in subsection L2c of this section.
c. A special vehicle may not be used for dwelling purposes except as temporary lodging for guests of the property owner or tenant. Such temporary
lodging may occur for no more than twenty one (21) consecutive days nor may temporary lodging exceed a total of forty five (45) days in any
calendar year. An extension may be approved by the city manager or designee.
d. The special vehicle may not be used for storage of items other than those considered to be part of the unit.
e. The storage area must be surfaced with crushed rock, asphalt, concrete or a similar surface designed and maintained to prevent muddy
conditions, erosion from the flow of water onto adjoining property and weed growth. In cases where crushed rock is used, the perimeter of a
storage area must be lined with bricks, landscape timbers or similar material that will effectively contain the crushed rock.
f. (1) A special vehicle may not be parked or stored on a vacant residential lot.
(2) No special vehicle may be stored in a front setback, except on a regularly constructed aisle for a period of no more than four (4) days for the
purpose of loading and unloading.
(3) A special vehicle may be stored in the required rear setback or the required side setback, provided the outer edge of the storage area is no
closer than three feet (3') to a side lot line or to a rear lot line of a reversed corner lot.
(4) The city manager or designee may permit outside storage of a special vehicle in the required front setback or the required side setback along a
street, provided:
(A) Storage space is not available in the side or rear setback or there is no access to either the side or rear setback. For purposes of this
provision, a corner lot will always be deemed to have access to the rear setback. Accessory structures and buildings less than one hundred
sixty (160) square feet in area and vegetation that is transplantable are not deemed to prevent access.
(B) Inside storage is not possible because the size of the special vehicle exceeds either the space available or the size of the entrance available
in any existing building, or both.
(C) The special vehicle is parked perpendicular to the street.
(D) The special vehicle storage area is screened from view of the street using landscaping, a fence or a wall. Fences, walls, and hedges must
meet the applicable standards specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
(E) No part of the special vehicle extends beyond the property line or over a public right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5A-6: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 465/715
A. Applicability: In all zones, except the CB-5 and CB-10 zones, off street loading spaces must be provided and maintained in compliance with the
requirements of this section.
B. Off Street Loading Requirements: Any nonresidential use that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by trucks or vans and that has an
aggregate gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must provide the minimum number of loading spaces as indicated in table 5A-
4 of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 5A-4: Off Street Loading Requirements
Aggregate Gross Floor
Area (Square Feet)
Required Number Of
Loading Spaces
10,000 to 20,000 1
20,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 80,000 3
80,001 to 120,000 4
120,001 to 160,000 5
For each additional 80,000 1 additional
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
C. Rules For Computing Minimum Loading Requirements:
1. Where a fractional space results, the number of loading spaces required is the closest whole number. A half space will be rounded down.
2. Any use that is nonconforming with regard to the number of required loading spaces is subject to the applicable provisions of chapter 4, article E,
"Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
D. Use And Restrictions:
1. The use of required loading spaces is reserved for loading. Other uses of required loading areas are not permitted, except as approved for a
temporary use. (See chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.)
2. The storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, refuse containers, obsolete or junk vehicles or the major repair of vehicles in required loading
areas is prohibited.
E. Design And Maintenance Requirements: All loading spaces must be constructed of asphalt, concrete or similar permanent dust free surface and in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. Loading spaces must be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide, twenty five feet (25') long and twelve feet (12') high, exclusive of aisles. When more than
two (2) spaces are required, the spaces, other than the first two (2), must be at least twelve feet (12') wide, seventy two feet (72') long and fourteen
feet (14') high.
2. All loading spaces must be pitched and drained to prevent the flow of water from such areas onto streets and alleys that do not have adequate
drainage facilities as determined by the city engineer.
F. General Location Standards:
1. Loading spaces must be located so that trucks or vans loading or unloading do not back onto or out of a street.
2. Off street loading areas are subject to the location and setback requirements specified in the base zone.
G. Screening Requirements: Loading areas must be screened from view according to applicable screening provisions of the base zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
ARTICLE B. SIGN REGULATIONS
14-5B-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
Signs can obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the size, illumination, movement, materials, location, height and condition of all signs placed on private property
meant to be visible to the public from a street or other public right of way thus enhancing and protecting the physical appearance and safety of the
community, protecting property values and the character of the various neighborhoods, and preserving Iowa City's areas of natural, historic and scenic
beauty.
These regulations are intended to reduce distractions and obstructions contributing to traffic accidents; reduce hazards caused by signs projecting over the
public right of way; provide a reasonable opportunity for all sign users to display signs without interference from other signage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 466/715
These regulations are further intended to provide fair and equitable treatment for all sign users; to allow for creative design; to encourage economic
development; to distinguish between areas designed primarily for auto oriented commerce and areas designed for residential living or pedestrian oriented
commerce; and to establish a reasonable period of time for the elimination of nonconforming signs.
This article allows adequate communication through signage while encouraging aesthetic quality and creativity in the design, location, size and purpose of
all signs. This article must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the first amendment guarantee of free speech. A sign placed on land or on a building
for the purpose of identification, protection or directing persons to a use conducted therein must be deemed to be an integral but accessory and
subordinate part of the principal use of land or building. Therefore, the intention of this article is to establish limitations on signs in order to ensure they are
appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are appurtenant and are adequate for their intended purpose while balancing the individual and
community interests identified above. These regulations are intended to promote signs that are compatible with the use of the property to which they are
appurtenant, landscape and architecture of surrounding buildings, are legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain, are not distracting to
motorists, and are constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition.
The regulations are not intended to and do not apply to signs erected, maintained or otherwise posted, owned or leased by the city, state or federal
government.
A sign displaying a noncommercial message of any type is allowed anywhere that commercial signs are allowed, subject to the same regulations
applicable to such commercial signs to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular
commercial message over any other noncommercial message. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-2: GENERAL RULES AND APPLICABILITY:
A. Applicability: All signs on private property must be installed, maintained, and/or removed according to the provisions of this article.
B. Permit Required:
1. No sign requiring a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be installed, altered, moved, improved or converted without first
obtaining a sign permit from the building official or designee according to the procedures specified in chapter 8, "Review And Approval Procedures",
of this title. A permit is not required for incidental repairs or routine maintenance.
2. Certain types of signs are allowed without a permit and such exemption from the sign permit requirements is clearly specified in the tables included
in sections 14-5B-8 and 14-5B-9 of this article. A permit is required for any sign that is not specifically exempted from the permit requirements.
C. Sign Installer's License Required:
1. Except for those signs not requiring a permit, as listed in sections 14-5B-8 and 14-5B-9 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to install,
alter, move, improve, remove or convert any sign without having a sign installer's license in good standing issued by the city. A onetime sign
installer's license shall be available to a tenant or owner of a building to permit the tenant's or owner's own sign to be installed.
2. The license to install, alter, move, improve, remove or convert any sign as required herein shall be known as a "sign installer's license" and shall be
issued by the city to the person desiring to perform the work indicated above. No such license shall be issued to any person until such person shall
have paid to the city a license fee as established by resolution of city council and shall have filed with the department of housing and inspection
services a copy or a certificate of a contractor's public liability insurance policy with coverage limits as set out in this code. The city shall be
designated as an additional insured, and the policy shall provide that the city is to be notified thirty (30) days in advance of the termination of the
policy. The license shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all damage, judgment, cost or expense which the city may incur or suffer
by reason of said license issuance.
3. All sign installer's licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewal fees and reinstatement fees shall be as established by resolution of
the city council. Any license that has expired may be reinstated within sixty (60) calendar days after the expiration date upon payment of an
additional reinstatement fee.
4. A onetime sign installer's license shall be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
5. The building official or designee is responsible for enforcement of these provisions and is empowered to suspend or revoke a sign installer's license
for a violation of the sign regulations or if the license was obtained by fraud or if the license allows any person not employed by the sign installer
without a valid installer's license to do or cause to be done any work requiring a license.
6. A person aggrieved by the revocation, suspension or denial of a license may appeal said action to the board of adjustment.
7. If a license is revoked for any reason, another installer's license shall not be issued to such person for twelve (12) months after revocation.
D. Application Of State Law: In any case in which the code of Iowa, as amended, contains more restrictive requirements than the regulations contained
herein, the code of Iowa, as amended, will govern. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-3: GENERAL LOCATION STANDARDS:
A. Location Standards For All Zones:
1. No sign shall be located in violation of the intersection visibility standards set forth in article D of this chapter.
2. All nonbuilding signs, and all parts thereof, must be set back at least five feet (5') from any property line, with the following exception: Signs may be
located closer than five feet (5') to a property line at ten feet (10') or more above grade, provided no part of the sign or sign support overhangs any
property lines. In addition, freestanding wide base signs must not be located closer than ten feet (10') to any right of way or closer than thirty feet
(30') to any street curb.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 467/715
3. Building signs must comply with the building setback requirements of the base zone. No part of a building sign or sign support may overhang a
property line, unless specifically allowed in this article.
4. For any sign that is allowed to project over the public right of way according to the provisions of this article, a use of public right of way agreement
must be signed by the property owner as a part of the permitting process.
5. No sign shall obstruct ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
B. Signs Adjacent To Residential Zones:
1. Any sign located in a nonresidential zone, but within one hundred feet (100') of a residential zone is subject to the standards and limitations of
subsection 14-5B-8C, "Sign Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this article.
2. Electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed within one hundred feet (100') of a residential zone, except for allowed time and temperature
signs, as defined in chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title.
3. In nonresidential zones, except for fascia signs, no sign shall be located in the required front building setback area within fifty feet (50') of a
residential zone.
4. Fascia signs located in nonresidential zones and within fifty feet (50') of a residential zone on the same side of the street shall not be placed on the
wall of the building facing the residential zone. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-4: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Construction: All signs, except for temporary signs, shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds
per square foot of area and loads as required by the building code. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
B. Minimum Clearance Height: The minimum clearance height is measured from ground level to the lowest point on the sign. The minimum clearance
height for freestanding, banner, and time and temperature signs is ten feet (10'). For freestanding wide base signs, the bottom of the sign face must be
a minimum of ten feet (10') above ground level, except if the sign is fifteen feet (15') or less in height. For these shorter wide based signs, the bottom of
the sign face must be a minimum of three feet (3') above ground level. For storefront projecting signs and canopy signs, the minimum clearance height
is eight feet (8'). Minimum clearance height is ten feet (10') for entranceway signs across driveways and eight feet (8') for entranceway signs across
walkways. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
C. Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in such a manner as to avoid becoming a hazardous sign.
D. Changeable Copy:
1. Copy Changed Manually: Any sign may contain copy that is changed manually, unless precluded by definition or specifically prohibited herein.
2. Copy Changed Electronically: Signs where the copy is changed by electronic means are only allowed as specified below:
a. The sign must be located in a commercial zone or in a public zone. However, electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed within one
hundred feet (100') of a residential zone, except for allowed time and temperature signs, as defined in chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of
this title. On properties zoned public, electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed where said sign would be visible from any adjacent
residential zone. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
b. Electronic changeable copy is allowed on only one sign per lot. In the CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones, a "time and temperature
sign", as defined in chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title, shall not count toward the one sign limit. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008; amd.
Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
c. The changeable copy may not be animated. (See definition of "animated sign" in chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title.) The copy may
be changed no more than once per hour, except for designation of the time and temperature, which may be changed more frequently.
d. The sign may not contain images or be of a brightness that will interfere with, obstruct the view of, or confuse traffic. The sign may not contain
images that may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. The sign may not make use of the words, "stop", "go slow",
"caution", "drive-in", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a way as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
e. The sign must comply with the illumination standards as specified in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
f. In the MU, CO-1, and CN-1 zones, electronic changeable copy is only allowed on a time and temperature sign. (See definition of "time and
temperature sign" in chapter 9, article C of this title.) The electronic changeable copy portion of the sign is limited to the display of the time and/or
temperature and may not exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
g. In public zones and in CH-1, CI-1, and CC-2 Zones, electronic changeable copy is only allowed on time and temperature signs, freestanding
signs, freestanding wide base signs, and monument signs. On time and temperature signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign is
limited to the display of the time and/or temperature and may not exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. On freestanding and
freestanding wide base signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may not exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face.
For monument signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of the sign face.
h. In the CB-2 and CB-5 Zones, electronic changeable copy is only allowed on time and temperature signs and monument signs. On time and
temperature signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign is limited to the display of the time and/or temperature and may not exceed
forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. On monument signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the area of the sign face. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
i. In the CB-10 Zones, electronic changeable copy is only allowed on time and temperature signs and window signs as permitted for indoor
recreational uses in section 14-5B-8, table 5B-4 of this article. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 468/715
E. Illumination Requirements: Illuminated signs must conform to the following requirements: (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
1. Except for signs in the ID and Residential Zones, all permitted signs may be internally or externally illuminated. All signs permitted in the ID and
Residential Zones may only be externally illuminated with white light, except that institutional uses in the PRM Zone may have one sign internally
illuminated. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
2. Illumination through the use of exposed lamps or inert gas tubes is allowed, provided the exposed lamp does not exceed eleven (11) watts or that an
inert gas tube does not draw more than sixty (60) milliamps. When inside frosted lamps or exposed lamps with a diffusing screen are used, no lamp
shall exceed twenty five (25) watts.
3. Illumination through the use of LEDs is allowed only as specified for electronic changeable copy. All signs using LEDs must have installed ambient
light monitors and must at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic sign based on ambient light
conditions. At no time shall the sign be operated at a brightness level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels. The electronic
changeable copy must be monochromatic. It must utilize a dark background with only the message or image lit in a single color.
4. Artificial external light sources used to illuminate a sign face must be located and shielded such that the bulb is not directly visible from any adjacent
residentially zoned property or public right-of-way and must use a narrow cone of light that does not extend beyond the illuminated sign face.
5. Illumination on a property, including illumination from signs, must not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot-candle and 2.0 initial maximum foot-candles as
measured at any point along a property boundary that is adjacent to or across the street from properties that are zoned residential, CN-1, or CO-1.
6. All illuminated signs are subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code, including any permit fees.
7. Permit applications for electronic changeable copy signs must include a copy of the manufacturer's operating manual, including any recommended
standards for brightness and other display operations.
8. For electronic changeable copy signs, whether the sign is programmed from the site or from a remote location, the computer interface that programs
the sign shall be made available to City staff for inspection upon request. If the computer interface is not immediately available, the sign shall cease
operation until such program can be provided. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-5: NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
A. Nonconforming Signs: All legally nonconforming signs must comply with the provisions specified for nonconforming signs in chapter 4, article E,
"Nonconforming Situations", of this title. Signs deemed "historic" may be eligible for a special exception according to the provisions specified in chapter
4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
B. Signs For Nonconforming Uses: A nonconforming use is permitted to have the same amount and type of signage as would be allowed for such use in
the most restrictive zone in which such use is allowed. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
A. Regulations Are Exclusionary: These regulations are intended to be exclusionary. Any type of sign not specifically listed in this article is prohibited. In
addition, the following signs are specifically prohibited in all zones:
1. Animated signs, except for barbers' poles and three-dimensional storefront projecting signs as expressly permitted by this article.
2. Hazardous signs.
3. Obsolete signs.
4. Painted wall signs except for wall mural painted signs.
5. Portable signs, including signs on wheels, trailers, and truck beds, but excepting those portable signs expressly permitted by this article.
6. Roof signs.
7. Searchlights.
8. Spinners, balloons, pennants, or other similar devices.
9. Swinging signs except for storefront projecting signs.
10. Banners except for banner projecting signs as expressly permitted in this article and banners permitted in section 14-5B-8, table 5B-4 of this article.
11. No vehicle, including trailers, shall be parked so that it functions primarily as a sign. A vehicle will be considered in violation of this provision if the
questions in subsections A11a through A11c of this section can be answered in the affirmative, and there is no compelling answer to the question in
subsection A11d of this section to justify the parking location as opposed to some less conspicuous location.
a. Is the vehicle parked at a prominent location?
b. Can people driving by the sign easily read the sign?
c. Is the vehicle in the same or similar locations for several hours during the same day or for several days during the same week?
d. Are there any stated or apparent reasons, other than for signage purposes, that justify the vehicle being at that location? (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-
2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 469/715
B. Removal Of Prohibited Or Illegal Signs: In accordance with the following procedure, the building official or designee is authorized to require the removal
of any illegal or prohibited sign:
1. Before taking action to require the removal of any illegal or prohibited sign, the building official or designee will provide written notice to the owner or
operator of the business to which the sign relates.
2. The notice will specify that the illegal or prohibited sign must be removed or brought into compliance with this article within a reasonable time of such
notice.
3. If the sign is not removed or repaired, as the case may be, within the time allowed, the building official or designee is hereby authorized to have the
sign removed to be used as evidence and assess the costs of removal against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord.
08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-7: MEASUREMENT STANDARDS:
A. Maximum Sign Area:
1. Where the size of a sign is regulated by the area of a wall, an awning or a canopy, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the total
area of the wall, the awning, or the canopy on which the sign is affixed.
2. For entranceway signs located on the front elevation of the subject archway, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the total area
delineated by the archway. For entranceway signs located on the side of the archway, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the
surface area of the side of the archway support on which the sign is located. Figure 5B.1 of this section illustrates how to measure the total area
delineated by the archway and the surface area of the side of the archway support. The total area delineated by the archway in figure 5B.1 of this
section equals x(y). The surface area of the side of the archway support in figure 5B.1 of this section equals a(b).
3. The total building signage on a wall, canopy, or awning shall not exceed the maximum sign allowance for that wall, canopy, or awning, regardless of
the number of uses or occupants in the building. For example, if the maximum sign area for fascia signs is fifteen percent (15%), then no more than
fifteen percent (15%) of any single wall of the building may be covered by fascia signs, regardless of how many businesses are located in the
building.
B. Measuring Sign Area: The area of each sign, regardless of shape, shall be computed by determining the area of a triangle, rectangle or circle that
completely encloses the outer perimeter of the sign face. In the case of a sign composed of characters or words that are attached directly to a building,
an appurtenance to a building, or a masonry wall, the area of the sign will be computed by determining the area of a triangle, rectangle, or circle that
completely encloses the whole group of characters or words.
C. Measuring Sign Height: The maximum height of a sign shall be the measurement from grade to the highest point on the sign. In the case where a
minimum height is established, the minimum height shall be measured from grade to the lowest point on the sign. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-8: SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 470/715
A. Sign Standards For ID And OPD Zones:
1. Permitted Signs:
a. Single-family uses and two-family uses are not allowed to install permanent signs, except for one small identification building sign and one integral
sign, as specified in table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
b. Institutional uses in ID-RS and ID-RM Zones are permitted two (2) identification signs from the following types: fascia, awning, canopy, monument
or masonry wall sign. One sign for an institutional use may also include copy announcing its services or activities. All other nonresidential uses in
the ID-RS and ID-RM Zones are permitted one identification sign from the following types: fascia, awning, canopy or monument sign. (Ord. 18-
4735, 1-2-2018)
c. Signage for nonresidential uses in the ID-C, ID-I, and ID-RP Zones must comply with the sign regulations contained in subsection C, "Sign
Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this section.
d. Residential uses in any OPD Zone are permitted signage in accordance with the requirements of the underlying residential zone. Nonresidential
uses approved as part of a planned development are permitted signage in accordance with the sign regulations contained in subsection C, "Sign
Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this section.
2. Sign Specifications And Provisions:
a. All signs for residential uses in the ID and OPD Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
b. All signs in the ID-RS and ID-RM Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
c. All signs for nonresidential uses in the ID-C, ID-I, and ID-RP Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-2 of this section.
d. In the OPD Zone, all signs for nonresidential uses approved as part of a planned development are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-2
of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
B. Sign Standards For All Residential Zones:
1. Permitted Signs:
a. Principal uses, other than single-family uses and two-family uses, are permitted one identification sign from the following types: fascia, awning,
canopy or monument sign. Institutional uses are permitted two (2) identification signs from the following sign types: fascia, awning, canopy,
monument or masonry wall sign. One sign for an institutional use may also include copy announcing its services or activities. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-
2018)
b. Parks and open space uses are permitted entranceway signs as specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
c. Single-family uses and two-family uses are not allowed to install permanent signs, except for one small identification building sign and one integral
sign as specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
d. One monument sign is permitted at each street entrance of a subdivision or development of two (2) acres or more. The maximum sign area is
thirty two (32) square feet per side - may be double faced for a total of sixty four (64) square feet - maximum height is five feet (5'). All other
monument signs are permitted as specified in table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
2. Sign Specifications And Provisions: All signs in residential zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
Table 5B-1: Sign Specifications And Provisions
In Residential And The ID And OPD Zones
Awning
signs1
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
12 sq. ft. or 25% of awning surface,
whichever is less
Maximum height: Top of first story
Limited to identification only
Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
Canopy
signs1
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
Sign cannot exceed 90% of streetfacing
canopy length and no more
than 15 inches in height
Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright on the top of the
canopy or underneath the canopy. Signs mounted on the face of the canopy
may not extend beyond the edges of the canopy. Signs mounted on the top of
the canopy or underneath the canopy must consist of individual letter forms and
may not extend more than 15" in height above or below the canopy. The bottom
of the canopy or any letter forms attached underneath the canopy must be, at
minimum 8' above the level of the adjacent grade
Canopy signs may not be illuminated
Permitted
Signs Zone
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum Height And
Special Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 471/715
Directional
signs
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
2 sq. ft. per face
May be double faced for total area
of 4 sq. ft.
--
Entranceway
signs
Allowed for
parks and
open space
uses in any
residential
zone, ID
Zone, or
OPD Zone
For signs located above or across
the top of the subject archway, the
area of the sign may not exceed
25% of the area delineated by the
subject archway
Maximum height: 20'
Up to 1 sign per facade of the subject archway
The sign may not contain changeable copy
For a sign located on the side of
the archway, the area of the sign
may not exceed 33% of the surface
area of the side of the archway
support on which the sign is
located. (See section 14-5B-7,
"Measurement Standards", of this
article.)
Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the entranceway structure
Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs across driveways and 8'
for entranceway signs across walkways
Entranceway signs are not allowed if the subject lot or tract already has a
monument sign located at the subject entrance
Fascia
signs1
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12
4 sq. ft., except institutional uses
are allowed 12 sq. ft.
Maximum height: Top of first story
Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
ID-RM, RM-
12, RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
12 sq. ft.
Integral
signs
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
2 sq. ft. Up to 1 of these signs is allowed per building
No permit is required
Masonry
wall signs
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
12 sq. ft. 1' less than the height of the masonry wall
Limited to institutional uses
Monument
signs1
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12
12 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total
area of 24 sq. ft.
Maximum height: 5'
Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
ID-RM, RM-
12, RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
24 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total
area of 48 sq. ft.
Maximum height: 5'
Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
Small
identification
signs
ID-RS, RR-
1, RS-5, RS-
8, RS-12,
RNS-12, IDRM,
RM-12,
RM-20,
RNS-20,
RM-44,
PRM
2 sq. ft. The sign must be a building sign
Up to 1 of these signs is allowed per building
No permit is required
Permitted
Signs Zone
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum Height And
Special Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 472/715
Note:
1. See subsections A1b and B1a of this section for the number of signs allowed.
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; amd. Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
C. Sign Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones:
1. All signs in the CO-1, CN-1, and MU Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-2 of this section, except signage for residential uses
must comply with the requirements for residential uses in the RM Zones as stated in table 5B-1 of this section.
Table 5B-2: Sign Specifications And Provisions
In The CO-1, CN-1, And MU Zones
Awning
signs
25% of awning surface Top edge of
first story
awning
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting
signs. Awning signs are only allowed on first story awnings
Barbers'
poles
-- -- Maximum diameter: 9"
Maximum length: 3'
Canopy
signs
Sign cannot exceed 90% of street-facing canopy
length and no more than 24" in height
Top edge of
first story
canopy
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting
signs
Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright on the
top of the canopy or underneath the canopy. See applicable
dimensional provisions for each type
Signs mounted under a canopy with the face perpendicular to
the building will be considered storefront projecting signs and
regulated accordingly. Said signs may not project beyond the
outer edge of the canopy
Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may not project
beyond the edges of the canopy
Signs mounted on the top of the canopy must consist of
individual letter forms and may not extend more than 24" in
height above the canopy
Canopy signs may be internally or externally illuminated or halo
backlit
Directional
signs
3 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for total area of 6 sq. ft.
-- --
Entranceway
signs
For signs located above or across the top of the
subject archway, the area of the sign may not
exceed 25% of the area delineated by the subject
archway
For a sign located on the side of the archway, the
area of the sign may not exceed 33% of the surface
area of the side of the archway support on which
the sign is located. (See section 14-5B-7,
"Measurement Standards", of this article.)
20' Up to 1 sign per facade of the subject archway
The sign may not contain changeable copy
Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the
entranceway structure
Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs across
driveways and 8' for entranceway signs across walkways
Entranceway signage as specified herein will count as 1 sign
toward the total limit for monument signs on a lot or tract.
Entranceway signs are not allowed if the subject lot or tract
already has a monument sign located at the subject entrance
Fascia signs
15% of sign wall area Top of first
story
Parapet signs are allowed only on one-story buildings
Flags -- -- 1 additional flag may be displayed in conjunction with any city,
county, state or federal flags
No permit is required
Identification
and integral
signs
2 sq. ft. except as allowed in provisions -- No permit is required
A larger integral sign may be allowed when said sign delineates
the name of the building. Size shall be regulated as a fascia
sign. A permit is required
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 473/715
Monument
signs
Up to 2 sq. ft. of sign area per linear foot of lot
frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 100 sq. ft.
per sign
5' 2 or more uses on a single lot may share a common monument
sign
The number of monument signs on a lot or tract is limited as
follows:
* For lots or tracts with less than 160' of frontage on a single
street, only 1 monument sign is permitted along that frontage
* For lots or tracts with 160 to 300' of frontage along a single
street, up to 2 monument signs are permitted. The monument
signs must be at least 150' apart as measured along the
frontage
* For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of 300' along a single
street, up to 3 monument signs are permitted, provided the
signs are at least 150' apart as measured along the frontage
* For lots or tracts with frontage along more than 1 street, each
frontage is allowed signs based on the formulas stated above
up to a maximum of 5 signs. Any sign that is located within 25'
of a corner (at the point where property lines intersect) will count
as 2 signs; 1 toward the sign allowance for each frontage
Storefront
projecting
signs
9 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 18 sq. ft.
The size may be increased up to 18 sq. ft. (may be
double faced for a total area of 36 sq. ft.) if the sign
and storefront meet the following criteria: The floor
to ceiling height of the ground level floor is a
minimum of 18' and the sign is vertically
proportioned
Top of the
first story,
located
below any
second
floor
windowsill
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting
signs. There must be at least 12' between projecting signs
May not project more than 4' from the building wall
Allowed to be a three-dimensional model of an object, such as a
globe or book. If three-dimensional, the sign may rotate
External illumination is permitted provided there are no more
than 2 spotlights of no more than 2000 lumens shining directly
on the sign and provided they meet the light trespass standards
in article G of this chapter
Internal illumination is allowed for halo backlit or neon letters.
Internally illuminated plastic trim cap letters and internally
illuminated cabinet signs where the entire face of the cabinet is
illuminated are prohibited
Shall not project more than 6' into public right of way
If located on or in required storefront windows, window signs
shall be displayed or affixed in a manner that does not block
views into the interior of the storefront
Time and
temperature
signs
25 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total of 50 sq. ft.
--
Window
signs
25% of window area --
D. Sign Standards In CH-1, CC-2 And CI-1 Zones:
1. All signs in the CH-1, CC-2, and CI-1 Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-3 of this section except that signage for residential
uses must comply with the requirements for residential uses in the RM Zones as stated in table 5B-1 of this section.
2. The total number of freestanding signs, freestanding wide base signs and monument signs on a lot or tract is limited as follows. Any combination of
these three (3) types of signs is allowed within the stated limits.
a. For lots or tracts with less than one hundred sixty feet (160') of frontage on a single street, only one (1) such sign is permitted along that frontage.
Freestanding wide base signs are not permitted on lots or tracts with less than one hundred sixty feet (160') of frontage. The City Engineer will
determine that the location of a wide base freestanding sign will not obstruct the visibility of vehicles entering or exiting the property.
b. For lots or tracts with one hundred sixty feet to three hundred feet (160' - 300') of frontage along a single street, up to two (2) such signs are
permitted, provided the signs are at least one hundred fifty feet (150') apart as measured along the frontage.
c. For lots or tracts with three hundred one feet to six hundred feet (301' - 600') of frontage along a single street, up to three (3) such signs are
permitted, provided the signs are at least one hundred fifty feet (150') apart as measured along the frontage.
d. For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of six hundred feet (600') along a single street, up to three (3) such signs are permitted, provided the
signs are at least one hundred fifty feet (150') apart as measured along the frontage. One (1) additional monument sign is allowed, provided the
sign is at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any other monument, freestanding, or freestanding wide base sign.
e. For lots or tracts with frontage along more than one (1) street, each frontage is allowed signs based on the formulas stated in subsections D2a
through D2d of this section. However, a maximum of five (5) such signs are allowed on any one (1) lot or tract. Any sign that is located within
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 474/715
twenty five feet (25') of a corner (the point where property lines intersect) will count as two (2) signs; one (1) toward the sign allowance for each
frontage.
Table 5B-3: Sign Specifications And Provisions
In The CH-1, CC-2, And CI-1 Zones
Awning signs
25% of awning surface Top edge of first story
awning
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from
the following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs. Awning signs are only allowed on first
story awnings
Barbers'
poles
-- -- Maximum diameter: 9"
Maximum length: 3'
Canopy
signs
Signs cannot exceed 90% of street-facing
canopy length and be no more than 24" in
height
Top edge of first story
canopy
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from
the following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs
Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright
on the top of the canopy or underneath the canopy. See
applicable dimensional provisions for each type
Signs mounted under a canopy with the face
perpendicular to the building will be considered storefront
projecting signs and regulated accordingly. Said sign
may not project beyond the outer edge of the canopy
Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may not project
beyond the edges of the canopy
Signs mounted on top of the canopy must consist of
individual letter forms and may not extend more than 24"
in height above the canopy
Canopy signs may be internally or externally illuminated
or halo backlit
Directional
signs
3 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for total area of 6 sq. ft.
-- --
Entranceway
signs
For signs located above or across the top of
the subject archway, the area of the sign
may not exceed 25% of the area delineated
by the subject archway
For a sign located on the side of the
archway, the area of the sign may not
exceed 33% of the surface area of the side
of the archway support on which the sign is
located. (See section 14-5B-7,
"Measurement Standards", of this article.)
20' Up to 1 sign per facade of the entranceway arch
The sign may not contain changeable copy
Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the
entranceway structure
Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs
across driveways and 8' for entranceway signs across
walkways
Entranceway signage as specified herein will count as 1
sign toward the total limit for freestanding, freestanding
wide base signs and monument signs on a lot or tract.
Entranceway signs are not allowed if the subject lot or
tract already has a monument sign, freestanding sign,
freestanding wide base sign, or masonry wall sign
located at the subject entrance
Fascia signs
15% of sign wall area -- --
Flags -- -- 1 additional flag may be displayed in conjunction with any
city, county, state or federal flags
No permit is required
Permitted
Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 475/715
Freestanding
signs
Individual sign in CC-2 and CI-1:
Up to 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage,
not to exceed 125 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 250
sq. ft.
Individual sign in CH-1: For property within
1,000' of an interstate highway right-of-way,
1 of the property's allotted freestanding signs
is allowed to be up to 250 sq. ft. per sign
face, which may be double faced for a total
area of 500 sq. ft.
Common sign: The maximum area of a
common sign may be 50% larger than the
area of the maximum individual sign allowed
25', however, in the CH-1
District, property within
1,000' of an interstate
highway right-of-way may
have 1 freestanding sign
with a maximum height
not to exceed 65'
When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a common
sign may be installed
Freestanding
wide base
signs
Individual sign: Up to 2 sq. ft. per linear foot
of lot frontage, not to exceed 125 sq. ft. per
sign face
May be double faced for a total of 250 sq. ft.
Common sign: The maximum area of a
common sign may be 50% larger than the
area of the maximum individual sign allowed
26' Maximum width: 10'
When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a common
sign may be installed
Identification
and integral
signs
2 sq. ft. except as allowed in provisions -- No permit is required
A larger integral sign may be allowed when said sign
delineates the name of the building. Size shall be
regulated as a fascia sign. A permit is required
Masonry wall
signs
Up to 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage,
not to exceed 50 sq. ft. per sign
In addition, the sign may not exceed 15% of
the total area of the face of the masonry wall
1' less than the height of
the masonry wall, not to
exceed 12'
1 masonry wall sign is allowed in lieu of a monument,
freestanding, or freestanding wide base sign
Monument
signs
Individual sign: Up to 2 sq. ft. per linear foot
of lot frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. per
sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 100
sq. ft.
Common sign: The maximum area of the
common sign may be 50% larger than the
area of the maximum individual sign allowed
5' When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a common
sign may be installed
Storefront
projecting
signs
9 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 18 sq. ft.
The size of a storefront projecting sign may
be increased up to 18 sq. ft. (may be double
faced for a total area of 36 sq. ft.) if the sign
and storefront meet the following criteria:
The floor to ceiling height of the ground level
floor is a minimum of 18' and the sign is
vertically proportioned
Top of the first story
located below any
second floor windowsill
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from
the following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs. There must be 12' between projecting
signs
May not project more than 4' from the building wall
External illumination is permitted provided there are no
more than 2 spotlights of no more than 2000 lumens
shining directly on the sign and provided they meet the
trespass standards in article G of this chapter
Internal illumination may be permitted for halo backlit or
neon letters. Internally illuminated plastic trim cap letters
and cabinet signs where the entire face of the cabinet is
illuminated are prohibited
Permitted to be a three-dimensional model of an object,
such as a globe or book. If three-dimensional, the sign is
permitted to rotate
Permitted
Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 476/715
Time and
temperature
signs
25 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 50
sq. ft.
-- Permitted only in the CC-2 Zone
Signs must not project more than 6' into the public rightof-
way
Upper level
projecting
signs
2 story: 30 sq. ft. with maximum 4' projection
from the face of the building
3 story: 80 sq. ft. with maximum 5' projection
from the face of the building
4 story and taller: 150 sq. ft. with a maximum
of 6' from the face of the building
May be double faced
Cannot extend above the
bottom of the cornice
and/or roofline at the top
of the building and no
lower than the bottom of
the second floor
windowsill
Only permitted when the use occupies the entire building
and the building frontage is greater than 60' or when the
use is an indoor commercial recreational use or
hospitality oriented retail use
Sign can be no closer than 5' from adjacent buildings and
no closer than 15' from adjacent upper level and
storefront projecting signs
Internal and external illumination is allowed except
internally illuminated plastic trim cap letters and internally
illuminated cabinet signs are prohibited
Window
signs
25% of window area -- If located on or in required storefront windows, window
signs shall be displayed in a manner that does not block
views into the interior of the storefront
E. Sign Standards In CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10 Zones:
1. All signs in the CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-4 of this section.
2. The maximum sign area for each type of sign, special provisions, and any restrictions on the number of signs allowed are specified in table 5B-4 of
this section. Unless specifically limited in table 5B-4 of this section, any number of signs may be installed.
3. Signage for residential uses must comply with the requirements for residential uses in the RM Zones as stated in table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 16-
4685, 11-15-2016)
4. Cabinet signs where the entire face of the cabinet is internally illuminated are prohibited. Internally illuminated plastic trim cap letters are prohibited,
except as specifically allowed in table 5B-4 of this section. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
Table 5B-4: Sign Specifications And
Provisions In The CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10 Zones
Awning signs
25% of awning surface Top edge of first story
awning
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs. Awning signs are only allowed on first story
awnings
Note: See subsection 14-3C-3C of this title for awning and
canopy design standards
Banner
projecting
signs
Same allowances as upper level projecting
signs
Same restrictions as
upper level projecting
signs
Only permitted on multiuse buildings where access to uses is
primarily through a common lobby from the street such as an
indoor shopping mall or where a single use occupies a large
multi-story building with more than 100' of frontage
Banners must be mounted perpendicular to the building with
permanent brackets at both top and bottom
Banners can be no closer than 5' from adjacent buildings and
no closer than 15' from adjacent upper level and storefront
projecting signs
A minimum of 3 banners is required to establish a consistent
rhythm and visual impact
Barbers'
poles
-- -- Maximum diameter: 9"
Maximum length: 3'
Permitted
Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 477/715
Canopy
signs
Sign cannot exceed 90% of street-facing
canopy length and no more than 24" in
height
Top edge of first story
canopy
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs
Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright on
the top of the canopy or underneath the canopy. See
applicable dimensional provisions for each type
Signs mounted under a canopy with the face perpendicular to
the building facade will be considered storefront projecting
signs and regulated accordingly. Said signs may not project
beyond the outer edge of the canopy
Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may not project
beyond the edges of the canopy
Signs mounted on the top of the canopy must consist of
individual letter forms and may not extend more than 24" in
height above the canopy
Canopy signs may be internally or externally illuminated or
halo backlit
Directional
signs
3 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for total area of 6 sq.
ft.
-- --
Entranceway
signs
For signs located above or across the top
of the subject archway, the area of the sign
may not exceed 25% of the area delineated
by the subject archway
For a sign located on the side of the
archway, the area of the sign may not
exceed 33% of the surface area of the side
of the archway support on which the sign is
located. (See section 14-5B-7,
"Measurement Standards", of this article.)
20' Up to 1 sign per facade of the entranceway arch
The sign may not contain changeable copy
Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the
entranceway structure
Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs
across driveways and 8' for entranceway signs across
walkways
An entranceway sign is not allowed if the property has a
masonry wall sign, monument sign, or freestanding sign
Fascia signs
Square footage equal to 1.5 times the
length of the sign wall
-- No longer than 90% of the length of the sign wall, sign band
or storefront, whichever is most applicable to the location of
the sign
Back lit cabinet signs, where the entire face is illuminated, are
prohibited
Internally illuminated plastic trim cap letter forms are
prohibited except for buildings of more than 5 stories when
the sign is above the 5th story. Limited to identification only
Flags -- -- 1 additional flag may be displayed in conjunction with any
City, County, State or Federal flags
No permit is required
Freestanding
signs
2 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage, not to
exceed 40 sq. ft. per sign face
20' Allowed only in the CB-2 Zone
Only 1 freestanding sign is allowed per lot
Allowed only through approval of a minor modification.
Applicant must provide convincing evidence that the existing
configuration of the site and location of the building or
buildings on the site make it practically difficult to install a
monument sign and that other types of allowed signage would
not be readily visible from the street due to the location of
building(s) or other unique site characteristics
A freestanding sign is not allowed if the property has a
monument sign, entranceway sign, or masonry wall sign
Identification
and integral
signs
2 sq. ft. except as allowed in provisions -- No permit is required
A larger integral sign 1.5 times the length of the street-facing
facade may be allowed when said sign delineates the name
of the building. A permit is required
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 478/715
Masonry wall
signs
1 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage, not to
exceed 50 sq. ft.
In addition, the sign may not exceed 15% of
the total area of the face of the masonry
wall
1' less than the height
of the masonry wall,
not to exceed 12'
Only 1 masonry wall sign is allowed per lot
A masonry wall sign is not allowed if the property has a
monument sign, entranceway sign or freestanding sign
Monument
signs
24 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 48
sq. ft.
5' Only 1 monument sign is allowed per lot or tract
When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a common
monument sign may be installed. A common monument sign
may identify up to 4 uses per sign face
A monument sign is not allowed if the property has a
freestanding sign, an entranceway sign, or a masonry wall
sign
Portable
signs
6 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 12
sq. ft.
4' Up to 1 nonilluminated portable sign is allowed per storefront.
A maximum of 1 additional sign is allowed for businesses not
located on the ground floor, which may be for 1 or more of
those businesses
The entire sign must be placed: 1) on private property; 2)
within or on the fenced delineated area of a sidewalk cafe; or
3) on City right-of-way within an area no more than 30" from
the front facade wall and/or front property line of the building
containing the business
The sign may not block access to any doorway
When placed on City right-of-way, a clear, unobstructed 8'
path between the sign and any streetscape amenities,
planters, delineated sidewalk cafe areas or obstructions must
be maintained
The sign must be moved inside the business when the
business is closed
The sign must be constructed of durable materials and
weighted to provide stability in all weather conditions. Plastic
signs are prohibited
External weights separate from the sign itself, such as
sandbags, are not permitted
A maximum of 2 sign faces are allowed per sign. Sign faces
can be separated if placed on a fence for sidewalk cafe
permitted
Storefront
projecting
signs
9 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 18 sq. ft.
The size of a storefront projecting sign may
be increased up to 18 sq. ft. (may be
double faced for a total area of 36 sq. ft.) if
the sign and storefront meet the following
criteria: The floor to ceiling height of the
ground level floor is a minimum of 18' and
the sign is vertically proportioned
Top of the first story
located below any
second floor
windowsill
Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the
following sign types: canopy signs, awning signs, and
projecting signs. There must be at least 12' between
projecting signs
A projecting sign may not project more than 4' from the
building wall
Storefront projecting signs are permitted to be a threedimensional
model of an object, such as a globe or book. If
three-dimensional, the sign is permitted to rotate
External illumination is permitted provided there are no more
than 2 small spotlights of no more than 2000 lumens shining
directly on the sign and provided they meet the light trespass
standards in article G of this chapter
Internal illumination may be permitted for halo backlit or neon
letters
Time and
temperature
signs
25 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 50
sq. ft.
-- Signs must not project more than 6' into the public right-ofway
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 479/715
Upper level
projecting
signs
2 story: 30 sq. ft. with maximum 4'
projection from the face of the building
3 story: 80 sq. ft. with maximum 5'
projection from the face of the building
4 story and taller: 150 sq. ft. with a
maximum of 6' from the face of the building
May be double faced
Cannot extend above
the bottom of the
cornice and/or
roofline at the top of
the building and no
lower than the bottom
of the second floor
windowsill
Only permitted when a use occupies the entire building and
the building frontage is greater than 60' or when the use is an
indoor commercial recreational use or a hospitality oriented
retail use
Sign can be no closer than 5' from adjacent buildings and no
closer than 15' from adjacent upper level and storefront
projecting signs
Internal and external illumination is allowed except as set
forth in subsection E4 of this section
Wall mural
painted sign
1.5 times the length in feet of the streetfacing
facade of the building
-- Sign must be incorporated into a larger mural and can only be
placed on an alley facade or a nonstreet-facing facade when
it contains a public entrance to a business
Window
signs
25% of window area -- Only permitted in first floor windows
If located on or in required storefront windows, window signs
shall be displayed or affixed in a manner that does not block
views into the interior of the storefront
In CB-10 Zones, an indoor recreational use may have an
electronic changeable copy window sign. Maximum size
permitted is 75 sq. ft. or 25% of the window area, including all
other window signs, whichever is less. Subject to all
regulations found in section 14-5B-4 of this article
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4702, 4-18-2017; Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
F. Sign Standards In Industrial And Research Park Zones:
1. All signs in the I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP Zones are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-5 of this section.
2. The total number of freestanding signs and monument signs on a lot or tract is limited as follows. Any combination of these types of signs is allowed
within the stated limits.
a. For lots or tracts with less than one hundred sixty feet (160') of frontage on a single street, only one such sign is permitted along that frontage.
b. For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of one hundred sixty feet (160') of frontage along a single street, up to two (2) such signs are permitted,
provided the signs are located at least one hundred fifty feet (150') apart as measured along the frontage.
c. For lots or tracts with frontage along more than one street, each frontage is allowed signs based on the formulas stated in subsections F2a and
F2b of this section.
3. Masonry wall signs and entranceway signs are limited according to the provisions specified in table 5B-5 of this section.
4. Other than for the types of signs listed in subsections F2 and F3 of this section, any number of signs may be installed, provided the maximum sign
area for each type of sign is not exceeded and the provisions specified in table 5B-5 of this section, are met. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
Table 5B-5: Sign Specifications And Provisions
In The Industrial And Research Park Zones
Awning signs
Must not exceed 25% of awning surface or 12 sq. ft. per sign,
whichever is less
Top of first
story
--
Canopy
signs
Sign cannot exceed 90% of street-facing canopy length and no
more than 24" in height
Top of first
story
Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy,
upright on the top of the canopy or underneath the
canopy. See applicable dimensional provisions for
each type
Signs mounted under a canopy may not project
beyond the outer edge of the canopy
Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may not
project beyond the face of the canopy and must not
extend above or below the top and bottom edges of
the canopy
Signs mounted on the top of the canopy must
consist of individual letter forms and may not extend
more than 24" in height above the canopy
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 480/715
Canopy signs may be internally or externally
illuminated or halo backlit
Directional
signs
In industrial zones: 15 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for total area of 30 sq. ft.
In research park zones: 3 sq. ft. per sign face
May be double faced for total area of 6 sq. ft.
-- --
Entranceway
signs
For signs located above or across the top of the subject archway,
the area of the sign may not exceed 25% of the area delineated
by the subject archway
For a sign located on the side of the archway, the area of the
sign may not exceed 33% of the surface area of the side of the
archway support on which the sign is located. (See section 14-
5B-7, "Measurement Standards", of this article.)
20' Up to 1 sign per facade of the entranceway arch
The sign may not contain changeable copy
Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the
entranceway structure
Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway
signs across driveways and 8' for entranceway
signs across walkways
An entranceway sign is not allowed if the property
has a masonry wall sign
Fascia signs
15% of sign wall area -- --
Flags -- -- 1 additional flag may be displayed in conjunction
with city, county, state and federal flags
No permit is required
Freestanding
signs
1 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft.
except as allowed in provisions for common signs
May be double faced for a total of 100 sq. ft. or as allowed in
provisions for common signs
25' When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a
common sign may be installed. The maximum area
of the common sign may be 50% larger than the
area of the maximum individual sign allowed
Freestanding signs are limited to identification only
Identification
and integral
signs
2 sq. ft. -- Up to 1 of these signs is allowed per building
No permit is required
Masonry wall
signs
Up to 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed 75 sq.
ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 150 sq. ft.
In addition, the sign may not exceed 15% of the total area of the
face of the masonry wall
1' less
than the
height of
the
masonry
wall
At each entranceway, up to 2 masonry wall signs
may be established, if no freestanding,
entranceway, monument or other nonbuilding signs
are located at that entranceway
In the ORP Zone, masonry wall signs up to 12' in
height may be established in the required front
setback, provided the signs are located a minimum
of 20' back from street right-of-way lines
Monument
signs
Up to 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed 75 sq.
ft. per sign face
May be double faced for a total area of 150 sq. ft.
5' When 2 or more uses are located on a lot, a
common sign may be installed. The maximum area
of the common sign may be 50% larger than the
area of the maximum individual sign allowed
Monument signs are limited to identification only
Window
signs
25% of window area -- --
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
G. Sign Standards For Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Zones:
1. In the South Downtown, University, Central Crossings, Park, South Gilbert Subdistricts of Riverfront Crossings and Eastside Mixed Use Zone,
signage on mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply in the CB-10 Zone, except that in the
South Gilbert Subdistrict the maximum sign area for fascia signs for Cottage Industries and associated uses located in existing buildings that are
legally non-compliant with storefront frontage standards is fifteen percent (15%) of the sign wall.
2. In the Gilbert Subdistrict, signage for mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply in the CN-1
Zone.
3. In the West Riverfront Subdistrict, signage on mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply in the
CC-2 Zone, except that new freestanding signs shall be limited to fifteen feet (15') in height.
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Height Provisions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 481/715
4. Signage for residential buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply in residential zones. For multi-family buildings, the larger sign
area for fascia and monument signs as specified in multi-family zones applies.
5. Signs shall be integrated into the architectural design of the building and not dominate the facade or interfere with adjacent buildings. For buildings
with multiple storefronts, a sign plan is required at the time of development that ensures that signage allowances are fairly apportioned according to
the relative width of the individual storefronts and that the signage type and designs are consistent and complementary along the building frontage.
6. On storefront and urban flex frontages, storefront level signs shall be primarily oriented to pedestrians and scaled appropriately. Window signs and
temporary signs in windows shall not block views into the interior and shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the storefront window
area.
7. Sign installations shall comply with all other generally applicable sign regulations, standards, and requirements as set forth in this article. (Ord. 17-
4702, 4-18-2017)
14-5B-9: OFF PREMISES AND TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. In addition to the signage permitted in each zone, as described in section 14-5B-8 of this article, the following signs may be installed in any zone
according to the specifications and provisions contained in table 5B-6 of this section. These signs shall not be applied toward the maximum sign area
specified in section 14-5B-8 of this article, except as otherwise indicated in table 5B-6 of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
Table 5B-6: Sign Specifications And
Provisions For Off Premises And Temporary Signs
Permitted
Signs
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Height Provisions
Billboards
and other
off
premises
signs
Not to exceed the maximum sign area
for the subject sign type as specified in
the applicable zone and will be
deducted from the maximum sign
allowance for the subject property.
Billboards: 72 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total area of
144 sq. ft.
Not to exceed the
maximum sign height
for the subject sign
type as specified in
the applicable zone
Billboards: 25'
Not permitted in residential, CO-1, CN-1, CB-5, CB-10, ORP and
RDP zones
May take the form of any type of sign allowed in the zone in which
the sign is located and must comply with all other provisions
specified for the subject zone
Only 1 off premises sign is allowed per lot or tract
2 or more uses may install a common off premises directional sign
Shall not be located within 300' of another off premises sign
Shall not be located within 120' of a residential zone, parks and
open space use, educational facility, religious/private group
assembly use, public museum or government administrative or
judicial office
Billboard signs shall not apply toward maximum sign allowance for
the lot or tract
Temporary
signs
-- -- No permit is required
No illumination is allowed
In ID and residential zones: 4 sq. ft.
In all other zones: 32 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 8 sq.
ft. and 64 sq. ft. respectively
In residential zones:
5'
In all other zones: 10'
1 sign may be located on a lot and/or parcel when being advertised
for sale or lease
Must be displayed in yard or window. Cannot be affixed to building
Must be removed 48 hours after the sale or lease of property
All zones: 32 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 64 sq.
ft.
In residential zones:
5'
In all other zones: 10'
1 sign may be located on a lot and/or parcel when construction
and/or development is occurring on said lot or parcel. Must be
removed upon issuance of certificate of occupancy or upon
completion of construction
All zones: 32 sq. ft.
May be double faced for a total of 64 sq.
ft.
In residential zones:
5'
In all other zones: 10'
1 sign may be located on a development area of 2 acres or more.
Must be removed upon the sale or lease of 50% of the lots or units
in the development
100 sq. ft. allowed in all zones except
residential zones
10' 1 sign may be located on a lot and/or parcel for a period not to
exceed 60 days when a business has recently opened or is in the
process of closing or when events of civic interest, a philanthropic or
nonprofit organization are occurring on the property
Banners are permitted for these situations
4 sq. ft.
In all zones: 5' 1 sign may be located on a lot and/or parcel for a period not to
exceed 14 days and no more than 2 occasions in any calendar year
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 482/715
May be double sided for a total of 8 sq.
ft.
Temporary
signs in
windows
-- -- No permit is required
Posters and other nonpermanent signs in windows are allowed, but
may only be displayed for a temporary period of time, not to exceed
60 days. If located in or on required storefront windows, window
signs shall be displayed in a manner that does not block views into
the interior of the storefront
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-10: PRIVATELY OWNED SIGNS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Purpose: In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the population, no privately owned signs shall be placed on or over a "public
place", as defined in chapter 9, article C of this title, except as permitted by this Code.
B. Removal: Existing privately owned signs currently located on or over a public place that are not in compliance with this Code shall be eliminated and
removed. If the sign owner fails to remove the sign after so ordered by the City, the City may remove the sign and assess the costs against the sign
owner.
C. Special Provisions:
1. Signs associated with parades, marches, public entertainment, public demonstrations, or the commercial use of sidewalks that are located on or
over a public place are subject to the provisions of title 10, chapters 1, 2, and 3 of this Code. Any signs located on or over the City Plaza are subject
to the provisions of title 10, chapter 5 of this Code.
2. The City Manager or designee may approve and execute applications on the City's behalf for the placement of privately owned signs on or over a
public place upon finding that the signs:
a. Provide information and guidance to locations of general public interest; and
b. Will not create a hazard to movement along or within a public place, restrict access to a public place, or interfere with the convenience and
tranquility of the area adjacent to a public place. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
ARTICLE C. ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
14-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to ensure safe and adequate access to the public street network by establishing standards to control the location and number
of access points, separate and control intersection conflict areas, remove turning vehicles from through travel lanes when appropriate, provide adequate
spacing between driveways, and minimize impervious driveway surface in the parkway portion of the public right of way. These standards help to ensure
that the city's street network is designed to balance the functions of access to adjoining property, pedestrian circulation, and vehicular traffic circulation.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-2: APPLICABILITY AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. It is unlawful for any person to cut, break, or remove any curb along a street except in compliance with the requirements of this article.
B. No building permit will be issued and no site plan or subdivision will be approved unless the proposed development is in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
C. Every residential and nonresidential property will be permitted at least one means of vehicular access to a public street. However, direct driveway
access to a public street may not be permitted in all instances. Use of alleys, private rear lanes, backage roads, and cross access easements may be
required as alternatives to direct street access.
D. The specifications, design, and construction of all curb cuts, access drives and sidewalks must comply with the Iowa City municipal design standards
(MDS), as amended. In cases where the provisions of the MDS conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Arterial streets, as referenced in this article, are those streets shown on the Iowa City arterial street map in figure 5C.1 (found in subsection 14-5C-6F of
this article), and include future arterial streets as shown on the map. Said map is based on the JCCOG arterial street map, as amended. If the JCCOG
arterial street map, as amended, conflicts with figure 5C.1 of this article, the JCCOG map will supersede figure 5C.1. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-5C-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 483/715
A. Except as otherwise specified in subsections B through D of this section, an access permit must be obtained prior to cutting, breaking, or removing any
curb. Procedures for obtaining an access permit are specified in chapter 8, "Review And Approval Procedures", of this title.
B. An access permit is always required for access to an arterial street, unless the specific access point has already been approved through the site plan
review process.
C. For local and collector streets, if access locations are specified and approved as a part of a subdivision or site plan review process, separate access
permits are not required upon development of the individual lots within the subdivision. However, an access permit is required if the request for an
access point is other than what was approved through the site plan review or the subdivision process or if access was not addressed through the
subdivision or site plan review process.
D. For access to a state highway, an access permit must be approved by the Iowa department of transportation (IDOT), with a recommendation from the
city. A recommendation from the city is required prior to filing an application with the IDOT. However, a separate city access permit is not required.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Historic review, as set forth in chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures", of this title, is required for any new access
to property designated as an Iowa City landmark or property located in a historic or conservation district. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-5C-4: DRIVEWAY SPACING STANDARDS:
A. Driveway Spacing From Street Intersections: On corner lots, driveways must be constructed as far away from the intersection as possible while
maintaining the driveway spacing standards specified in subsection B of this section. In addition to this general standard, the following standards apply,
based on the functional classification of the street.
1. Along local streets and collector streets, there must be a minimum of twenty feet (20') between the end of a radius of a street intersection and the
beginning of a driveway curb cut as measured at the curb line, except as required in the subsection A2 of this section.
2. Along collector streets, where they intersect with arterial streets, there must be a minimum of fifty feet (50') between the end of a radius of a street
intersection and the beginning of a driveway curb cut as measured at the curb line.
3. Along arterial streets, there must be a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') between the end of a radius of a street intersection and the beginning
of a driveway curb cut as measured at the curb line.
4. Additional distance between the radius of a street intersection and the beginning of a driveway curb cut may be required by the city where deemed
necessary due to high traffic volumes or other safety concerns.
5. The city may adjust the driveway spacing standards so that driveways line up with existing driveways across the street.
B. Minimum Spacing Between Driveways:
1. Along arterial streets, there must be at least fifty feet (50') between curb cuts, measured at the curb line. No portion of a driveway may be
constructed within twenty five feet (25') of a side property line extended, except when a common driveway agreement has been reached with an
adjacent property owner and is of record.
2. Along local and collector streets, there must be at least six feet (6') between curb cuts, measured at the curb line. No portion of a driveway may be
constructed closer than three feet (3') to a side property line extended, except when a common driveway agreement has been reached with an
adjacent property owner and is of record.
C. Modifications To Driveway Spacing Standards: If it can be demonstrated that there is practical difficulty meeting a driveway spacing standard contained
in this section due to topographical limitations, natural features of the site, or other circumstances peculiar to the property in question, a property owner
may request a modification or waiver of said standard according to the applicable approval criteria for a minor modification as set forth in chapter 4,
article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-5: LOCATION AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS:
The following location and dimensional standards for access points provide the opportunity for access to streets while setting limits on the number of curb
cuts permitted and the width of driveways. Maximums are intended as an upper limit on the number and dimensions of driveways and should not be
construed as minimum requirements. In many cases, fewer and narrower driveways may be desirable to reduce interruption of the city's street and
sidewalk system, to preserve opportunities for on street parking, and to reduce impervious surface and storm water runoff.
A. Household Living Uses, Except Multi-Family Uses:
1. Group Households: Group households must comply with the access regulations that pertain to the type of dwelling in which the group household is
located. For example, a group household located in a two-family use must comply with the access regulations for two-family uses.
2. Number Of Access Points Allowed:
a. For detached single-family dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings, a maximum of two (2) access points may be approved per property,
regardless of whether it is a single frontage, double frontage, or corner lot. For lots with less than fifty feet (50') of frontage, only one access point
is allowed.
b. For attached single-family dwellings and two-family uses, a maximum of one access point per dwelling unit will be allowed, regardless of whether it
is a single frontage, double frontage, or corner lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 484/715
3. Access Based On Street Classification: Direct lot access to city streets is allowed according to the following rules. Single-family and two-family uses
must also comply with the single-family site development standards as set forth in section 14-2A-6 of this title and/or according to any applicable
provisions of the single-family density bonus options set forth in section 14-2A-7 of this title.
a. If two (2) access points are approved for a single lot, the primary access drive must be from the lower classified street.
b. Where a lot is adjacent to a paved alley or paved private rear lane, primary access must be from the alley or private rear lane, unless, due to
topographical limitations or other unique circumstances, such access is not feasible.
c. For properties without feasible access to a paved alley or paved private rear lane, the primary access may be located along a local or collector
street. For lots with frontage along more than one street, primary access must be located along the lower classified street.
d. Direct lot access to an arterial street may be requested when access to a paved alley, private rear lane, local street, or collector street is not
feasible due to inadequate frontage, topographical limitations or other unique circumstances. When land is being subdivided or resubdivided into
lots intended for single-family or two-family uses, individual lot access to arterial streets is discouraged. The city, at its discretion, may deny a
request for a subdivision design that would necessitate individual lot access for single-family and two-family uses to an arterial street. Requests for
direct lot access to an arterial street are subject to the provisions of section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this article.
e. For two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings in the RS-5 and RS-8 zone, if access to a paved alley or private rear lane is not feasible,
the garage entrance and access drive for a dwelling unit must be oriented towards the same street as that dwelling unit's main entrance.
4. Narrow Lots: Additional access restrictions may apply to lots less than sixty feet (60') in width. See the single-family site development standards
contained in chapter 2, article A, "Single-Family Residential Zones", of this title.
5. Shared Driveways: Dwellings may share drives and aisles; provided, that a shared access easement is secured from the owners of each property
sharing the drive or aisle. The easement must be recorded and proof of such recording must be submitted prior to issuance of an access permit.
6. Dimensional Standards:
a. For alley or rear lane access, the driveway is allowed to be as wide as necessary to provide access to the garage or parking space(s).
b. For properties with a single access point, the maximum driveway width is twenty four feet (24') measured at the property line and thirty feet (30')
measured at the curb line.
c. If two (2) access points are approved on a single frontage lot, the maximum dimension for each driveway is twelve feet (12') measured at the
property line and eighteen feet (18') measured at the curb line.
d. For single-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved, one from an alley or private rear lane, and one from a street, the primary access
drive must be from the alley or private rear lane. In such a case, the maximum driveway width for the secondary driveway from the street is twelve
feet (12') measured at the property line and eighteen feet (18') measured at the curb line. The access drive from the alley or rear lane is allowed to
be as wide as necessary to provide access to the garage or parking space(s).
e. For single-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved on a double frontage or corner lot, one on each frontage, maximum driveway width
for the primary driveway is twenty four feet (24') measured at the property line and thirty feet (30') measured at the curb line. The maximum
driveway width for the secondary driveway is twelve feet (12') measured at the property line and eighteen feet (18') measured at the curb line.
f. For two-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved, one from an alley or private rear lane, and one from a street, the maximum driveway
width for the driveway from the street is twenty feet (20') at the property line and twenty six feet (26') at the curb line. The access drive from the
alley or rear lane is allowed to be as wide as necessary to provide access to the garage or parking space(s).
g. For two-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved on a double frontage or corner lot, one on each frontage, the maximum driveway width
for each driveway is twenty feet (20') at the property line and twenty six feet (26') at the curb line.
h. The maximum width for shared driveways is twenty four feet (24') measured at the property line and thirty feet (30') measured at the curb line.
i. Additional driveway width restrictions may apply to lots narrower than sixty feet (60'). (See single-family site development standards contained in
chapter 2, article A of this title.)
j. In all cases, at least fifty percent (50%) of the area within the front building setback must remain open space free of impervious surface. Drives may
not be constructed such that this limit is exceeded, except when a special exception is granted by the board of adjustment according to the
applicable approval criteria as stated in the base zone.
B. Multi-Family Uses And Group Living Uses:
1. Group Households: Group households located within multi-family uses are subject to the standards of this subsection.
2. Determining Number And Location Of Access Points:
a. The city will grant direct lot access to local or collector streets based on the size of the residential development, anticipated traffic, the location, the
surrounding land uses, and the availability of cross access easements, or alley or private rear lane access. Based on these factors, the city will
determine the number and location of access points.
b. Direct lot access to arterial streets may be requested if access to an alley, private rear lane, local street, or collector street is not feasible and if
access is not feasible by means of a cross access easement. Requests for direct lot access to an arterial street are subject to the provisions of
section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this article.
c. No more than two (2) driveways will be allowed on any single frontage property. No more than three (3) driveways will be allowed on any double
frontage/corner lot, with a maximum of two (2) driveways permitted along any one street.
3. Driveway Dimensional Standards: The city will determine driveway specifications, including width and configuration of lanes, for multi-family and
group living uses based on the size of the development, the anticipated traffic generated by the use, the location, the surrounding land uses, and the
functional classification of the street to which the driveway provides access. Driveway widths may not exceed twenty four feet (24') measured at the
property line and thirty two feet (32') at the curb line, except as required by the city for high traffic volume situations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 485/715
C. Nonresidential Uses:
1. Determining Number And Location Of Access Points:
a. The city will grant direct lot access to local or collector streets that are nonresidential in nature, provided traffic circulation and/or public safety will
not be compromised. The city will determine the number, location, and design of the access based on the size and location of the nonresidential
development, the type of use, the anticipated traffic and safety issues, and the surrounding land uses.
b. When a site is being developed or redeveloped for nonresidential uses, existing access points along local or collector streets may be retained in
most instances. However, the city may require that an access point be moved or combined with another access point in order to prevent public
safety or traffic circulation problems that might reasonably be expected to occur due to the development or redevelopment of the site.
c. Institutional uses that are allowed in residential zones may be permitted access to residential local and collector streets, provided such access
does not conflict with the approval criteria for provisional and special exception uses contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
d. Direct lot access to arterial streets may be requested if access to a local or collector street is not feasible and if access is not feasible by means of
a cross access easement. Requests for direct lot access to an arterial street are subject to the provisions of section 14-5C-6, "Arterial Street
Access Requirements", of this article.
e. No more than two (2) driveways will be allowed on any single frontage property. No more than three (3) driveways will be allowed on any doublefrontage/
corner lot, with a maximum of two (2) driveways permitted along any one street.
2. Driveway Dimensional Standards:
a. The city will determine driveway specifications, including width and configuration of lanes, for nonresidential uses based on the size of the
nonresidential development, the anticipated traffic generated by the use, the location, the surrounding land uses, and the functional classification
of the street to which the driveway provides access.
b. Driveway widths may not exceed thirty four feet (34') measured at the property line and forty two feet (42') at the curb line, except as required by
the city for high traffic volume situations and for commercial and industrial properties that need to accommodate large truck traffic. The Iowa City
municipal design standards, as amended, describe and illustrate type A, B, and C driveways that are intended for these situations. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-5C-6: ARTERIAL STREET ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
A. Direct lot access to an arterial street (see figure 5C.1 at subsection F of this section) will only be granted upon presentation by the applicant of
convincing evidence that an alternative means of access is not feasible from an intersecting local or collector street or through means of a cross access
easement.
B. The city will approve or deny a request for direct lot access to an arterial street based on whether an alternative means of access is available, the size
and nature of the proposed development, the anticipated amount of traffic that will be generated by the development, the capacity of the surrounding
streets, and the character of surrounding land uses. At the discretion of the city, a traffic study may be required as described in subsection C of this
section for any request for access to an arterial street.
C. When an applicant makes a request for driveway access from any use to an arterial street, either as part of an access permit application or an
application for a new subdivision, the city may require the applicant to conduct and submit a traffic study. The city will determine the scope of the traffic
study. The traffic study must provide accurate and convincing evidence justifying the need for the proposed access point and also determine whether
additional traffic control improvements are necessary for safe access. These improvements may include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Right turn lanes.
2. Left turn lanes, including two-way left turn lanes.
3. Opening or closing a median.
4. Cross access roads or driveways.
5. Installation or modification of traffic signals, or other traffic control devices.
6. Widening or narrowing driveways and improving on site vehicle storage areas.
7. Consolidating or closing existing driveways.
8. Relocating or re-orienting access to provide better sight distance.
9. Redesigning internal road and parking layout.
10. Modifications to on street parking or off street parking.
D. If the city determines that a cross access easement, road or driveway is required as a condition of approval, the development must adhere to the
standards for cross access easements outlined in section 14-5C-7 of this article.
E. In addition to any traffic control improvements required based on the traffic study, the driveway spacing, location, and dimensional standards contained
in this article must be met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 486/715
F. Figure 5C.1 - Iowa City Arterial Street System:
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-7: CROSS ACCESS EASEMENTS:
A. Purpose: Cross access easements provide the opportunity to minimize the number of access points along an arterial street in order to maximize the
traffic carrying capacity of the street and improve the overall safety of the transportation corridor.
B. Applicability And Rules Of Interpretation:
1. If a property with frontage along an arterial street is proposed to be subdivided, developed or redeveloped for any multi-family, group living,
commercial, or industrial use, a cross access easement must be provided by the property owner to all adjoining properties that front on the same
arterial street that are or may be developed as multi-family, group living, commercial, or industrial uses.
2. The city may waive the requirement for a cross access easement in cases where unusual topography, existing buildings, utility substations or other
unique conditions would render such an easement functionally unusable. The city may also waive cross access easement requirements between
properties that contain dissimilar uses, such as between residential uses and commercial or industrial uses.
3. The city may approve the vacation of cross access easements in those cases where the adjoining parcels are subsequently developed with a
dissimilar use such as a single-family dwelling or duplex, multi-family dwellings adjacent to commercial uses, or other similar situation.
C. Requirements:
1. The cross access easement must be at least twenty four feet (24') in width, unless a narrower width is approved by the city due to topography,
existing buildings, or other site conditions.
2. The drive or lane constructed in the cross access easement must be at least twenty feet (20') wide, unless a greater width is required due to fire
apparatus access drive requirements or driveway width requirements contained in chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards",
of this title.
3. The cross access drive must meet any other applicable standards for access drives contained in chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And
Loading Standards", of this title.
4. Cross access easements should function as rear service lanes or as traffic circulation drives between parking areas of adjacent properties. See
figures 5C.2 and 5C.3 below.
Figure 5C.2 - Rear Service Lane As A Cross Access Easement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 487/715
Figure 5C.3 - Cross Access On A Site With Shared Traffic
Circulation And Parking
5. Permanent structures that would interfere with the proposed access are not permitted within the easement. Improvements such as medians and
parking islands may be constructed within a cross access easement if it can be demonstrated that adequate circulation and cross access will be
accomplished.
6. The property owner is responsible for properly maintaining the cross access easement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. INTERSECTION VISIBILITY STANDARDS
14-5D-1: PURPOSE:
The intersection visibility standards establish triangular areas on corner lots, referred to herein as "vision triangles", within which the placement of
buildings, fences, hedges, walls, and other structures is restricted in order to maintain clear lines of sight at street intersections for the purposes of traffic
and pedestrian safety. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5D-2: APPLICABILITY:
Lots located at the corner of any street intersection must comply with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 488/715
14-5D-3: VISION TRIANGLES:
The dimensions of vision triangles are determined as follows: (See also figure 5D.1, located at the end of this section.)
A. At the intersection of two (2) local streets, a local street with a collector street, or two (2) collector streets, the legs of the vision triangle will be thirty feet
(30') in length, as measured along the curb line from the point where the curbs of the two (2) streets intersect. In the absence of a curb, the legs of the
triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the edge of the street pavement from the point where the pavement of the two (2) streets
intersect.
B. At the intersection of two (2) arterial streets, the legs of the triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the right of way line from the
point the right of way lines of the two (2) streets intersect.
C. At the intersection of a local street with an arterial or at the intersection of a collector street with an arterial, the local or collector leg of the triangle will
be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the curb line from the point where the curbs of the streets intersect. The arterial leg of the triangle will
be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the right of way line from the point the right of way lines of the two (2) streets intersect.
Figure 5D.1 - Vision Triangles At The Intersections
Of Various Street Types
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5D-4: STANDARDS WITHIN VISION TRIANGLES:
A. Prohibited Obstructions: The following obstructions are prohibited within vision triangles:
1. Hedges and walls higher than two feet (2') above the curb level.
2. Fences higher than two feet (2') above the curb level. However, fences that are of a type that is less than twenty percent (20%) solid, such as split
rail, open weave, or wrought iron, are permitted within the vision triangle; provided, that such fences are kept free from plantings and other materials
that are more than two feet (2') in height. Solidity is the percent of the fence over a random area that is made up of solid, opaque material that does
not allow light or air to pass through.
3. Signs, except as specifically exempted in subsection B of this section.
4. Structures of any type, including principal and accessory buildings, except as exempted in subsection B of this section.
5. Items of outdoor display or storage, including ornamental features, such as fountains, statues, garden structures and similar features.
6. Parking and vehicular display areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 489/715
B. Exemptions: The following structures are exempt from the provisions of this article:
1. Structures, including signs, in the CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones.
2. After review by the city, buildings on lots at intersections where both streets are signalized. The city will approve or deny a request to construct a
building within the vision triangle based on such factors as street right of way width, speed and volume of traffic through the intersection, and the
number of turning movements.
3. Utility and street light poles.
4. Traffic control equipment, including control boxes, traffic signs, and structures that support traffic signals.
5. Building signs located on buildings that are exempt from the vision triangle requirements as specified in subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
6. A sign established according to chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, provided the bottom edge of the sign and any supporting
structure is at least eight feet (8') above the adjacent curb level, so that visual clearance is maintained within the vision triangle. Poles and supporting
structures for signs are prohibited within the vision triangle. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. LANDSCAPING AND TREE STANDARDS
14-5E-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this article is to encourage the retention of existing trees and to provide for the planting of new trees along streets, on two-family, multi-family
and group living residential properties, and to provide planting and maintenance standards for required trees and landscaping. Trees and landscaping
provide shade, reduce heat island effects in paved areas, improve the appearance of Iowa City streets and create attractive and functional living
environments that will protect and enhance property values. Standards for screening and buffering are contained in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And
Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Applicability: No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or structural alteration of a building nor shall any use be established
or converted nor shall a certificate of occupancy be granted for a use without conformity with the provisions of the tree regulations, unless specifically
exempted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B. Exemptions: The following are exempt from the requirements of this article:
1. Any individual lot occupied by a detached single-family dwelling or a detached zero lot line dwelling, including group households, if located within
such a dwelling.
2. Property in the ID and CB-10 zones.
3. In commercial zones, property developed in accordance with the setback requirements of the base zone in such a manner that insufficient area is
available to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article; however, all trees that can be provided in compliance with the requirements
must be provided. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-5E-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MEASUREMENTS:
A. Permitted Species: The list of recommended trees for Iowa City, as established by the city forester, specifies the varieties of trees permitted for the uses
indicated by this article. References to "large" or "small" trees herein refer to the mature heights of the trees as indicated in said list.
B. Landscape Plans Required: When the provisions of this article are applicable, a landscaping plan must be submitted that illustrates and lists the
following information:
1. The size and location of required planting areas.
2. The mature height (small or large) of both proposed trees and trees that will be preserved.
3. The species of trees (both preserved and proposed).
4. The location of the preserved and proposed trees.
5. The location of any existing trees within the right of way.
C. Measurements:
1. When measuring to determine the location or spacing of required trees or shrubs, the distance is measured to the center of the tree or shrub.
2. Where fractional numbers of trees result from calculations, the number of trees required will be rounded to the closest whole number. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-5E-4: TREE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 490/715
A. Plantings Required Prior To Occupancy:
1. All plantings required by this article must be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use, except as allowed in subsection A2 of this
section.
2. If the plantings cannot be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use due to seasonal conditions that may reduce survivability, the
building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and grant a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates of June 1 or
November 1, whichever occurs first, and the property owner must place in an escrow account, established with the city, an amount which will cover
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of plants and installation.
B. Planting Sizes:
1. Deciduous Trees: At the time of planting, deciduous trees must have a single stem and have a minimum trunk diameter of one and one-half inches
(1.5") measured at a point six inches (6") above ground level or above the top of burlap wrapping. It must demonstrate the growth capabilities,
branching formation and crown balance that are indigenous to the particular variety. The tree must be straight of trunk with the main leader intact and
must be healthy and free of disease and pests.
2. Coniferous Trees: At the time of planting, coniferous trees must have a minimum height of three feet (3') measured from the planted level to the top
of the tree. The needle color and branching habits must be normal for the species, and the overall appearance must be indicative of previous care in
pruning and development. The tree must be healthy and free of disease and pests.
C. Siting Requirements:
1. Trees must be located in a manner that, at maturity, will avoid interference with the construction, maintenance and operation of public and private
utilities and services aboveground or belowground.
2. The minimum planting area required for large trees is two hundred fifty six (256) square feet. The minimum planting area required for small trees is
one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
3. At the time of planting, trees and plantings must be separated from other structures and features on a site in order to minimize conflicts as plants
mature. Table 5E-1 below specifies the minimum spacing between plantings and various features of a site. However, the minimum distances
between trees, between trees and shrubs, and between shrubs may be reduced by twenty five percent (25%) to permit design flexibility or to create
denser screening where desired.
Table 5E-1: Minimum Spacing Between
Plantings And Other Features
(In Feet)
Large Tree Small Tree Shrub
Large tree 30 24 4
Small tree 24 16 3
Shrub 4 3 See chapter 5, article F of this title2
Building 14 8 2
Sidewalk 41 41 31
Curb/pavement 41 41 21
Notes to table 5E-1:
1. The minimum distance between plantings and sidewalks or pavement also applies to the anticipated location of a future sidewalk or paved
surface.
2. See spacing requirements listed in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-5: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. The provisions of this section apply to all plantings required by this title, whether newly planted or preserved.
B. Required planting areas must be separated from abutting vehicular use areas, including parking spaces, drives, aisles, alleys, vehicle display and
loading areas, etc., by an unmountable curb or barrier that is a minimum of five inches (5") in height. The curb or barrier must be constructed in such a
manner that salt water runoff will not damage the tree or plantings.
C. The property owner must keep all trees properly maintained, pruned as needed, and free from trash and litter. It is the responsibility of the property
owner to maintain and replace trees and plantings required by this title. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner.
Plants that die must be replaced. Improper maintenance, pruning, or removal of plantings may be subject to municipal infraction proceedings, up to and
including environmental infraction proceedings. Any preserved tree that has been improperly maintained, pruned, or removed may be required to be
replaced by the same number of trees for which it substituted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 491/715
D. Any trees that overhang the public right of way must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of title 10, chapter 8, "Trees And Plant Materials",
of this code.
E. Maintenance of trees within street rights of way will be the responsibility of the city. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-6: PRESERVATION OF EXISTING TREES:
Existing trees may be used to comply with the requirements of sections 14-5E-7, "Street Tree Requirements", and 14-5E-8, "Tree Requirements For
Residential Uses", of this article, and to meet the tree requirements for parking areas contained in article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of
this chapter. Existing trees used to satisfy these requirements must be in good health prior to and following site development. The city forester is
authorized to approve substitutions based on determination of health and survivability. Table 5E-2, "Schedule Of Substitution Values", of this section, will
be used to determine the ratio of substitution. The following provisions must also be observed:
A. The same minimum separation distances that are required of new plantings must be observed when possible; except, that extant groupings of two (2)
or more trees may be preserved upon approval by the city forester, who will also determine if trees or branches must be removed from such groupings
in the interest of public safety and/or to assure survival of the specimen.
B. The building official will determine if a preserved tree will be a substitute for a street tree or a residential use tree, depending on its location on a lot.
C. The roots of a tree must be protected during site development with barrier fencing extending out at least as far as the drip line of the tree, or as far as
the city forester deems necessary to minimize damage. Any limbs that might be damaged during construction must be pruned according to the
direction of the city forester.
D. No paving or construction will be allowed within the drip line of a preserved tree.
E. Any preserved tree that dies within five (5) years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy must be replaced by the same number of trees for which it
substituted.
Table 5E-2: Schedule Of Substitution Values1
Diameter Of Existing Tree
(Measured 4 Feet Above Ground Level) Substitution Value
36 inches or more 3 required trees
12 to 35 inches 2 required trees
2 to 12 inches 1 required tree
Note:
1. The substitution value of groupings of 1 or more trees, provided their preservation as a group is approved by the city forester, will be based on
the caliper measure of the largest tree of the group.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-7: STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements of this section provide for trees along streets to complement and soften the edges of development, to provide a tree canopy for
pedestrians, and to define and unify the street edge. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
A. Street Trees Adjacent To Public Right Of Way:
1. On single frontage lots, one large tree is required for every forty (40) linear feet of frontage or one small tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of
frontage, but not less than one tree per lot.
2. On lots with more than one frontage, one tree is required for every sixty (60) linear feet of frontage.
3. Required trees must be located as follows:
a. Trees must be planted on private property adjacent to the right of way, except when subsection A3b or A3c of this section apply. For purposes of
this section, "adjacent" means that large trees must be planted within fourteen feet (14') of the right of way line and small trees must be planted
within eight feet (8') of the right of way line. All other siting requirements contained in this article must be observed.
b. The number of trees required may be reduced by the number of qualifying trees that already exist in the right of way or adjacent to the right of way.
To qualify, a tree must meet the requirements of section 14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 492/715
c. Trees that cannot be planted adjacent to the right of way due to a conflict with any provision of this title must be planted within the right of way
according to the provisions of subsection B, "Street Trees Within Public Right Of Way", of this section. However, trees that cannot be planted in
conformity with the provisions of said subsection B may be omitted.
B. Street Trees Within Public Right Of Way:
1. Required street trees are to be planted within the right of way only in those cases where trees cannot be planted adjacent to the street right of way in
accordance with subsection A of this section.
2. Trees planted in the public right of way must meet the following requirements:
a. A tree planting permit must be obtained from the city forester.
b. Trees may not be planted in the area between a curb and a sidewalk if the width of the planting area is less than nine feet (9'), unless approved by
the city forester.
c. All other siting requirements contained in section 14-5E-4 of this article must be observed.
d. Any tree planted within the street right of way must have a single trunk, with a minimum of four feet (4') from grade to the first branch, at the time
of planting and must conform to the requirements of title 10, chapter 8, "Trees And Plant Materials", of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
14-5E-8: TREE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES:
A. Minimum Requirements:
1. For lots containing two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, or group living uses, trees must be planted on site at a minimum ratio of at least one
tree for every five hundred fifty (550) square feet of total building coverage of the lot. Any combination of small and large trees is allowed, provided
this coverage ratio is met.
2. For lease lot developments, trees must be planted at a ratio of one tree for every lease lot in the development. Any combination of small and large
trees is allowed, provided this coverage ratio is met.
B. Reductions And Substitutions:
1. Trees planted to meet the requirements of section 14-5E-7, "Street Tree Requirements", of this article, or to meet the tree requirements for parking
areas specified in article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this chapter, may also be used to fulfill the requirements of this section.
2. Existing trees preserved according to the provisions of section 14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this article may be used to fulfill the
requirements of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE F. SCREENING AND BUFFERING STANDARDS
14-5F-1: PURPOSE:
The screening and buffering standards are intended to improve the appearance of Iowa City streetscapes for the benefit of its citizens; to create
aesthetically pleasing and functional living environments; to protect and enhance property values; and to provide for transitions between dissimilar uses.
This article contains a menu of screening tools collectively referred to as "S-series standards". These standards are applied in situations where uses,
activities, materials, or equipment must be separated from or screened from view of public ways, other zones, or adjacent properties. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-5F-2: APPLICABILITY:
The screening and buffering standards will be applied throughout this title, where they will be referenced with the numbers S1, S2, S3, etc. The regulations
in this article address materials, placement, layout, and timing of installation. The standards in this article are expressed as minimum standards; additional
landscaping and screening materials may be used as long as they do not conflict with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permitted Plant Species: Table 5F-2, located at the end of section 14-5F-6 of this article, lists the various plant species that are allowed to be used to
satisfy screening and buffering requirements. These plants were chosen because of characteristics, such as hardiness, growth rate, type and density of
foliage, and mature height. Deviations from the listed plants are allowed if the replacement shrubs are similar in form or hardiness to a permitted variety
and are approved by the city.
B. Landscape Plans Required: When provisions of this article are applicable, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the request for a building permit,
which, in addition to the information normally required, must indicate the following:
1. The size and location of required planting areas.
2. The estimated mature height of required plantings, both preserved and proposed.
3. The common and scientific names of any required shrubs, including any shrubs preserved in lieu of new plantings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 493/715
4. On the plan, preserved shrubs must be distinguished from new shrubs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-4: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Plantings Required Prior To Occupancy:
1. All plantings required by this article must be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use, except as allowed in subsection A2 of this
section.
2. If the plantings cannot be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use due to seasonal conditions that may reduce survivability, the
building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and grant a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates of June 1 or
November 1, whichever occurs first, and the property owner must place in an escrow account, established with the city, an amount which will cover
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of plants and installation.
B. Plant Materials Specifications:
1. The minimum planting height of shrubs is eighteen (18) to thirty six inches (36"), depending on species or as noted in the S-series requirements.
2. The use of mulch must be confined to the areas around plantings. Lawn grass or other living ground cover, such as low growing shrubs and/or
creeping plants should be used for exposed areas. Decorative landscaping gravel, cobbles or small stones may be used as a mulch alternative.
C. Planting Area Specifications:
1. The minimum width of a planting area will be specified in the base zone requirements, use regulations, or development standards for the use or
development being screened or buffered. If not specified in any of the above listed provisions, the minimum width of a planting area is five feet (5').
However, a wider planting area may be needed to accommodate the number and types of plants proposed and the spacing requirements listed in
table 5F-1, located at the end of this section, and table 5F-2, located at the end of section 14-5F-6 of this article.
2. Screening and buffering requirements will often coincide with required trees. (See chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this
title.) In such a case, the landscaping design and the size and width of the planting area must accommodate both trees and shrubs.
D. Siting Requirements:
1. Plantings may not be located in violation of the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
2. At the time of planting, trees and plantings must be separated from other structures and features on a site in order to minimize conflicts as plants
mature. Table 5F-1 below lists the minimum spacing between plants and between plants and other features and structures on a site. However, the
minimum distances between trees, between trees and shrubs, and between shrubs may be reduced by twenty five percent (25%) to permit design
flexibility or to create denser screening where desired. Distances are measured to the center of a tree or the approximate center of individual shrubs.
Table 5F-1: Minimum Spacing Between
Plantings And Other Features (In Feet)
Large Tree Small Tree Shrub
Large tree 30 24 4
Small tree 24 16 3
Shrub 4 3 See spacing requirements in table 5F-2, located at the end of section 14-5F-6 of this article
Building 14 8 2
Sidewalk 41 41 31
Curb/pavement 41 41 21
Note to table 5F-1:
1. The minimum distance between plantings and sidewalks or pavement also applies to the anticipated location of a future sidewalk or paved
surface.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-5: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. The provisions of this section apply to all plantings required by this title, whether newly planted or preserved.
B. Required planting areas must be separated from abutting vehicular use areas, including parking spaces, drives, aisles, alleys, vehicle display and
loading areas, etc., by an unmountable curb or barrier that is a minimum of five inches (5") in height. The curb or barrier must be constructed in such a
manner that salt water runoff will not damage trees or plantings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 494/715
C. The property owner must keep all plantings properly maintained, pruned as needed, and free from trash and litter. It is the responsibility of the property
owner to maintain and replace trees and plantings required by this title. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner.
Plants that die must be replaced. Improper maintenance, pruning, or removal of plantings may be subject to municipal infraction proceedings, up to and
including environmental infraction proceedings.
D. Any trees that overhang the public right of way must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of title 10, chapter 8, "Trees And Plant Materials",
of this code.
E. To prevent interference with pedestrian traffic, plantings must be located appropriately and maintained so that foliage does not grow any closer than one
foot (1') to the edge of a sidewalk or pedestrian trail. This one foot (1') setback must be maintained for at least the first nine feet (9') of plant height.
F. Maintenance of trees within street rights of way is the responsibility of the city. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-6: SCREENING STANDARDS (S-SERIES):
The screening and buffering standards listed below will be applied throughout this title, where they will be referenced with the numbers S1, S2, S3, etc.
The plant varieties listed in table 5F-2, located at the end of this section, are to be used to satisfy the requirements of these various standards. Deviations
from the listed plants are allowed if the replacement shrubs are similar in form or hardiness to a permitted variety and are approved by the city.
A. General Buffering, S1:
1. Intent: The S1 standard is a basic transitional buffering standard, where planting areas separate uses from the public right of way, define edges and
separate vehicular use areas from pedestrians, yet allow views to easily penetrate, as for outdoor sales display lots and for general landscaping on
commercial properties.
2. Requirements: A grass lawn must be maintained within the landscaped area, with groupings of low growing shrubs and ground plants.
Approximately half the landscaping plants must be of an evergreen variety to provide texture and color throughout the year. Plantings should be
arranged to achieve the desired buffering effect, but there is no established minimum or maximum height.
3. Figure 5F.1 - General Buffering, S1:
B. Variable Height Screen, S2:
1. Intent: The S2 standard is a buffering treatment that uses distance and low level screening to separate uses from the public right of way, from other
zones, to define edges and separate vehicular use areas from pedestrians. The standard is applied where moderate screening is necessary to soften
the impact of uses or paved areas, but where some visibility between areas is more desirable than a total visual screen.
2. Required Materials: The S2 standard requires enough shrubs to form a landscape screen ranging between two feet (2') and four feet (4') in height. At
least a third of the shrubs must grow to no less than four feet (4') in height.
a. Alternative Materials (Option A): Low berms or planters may be used to elevate shrubs as long as the overall height of the screening ranges from
two feet (2') to four feet (4'). At least one-third (1/3) of the shrubs must grow to no less than four feet (4') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 495/715
b. Alternative Materials (Option B): A continuous or semicontinuous two (2) to three foot (3') high masonry wall. Breaks in the wall are permitted for
sidewalk access and to accommodate required street trees. One shrub per ten (10) linear feet of wall, on average, is required. Shrubs may be
grouped, but long stretches without any shrubs should be avoided. At least one-third (1/3) of the shrubs must grow to no less than four feet (4') in
height.
3. Figure 5F.2 - Variable Height Screen, S2:
C. High Screen, S3:
1. Intent: The S3 standard is a buffering treatment that uses dense landscape screening to provide a visual and physical separation between uses and
zones. It is commonly applied between residential uses and commercial and industrial uses and to screen outdoor work or storage areas.
2. Required Materials: Enough shrubs and small evergreens to form a continuous screen or hedge at least five feet (5') to six feet (6') in height and
more than fifty percent (50%) solid year round. Screening materials must be at least three feet (3') high when planted. At least one-half (1/2) the
shrubs must be evergreen varieties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 496/715
a. Alternative Materials (Option A): A berm may be used in conjunction with a hedge to achieve an overall height of six feet (6').
b. Alternative Materials (Option B): A continuous or semicontinuous five (5) to six foot (6') high masonry wall or solid fence. Breaks in the wall or
fence are permitted for access and to accommodate required street trees. One shrub per ten (10) linear feet of wall, on average, is required.
Shrubs may be grouped, but long stretches without any shrubs should be avoided. At least one-third (1/3) of the shrubs must grow to no less than
five feet (5') in height.
3. Figure 5F.3 - High Screen, S3:
D. Open Pattern Fence Or Wall, S4:
1. Intent: The S4 standard provides a tall, semiopaque visual separation. The standard is applied where separation is required, but where visibility
between areas is more desirable than a total visual screen. This standard provides for instances where security may be an issue and where
landscaping is not a practical option.
2. Required Materials: A four (4) to six foot (6') high fence of fifty percent (50%) or greater opacity constructed of wood, brick, metal, masonry or other
permanent materials.
E. Opaque Fence Or Wall, S5:
1. Intent: The S5 standard provides a complete visual separation. The standard is applied in instances where complete screening is needed to protect
abutting uses. This standard provides for instances where security may be an issue and where landscaping is not a practical option.
2. Required Materials: A four (4) to eight foot (8') high fence, completely opaque, constructed of wood, brick, metal, masonry or other permanent
materials. When used for dumpster or utility enclosures, the material must match the primary building material or be complementary to it. The height
of the fence or wall will be determined based on the activity, materials, or equipment being screened. In general, the fence or wall should be of
sufficient height to screen the activity, materials, or equipment from public view.
Table 5F-2: Permitted Plants For Screening And Buffering1
General Buffering
S1
Dwarf Summer Blooming Spirea (Spirea japonica or x bumalda)
Daphne spirea 1 foot, mounding, pink flowers 3 feet on
center
Lime mound spirea 2 feet, mounding, yellow/green leaves 3.5 feet on
center
Japanese white spirea 2 feet, mounding, white flowers 3.5 feet on
center
Magic carpet spirea 2 feet, mounding, pink flowers 3.5 feet on
center
Spreading Juniper (Juniper horizontalis or Juniperus chinensis) Evergreen
Plant Name/
Variety
Mature Height, Form, Color
Spacing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 497/715
Andorra 1 to 1.5 feet, spreading, gray-green foliage, turns to plum in fall 4.5 feet on
center
Blue chip 1 foot, spreading, bright silvery blue foliage, dense 4.5 feet on
center
Buffalo 1 to 1.5 feet, spreading, feathery green branches 4.5 feet on
center
Sargent, blue 1 foot, spreading, blue-gray foliage all year 4.5 feet on
center
Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergi)
Crimson pygmy 1 foot, spiny mound, red leaves in summer, red berries in winter 3.5 feet on
center
Kobold 1 foot, spiny mound, green leaves, red berries in winter 3.5 feet on
center
Variable Height
Screen S2
Dwarf Summer Blooming Spirea (Spirea japonica or x bumalda)
Anthony waterer spirea 2 to 3 feet, mounding, rose-pink flowers, red fall color 4 feet on
center
Goldflame spirea 2 to 3 feet, mounding, red leaves in spring, yellow in summer, red in fall;
pink flowers
4 feet on
center
Little princess spirea 2 to 3 feet, mounding, covered with pink flowers throughout summer 4 feet on
center
Magic carpet spirea 2 feet, mounding, pink flowers 3.5 feet on
center
Neon flash spirea 2 to 3 feet, upright, dense; abundant with bright red flowers in summer 3.5 feet on
center
Dwarf Korean Lilac (Syringa meyeri
"Palibin")
4 to 5 feet, dense shrub, small foliage with very fragrant blooms 4.5 feet on
center
American Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis) Evergreen
Emerald 10 to 15 feet, narrow, bright green year round 3.5 feet on
center
Holmstrup 3 to 5 feet, dense, slow growing 3 feet on
center
Globe 3 to 5 feet, globular, dark green 3.5 feet on
center
Taunton Spreading Yew Evergreen 2 to 3 feet, 4 to 5 feet width, dense; soft, dark green needles 4 feet on
center
High Screen S3 American Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis) Evergreen
Emerald 10 to 15 feet, narrow, bright green year round 3.5 feet on
center
Techny 15 to 30 feet, wide pyramidal, dark green 4 feet on
center
Compact Burning Bush (Euonymus
alatus "compacta")
5 to 6 feet, dense shrub, brilliant purple-red fall color (Note: potentially
invasive near woodlands and pasture)
3.5 feet on
center
Hatfield Yew (Taxus media)
Evergreen
10 feet, pyramidal, dense 3.5 feet on
center
Note to table 5F-2:
1. Deviations from the listed plants are allowed if the replacement shrubs are similar in form or hardiness to a permitted variety and are approved
by the city.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE G. OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
14-5G-1: PURPOSE:
Plant Name/
Variety
Mature Height, Form, Color
Spacing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 498/715
The outdoor lighting standards are intended to reduce the obtrusive aspects of outdoor light usage while preserving safety, security, and the nighttime use
and enjoyment of property. These measures will encourage lighting practices that direct appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed and
decrease glare resulting from overlighting and poorly shielded or inappropriately directed lighting fixtures. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Application Of Provisions: The standards contained in this article apply to all uses in all zones, except for the exemptions listed in subsection B of this
section.
B. Exemptions:
1. Single-family uses, two-family uses, and group households located within single-family or two-family dwellings are exempt from all provisions of this
article, except for the provisions contained in section 14-5G-3 of this article.
2. Airport lighting for navigational purposes is exempt from the provisions of this article.
3. FAA required lighting on towers and buildings is exempt from the provisions of this article.
4. The temporary use of lighting for public festivals and celebrations and for temporary commercial activities such as carnivals and fairs may be
exempted from the provisions of this article if the building official determines, through the temporary use permitting process, that the proposed
lighting will not create a hazard or nuisance from glare, light trespass, or overlighting.
5. Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities that are accessory to community service uses, colleges and university uses, educational facility uses, parks
and open space uses, and religious/private group assembly uses may be exempted from the minimum standards or exceed the maximum standards
of this article; provided, that the provisions specified in section 14-5G-7, "Exemptions For Special Uses", of this article are met.
6. Lighting for outdoor display lots accessory to outdoor storage and display oriented retail uses may exceed the total outdoor light output standards
specified in section 14-5G-5 of this article; provided, that the provisions specified in section 14-5G-7, "Exemptions For Special Uses", of this article
are met. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-3: STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY USES:
The regulations of this section apply to all single-family uses, two-family uses, and any group household that is located within a single-family or two-family
dwelling.
A. Height And Glare Control:
1. Light fixtures must be mounted no higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade.
2. All bulbs that exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens must be fully shielded as installed.
3. Bulbs used for floodlights must not exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens.
B. Light Trespass Standards:
1. Any floodlights that are visible from any neighboring residential property must be aimed downward at an angle no higher than forty five degrees (45°)
from vertical.
2. Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or objects mounted on a pole or pedestal must use a narrow cone of light that does not extend beyond
the illuminated object. Lights that are intended to architecturally highlight a building or its features must use a limited pattern of light that does not
extend beyond the wall of the building. Bulbs must be shielded from view of abutting properties and the public right of way.
C. Lighting For Private Recreational Facilities: All floodlights used to illuminate outdoor private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, and basketball courts, must be turned off by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Underwater lighting in swimming pools and hot tubs are exempt from this
provision.
D. Prohibited Lighting: Laser lights, searchlights, mercury vapor bulbs, and any other type of lamp capable of producing comparable levels of ultraviolet
radiation per watt are prohibited. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-4: PHYSICAL CONTROLS:
A. Height Limitations:
1. Light fixtures located within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zone, riverfront crossings zone, or the eastside mixed use district must be
mounted no higher than twenty five feet (25') above grade.
2. Light fixtures located farther than three hundred feet (300') from a residential zone, riverfront crossings zone, or the eastside mixed use district must
be mounted no higher than thirty five feet (35') above grade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
B. Glare Control:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 499/715
1. All bulbs that exceed two thousand (2000) lumens must be fully shielded as installed.
2. Unshielded or partially shielded bulbs that are two thousand (2000) lumens or less must be frosted glass or be installed behind a translucent cover.
3. All under canopy lights or lights mounted in eaves must either be recessed into the canopy/eave and fully shielded or use flat lenses instead of drop
lenses.
4. The city may permit the use of light reflectors, refractors or house shields as a substitute for fully shielded light fixtures on lower wattage or low
voltage ornamental or pedestrian light fixtures. The shielding on such fixtures must control for uplighting. These substitute shielding options are not
permitted for general illumination of large areas, such as parking, service, or outdoor product display areas. Fixtures used to illuminate such areas
must be fully shielded.
C. Light Trespass: The trespass standards are intended to prevent light from one property extending beyond the property line onto adjacent properties.
Compliance with this subsection is achieved with fixture shielding, directional control designed into the fixture, fixture location, fixture height, fixture aim,
or a combination of these methods.
1. Except for lighting of loading areas, service areas, and for architectural emphasis, floodlighting is prohibited. Floodlights are not permitted for the
illumination of parking or outdoor product display areas.
2. Floodlights, when permitted, are exempt from subsection B2 of this section, but must be aimed no higher than forty five degrees (45°) from vertical.
Floodlights must also comply with subsections C3, C4 and C5 of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. Lighting fixtures must be located and shielded such that the bulb is not directly visible from any adjacent residential use or public right of way. The
right of way trespass standard does not apply in the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10 zones. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
4. Illumination must not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot-candle and 2.0 initial maximum foot-candles as measured at any point along a property
boundary that is adjacent to or across the street from properties that are zoned residential, CN-1, or CO-1. The city may increase the maximum up to
1.0 horizontal foot-candle for building code required lighting on buildings located on or close to the property line. However, lighting must be located
and shielded in a manner that will be least obtrusive to any abutting residential properties. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
5. On any property containing multi-family uses or group living uses, lighting fixtures must be located and shielded such that the bulbs are not visible
from any residential window on the property.
6. Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or objects mounted on a pole or pedestal must use a narrow cone of light that does not extend beyond
the illuminated object. Lights that are intended to architecturally highlight a building or its features must use a limited pattern of light that does not
extend beyond the wall of the building. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-5: TOTAL OUTDOOR LIGHT OUTPUT STANDARDS:
A. Maximum Outdoor Light Output:
1. Total Outdoor Light Output Defined: The "total outdoor light output" on a property is the total amount of light, measured in initial lumens, from all
bulbs used in outdoor light fixtures. It includes all lights and luminous tubing used for display lighting, general illumination, architectural/accent
lighting, and lights used for external illumination of signs, but does not include lights used to illuminate internally illuminated signs or luminous tubing
used in neon signs. For bulb types that vary in their output as they age, such as high pressure sodium, fluorescent and metal halide, the initial lumen
output, as defined by the manufacturer, is the value to be considered when calculating total outdoor light output.
2. Applicability: The total outdoor light output on any property that is subject to the provisions of this article may not exceed the limits in table 5G-1 of
this section, except for those that are exempted in subsection A3 of this section and in section 14-5G-7 of this article. The values in this table are
upper limits and not design goals; design goals should be the lowest light levels that meet the requirements of the task.
3. Exemptions:
a. Seasonal decorations, permitted between Thanksgiving and the end of January, are not counted toward the total outdoor light output.
b. In the E2 and E3 districts, properties where the building coverage is eighty percent (80%) or greater are exempt from the maximum total outdoor
light output standard, but are subject to the limitation on unshielded fixtures, as stated in table 5G-1 of this section. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
B. Lighting Environment Districts: All zones, except public (P) zones, are grouped into three (3) lighting environment districts that control lighting output on
applicable lots in each zone. Uses, for which the lighting standards are applicable, located within the public (P) zone must comply with the lighting
requirements of the adjacent zone; those on the border between two (2) or more zones must comply with the standards of the strictest adjacent zone.
Zones are grouped into the lighting environment districts as follows:
1. Low illumination district, E1: Areas of low ambient lighting levels. This district includes single-family and low density multi-family residential zones.
This district applies to the following zones: ID-RS, ID-RM, RR-1, RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, RM-12, and RNS-12.
2. Medium illumination district, E2: Areas of medium ambient lighting levels. This district includes higher density multi-family zones and lower intensity
commercial and office zones. This district applies to the following zones: ID-C, ID-I, ID-RP, CN-1, CO-1, PRM, RM-20, RM-44, RNS-20, MU, EMU,
and all RFC zones, except the RFC-WR.
3. High illumination district, E3: Areas of high ambient lighting levels. This district includes higher intensity commercial, industrial, and research zones.
This district applies to the following zones: CC-2, CH-1, CI-1, CB-2, CB-5, CB-10, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, and the RFC-WR. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
C. Measuring Total Outdoor Light Output:
1. The maximums in table 5G-1 of this section are based on a calculation of initial lumens per net acre. The lot size less the total building coverage of
the lot determines the number of net acres used for this calculation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 500/715
2. Lumen output from an under canopy or under eave light fixture mounted fifteen (15) or more feet from any edge of the eave or canopy will be
measured at 0.5 its full value.
Table 5G-1: Maximum Outdoor Light Output Standards
Shielding Combinations
Lighting Environment District
E1, Low Ambient Lighting (In
Initial Lumens Per Acre)
E2, Medium Ambient Lighting
(In Initial Lumens Per Acre)
E3, High Ambient Lighting (In
Initial Lumens Per Acre)
Maximum total outdoor light output (including
both fully shielded and unshielded fixtures)
50,000 100,000 200,000
Maximum outdoor light output from unshielded
fixtures
4,000 10,000 10,000
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-5G-6: PROHIBITED LIGHTING AND BULBS:
The following types of lighting are prohibited:
A. Laser lights.
B. Searchlights.
C. Mercury vapor bulbs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-7: EXEMPTIONS FOR SPECIAL USES:
A. Outdoor Recreational Facilities: Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities that are accessory to community service uses, colleges and university uses,
educational facility uses, parks and open space uses, and religious/private group assembly uses may be exempted from the minimum standards or
exceed the maximum standards of this article; provided, that the following specific approval criteria are met. To apply for this exemption, a lighting plan
must be submitted to the city and must be certified as conforming to the standards listed below by a registered engineer with lighting certified (LC)
status according to the national council on qualifications for the lighting professions (NCQLP).
1. The facility must satisfy the requirements set forth in the most current editions of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) RP-
6 recommended practice for sports and recreational area lighting and the IESNA lighting handbook. Appropriate lighting criteria must be selected
based on the class of play of the facility and participants as defined by the IESNA.
2. Fixtures must be located, aimed and shielded to the extent possible to prevent light trespass and glare onto adjacent properties according to the
following standards:
a. Luminaires must be aimed no greater than a distance two (2) mounting heights or less from the base of the pole (a maximum angle of 63 degrees
up from nadir or a minimum of 27 degrees down from horizontal).
b. Fixtures must be mounted so as to meet the criteria of a "cutoff fixture" as defined in chapter 9, article D, "Outdoor Lighting Definitions", of this title.
c. Illumination must not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot-candles and 2.0 initial maximum foot-candles as measured at any point along a property
boundary that is adjacent to or across the street from properties that are zoned residential.
3. Laser lights, searchlights, and mercury vapor bulbs are prohibited.
4. Use of such lighting is restricted to those hours when the recreational facility is in use. Lighting for recreational facilities must be turned off by one
hour after conclusion of the recreational activity. For facilities located in or adjacent to residential zones, the curfew for recreational facility lighting is
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Illumination of such facilities shall be permitted after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. only to conclude a scheduled event that
was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances.
B. Outdoor Display Lots: Lighting for outdoor display lots that are accessory to outdoor storage and display oriented uses may exceed the total outdoor
light output standards specified in section 14-5G-5 of this article; provided, that the following specific approval criteria are met. To apply for this
exemption, a lighting plan must be submitted to the city and must be certified as conforming to the standards listed below by a registered engineer with
LC status according to the NCQLP.
1. The display lot must be designed to achieve no greater than the minimal illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
2. Display lot lighting that exceeds the total outdoor light output standards specified in section 14-5G-5 of this article must be turned off at eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. or within thirty (30) minutes after close of business, whichever is later. After this time, lighting on the property must comply with
the total outdoor light output standards specified in section 14-5G-5 of this article.
3. All other standards and requirements of this article must be met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 501/715
C. Other Lighting On Properties Containing Special Uses: All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas listed in subsections A and B of this
section must conform to the lighting standards contained in this article. If recreational facilities or outdoor display lots take advantage of the exemptions
allowed in this section, the net acreage for the determination of compliance with the total outdoor light output standards for other lighting on the
property must not include the area of the recreational facility or outdoor display lot. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-8: MEASUREMENT:
All measurements shall be made thirty six inches (36") above the ground. Horizontal foot-candle measurements shall be taken with the meter held parallel
to the ground pointing up. Maximum foot-candle measurements shall be taken with the meter oriented towards the brightest light bank. Light levels are
specified, calculated and measured in foot-candles. All foot-candle values are expressed in initial foot-candles. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE H. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
14-5H-1: PURPOSE:
The performance standards are intended to protect property from off site impacts. These impacts include noise, air pollutants, odor, vibrations, and storage
of combustible/flammable materials. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this article apply to all uses located within the city of Iowa City. Nonconforming development is subject to the provisions of chapter 4,
article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-3: CERTIFICATION MAY BE REQUIRED:
When necessary, the building official may require, at the expense of the applicant, that a registered professional engineer or other qualified person certify
that the provisions of this article will be met. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-4: NOISE:
Permissible noise levels for uses and activities are specified in title 6, chapter 4, "Noise Control", of this code. All applicable uses must be in compliance
with these regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-5: AIR QUALITY STANDARDS:
The emissions of smoke, particulate matter or chemicals into the air must comply with the standards and permitting requirements of the Iowa department
of environmental quality and the U.S. environmental protection agency, or their successors. Upon request by the city, a property owner must provide
evidence that the subject operation is in compliance with these standards. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-6: ODOR:
The emission of offensive odorous matter from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration defined in the American Society
for Testing and Materials "Method D1391-57 Standard Method For Measurement Of Odor In Atmospheres (Dilution Method)", as amended, as the level
which will just evoke a response in the human olfactory system when measured as follows:
A. All Zones, Except Industrial Zones: When measured beyond lot lines at ground level or habitable elevation, odorous matter shall not exceed the odor
threshold concentration.
B. All Industrial Zones: Odorous matter shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration beyond zone boundary lines at ground level or habitable
elevation. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-7: VIBRATION:
A. Vibrations from any operation or activity shall not exceed the displacement values below.
B. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The
maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration displacement permitted. The maximum displacements shall be determined by the following
formula:
D=K/f, where
D=displacement in inches
K=a constant given in table 5H-1 below
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 502/715
f=the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per second
Table 5H-1: Vibration Displacement Standards
All zones,
except
industrial
At lot lines 0.003 0.006 0.015
Industrial
zones
At industrial zone boundary line 0.030 0.060 0.150
At the boundary of residential zones,
recreational areas, or educational facilities
0.003 0.006 0.015
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-8: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
A. Any combustible materials must be stored in such a way as to include, where necessary, access drives for firefighting equipment.
B. The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals in aboveground storage tanks, when allowed, must be located no closer to a lot line or any
principal building than is permitted by the international fire code, as amended. However, for aboveground storage tanks of two hundred seventy six
(276) gallons' capacity or more, the minimum distance between such aboveground tanks and any residential zone boundary must be at least one
hundred feet (100'). If the aboveground tank is located in an approved vault, the minimum separation distance from a residential zone boundary may
be reduced to no less than fifty feet (50').
C. The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids, when allowed, must be located in accordance with the international fire code, as amended.
However, the minimum distance between such underground tanks and any residential zone boundary must be at least ten feet (10').
D. The bulk storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited in all zones, except in the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones. In
these listed zones, storage of such fluids may be allowed, but only as specified and strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended.
E. The bulk storage of class I and class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited in all zones, except in the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones. In these
listed zones, the storage of such liquids may be permitted, but only as specified and strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended.
F. The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in all zones, except the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones. In these listed zones, the storage
of liquefied petroleum gas may be allowed, but only as specified and strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
ARTICLE I. SENSITIVE LANDS AND FEATURES
14-5I-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose for this article is to accomplish the following:
A. Implement the environmental policies of the comprehensive plan, as amended.
B. Permit and define the reasonable use of properties that contain environmentally sensitive features and natural resources while recognizing the
importance of environmental resources and protecting such resources from destruction.
C. Provide for ecologically sound transitions between protected environmentally sensitive areas and urban development.
D. Protect the public from injury and property damage due to flooding, erosion, and other natural hazards, which can be exacerbated by development of
environmentally sensitive land.
E. Foster urban design that preserves open space and minimizes disturbance of environmentally sensitive features and natural resources.
F. Provide for the mitigation of disturbances of environmentally sensitive features and natural resources by requiring and implementing mitigation plans, as
needed. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Zone
Point Of Measurement
Continuous
Impulsive
(At Least 1 Second Rest Between Pulses
That Do Not Exceed 1 Second Duration)
Less Than 8 Pulses
Per 24 Hour Period
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 503/715
14-5I-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Application Required: Unless specifically exempted as specified below, an application for sensitive areas review must be submitted to and approved by
the city prior to woodland clearing, grading or any development activity on tracts of land or portions of tracts of land where any regulated sensitive
features specified in subsection B of this section exist. This application process may occur as part of site plan review, a planned development overlay
rezoning and/or subdivision review.
B. Regulated Sensitive Features: Properties containing any of the following environmentally sensitive features are subject to the regulations of this article.
References to "regulated" sensitive features, such as "regulated wetlands", "regulated slopes", etc., within the text of this article are references to the
regulated features as listed below. The sensitive areas inventory map - phase I may be used as a tool to determine the locations of potential
environmentally sensitive areas. However, it is the applicant's responsibility to investigate and fully delineate such potential sensitive areas in order to
determine whether the sensitive area or feature is subject to the regulations of this article.
1. Jurisdictional Wetlands: Jurisdictional wetlands as regulated by the U.S. army corps of engineers, or its successor. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. Stream Corridors:
a. Floodways designated on either the current federal emergency management agency flood boundary and floodway maps for Iowa City and
Johnson County or the Iowa City (1 inch = 100 feet scale) flood boundary and floodway maps.
b. A watercourse, such as a river, stream or drainageway, which is shown in blue (the blue line) on the most current U.S. geological survey
quadrangle maps. In cases where no floodway is delineated, the blue line will serve as the centerline within a thirty foot (30') wide stream corridor.
If a watercourse is designated a blue line stream, but does not have a bed and bank defined by an "ordinary high water mark", as defined in
chapter 9, article E, "Sensitive Lands Definitions", of this title, and a definite direction of flow, either continuously or intermittently, then said
watercourse will not be considered a regulated stream corridor, provided the absence of these defining characteristics is verified in the field by a
qualified professional (see section 14-5I-7, "Stream Corridors", of this article for more information). (Ord. 10-4398, 7-12-2010)
3. Regulated Slopes: Slopes of eighteen percent (18%) or greater.
4. Wooded Areas:
a. Woodlands, two (2) acres in size or greater.
b. "Groves of trees", as defined in this title.
5. Fully Hydric Soils: Fully hydric soils as designated in the USDA soil conservation service soil survey of Johnson County, Iowa, as amended.
6. Prairie Remnants: Prairie remnants as shown on the Iowa City sensitive areas inventory map - phase I, as amended.
7. Archaeological Sites: Archaeological sites as determined by the state historic preservation officer or the state archeologist.
C. Exemptions: The following uses, activities, and structures are exempt from the requirements of this article. However, an applicant must first apply for
and obtain an exemption, prior to any woodland clearing, grading or development activity on a property.
1. Emergency/Public Safety: Grading, clearing, removal or other activities required for emergency situations involving immediate danger to life, health
and safety, or which create an immediate threat to person or property or create substantial fire hazards are exempt from the requirements of this
article.
2. Maintenance/Expansion Of Single-Family Or Two-Family Residential Uses: Normal maintenance, expansion, exterior remodeling, reconstruction or
replacement of single-family or two-family uses in existence as of December 13, 1995, are exempt from the requirements of this article, provided the
new construction or related activity will not increase the footprint of the structure and/or paving lying within the sensitive area by more than a
cumulative total of one thousand (1,000) square feet, and also provided there is no encroachment by said activities, including grading, into a
jurisdictional wetland, a designated sensitive areas conservation tract or protected sensitive area.
3. Construction Of Single-Family Or Two-Family Residential Uses: Grading, clearing or development activities on a tract of land for the purpose of
construction, landscaping or associated improvements for one single-family use or one two-family use are exempt from the requirements of this
article, provided the development activities do not exceed a maximum total of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area, and provided there is no
encroachment by said activities into a jurisdictional wetland, a designated sensitive areas conservation tract or protected sensitive area.
4. Groundwater Monitoring Wells And Stormwater Facilities: Normal and routine maintenance of existing drainage and stormwater management
facilities are exempt from the requirements of this article. This exemption includes vegetative maintenance for access and stormwater/flood control
purposes within and adjacent to drainageways. Except for temporary storage outside a wetland or water body, placement of fill or dredge spoils is not
exempt under this subsection C4. Groundwater monitoring wells, when constructed to standards approved by the city, are exempt.
5. Woodland Management Activities: Practices associated with "timber management standards" as defined by the International Society Of
Arboriculture, or its successor, are exempt from the requirements of this article. Existing tree farming operations, such as Christmas tree farming, fruit
or nut tree production and tree nurseries, during such time as the land is used for tree farming operations, are exempt from the requirements of this
article.
D. Uses, Activities And Structures Allowed Within Protected Sensitive Areas: The following uses, activities, and structures are allowed within protected
sensitive areas and required buffers where it can be shown that such a use, activity, or structure will not be detrimental to the functioning of sensitive
areas or associated buffers, or pose a public safety hazard, subject to city approval, during the applicable sensitive areas review process:
1. Parkland, private open space, and trails that provide opportunities for environmental interpretation and are designed to incorporate features that
protect areas of wildlife habitat, water quality and the natural amenities in protected sensitive areas and buffers.
2. Stream crossings, such as bridges, roads and culverts, or stream bank stabilization measures, provided they are designed to minimize any reduction
of the flood carrying capacity of the stream caused by such structures and are in compliance with all federal and state regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 504/715
3. Essential public utilities such as storm and sanitary sewers; water mains; gas, telephone and power lines; and storm water detention facilities are
permitted if they are designed and constructed to minimize their impact upon the protected sensitive areas and associated buffers. The design and
construction of utilities should also include measures to protect against erosion, pollution and habitat disturbance, and result in minimal amounts of
excavation and filling. Upon completion of the installation of the public facility or line, the sensitive protected areas and associated buffers shall be
restored by those persons responsible for the disturbance. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-3: LEVELS OF SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
A. Level I Sensitive Areas Review:
1. Except for exempted activities as listed in subsection 14-5I-2C of this article, a level I sensitive areas review is required prior to development activity
on property that contains any regulated sensitive feature listed in section 14-5I-2 of this article, but for which a level II sensitive areas review is not
required.
2. A sensitive areas development plan submitted with the application for a level I sensitive areas review must delineate any regulated sensitive areas
and associated buffers according to the specific regulations contained in sections 14-5I-6 through 14-5I-12 of this article and will be approved
according to the procedures for a level I sensitive areas review as set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
B. Level II Sensitive Areas Review:
1. Except for exempted activities listed in subsection 14-5I-2C of this article, a level II sensitive areas review is required prior to development on
properties for which any of the following activities are proposed:
a. The disturbance of a wetland or an associated buffer.
b. The removal of portions of a woodland in excess of the woodland retention requirements contained in section 14-5I-9, "Wooded Areas", of this
article.
c. The disturbance of more than thirty five percent (35%) of the critical slopes on a property.
d. Disturbance of a protected slope buffer or an altered protected slope.
e. Any development that contains regulated sensitive features and for which modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision regulations are
requested.
2. The submittal of a sensitive areas development plan is required for properties containing regulated sensitive areas for which a level II sensitive areas
review is required. Such sensitive areas development plan must delineate regulated sensitive areas and associated buffers according to the specific
regulations contained in sections 14-5I-6 through 14-5I-12 of this article.
3. A level II sensitive areas review is considered a type of planned development and as such, must comply with the applicable approval criteria set forth
in chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title and will be reviewed according to the approval procedures for a
planned development overlay rezoning as set forth in chapter 8, article D, "Planning And Zoning Commission Approval Procedures", of this title.
4. If a level II sensitive areas review is required, according to this subsection, and other regulated sensitive features exist on the property, the planned
development rezoning application must include all evidence and required information for all regulated sensitive features on the property. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-4: MODIFICATIONS TO ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
Through the planned development process, certain specified modifications to the underlying zoning and subdivision standards are allowed to provide for
flexibility in the design of a site. On sites that contain sensitive features, the planned development process may be used in order to cluster development
away from sensitive features. The types of zoning and subdivision modifications allowed and the associated site development standards are listed in
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title. If modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision standards are
requested, a level II sensitive areas review is required, regardless of the nature of the sensitive features on the site. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-5: COMPLIANCE MEASURES:
A. Compliance With Approved Plans Required: Approval of a sensitive areas development plan is authorization to proceed with development activity
according to the provisions and restrictions set forth in said plan and associated legal papers, including, but not limited to, compliance with all
construction area limits, conservation easements, and specified construction practices. Any development activity at variance with the approved plan
and/or associated legal papers shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to any enforcement action and penalties allowed according
to chapter 7, article C, "Penalties And Enforcement", of this title.
B. Recording Requirement: Approved sensitive areas development plans shall be recorded in the Johnson County recorder's office prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy for the property. The recording is intended to provide notice to subsequent property owners that environmental limitations
apply to the subject property.
C. Performance Guarantee: A performance guarantee may be required to ensure completion of conservation measures, including plantings and other
mitigation or maintenance efforts, as stipulated in this article. Required performance guarantees must be submitted according to the procedures for
performance guarantees as set forth in title 18, "Site Plan Review", of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-6: JURISDICTIONAL WETLANDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 505/715
A. Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around wetlands is to:
1. Preserve the unique and valuable attributes of wetlands as areas where storm water is naturally retained, thereby controlling the rate of runoff,
improving water quality, recharging ground water resources, providing erosion control and lessening the effects of flooding;
2. Promote the preservation of habitat for plants, fish, reptiles, amphibians or other wildlife;
3. Minimize the impact of development activity on wetland areas;
4. Provide a greater degree of protection for many wetland areas above and beyond that provided by the federal and state government; and
5. Minimize the long term environmental impact associated with the loss of wetlands.
B. Wetland Regulation By Other Agencies: The approval of a sensitive areas development plan under the provisions of this article is in addition to the
applicant's need to obtain permits required by other local, state, or federal agencies, and does not alter the applicant's obligation to satisfy and obtain
all other applicable local, state or federal regulations and permits.
C. Wetland Mitigation Plan Required:
1. A sensitive areas development plan for property containing a regulated wetland shall include a wetland mitigation plan demonstrating that all
regulations of this section will be met. Avoiding a delineated wetland area and minimizing the impact of development on a wetland is strongly
encouraged, and must be investigated before compensatory mitigation will be considered.
2. A wetland mitigation plan shall include the following information:
a. The boundaries of the delineated wetland and the required natural buffer area.
b. Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of associated restrictions thereof.
c. The type and location of erosion control measures to be placed on the property prior to any other development activity occurring on the site.
d. Certification by a wetland specialist or the U.S. army corps of engineers, or its successor, regarding the wetland delineation, if required.
e. Information regarding the characteristics of the wetland necessary to determine the allowable buffer reduction as provided in subsection E,
"Wetland Buffer Requirements", of this section if a reduction is requested.
f. A storm water management plan demonstrating compliance with the requirements of the Iowa City storm water regulations and related municipal
design standards.
D. Wetland Delineation:
1. Prior to any development activity occurring on a site containing a potential regulated wetland, the property owner must provide a delineation of the
wetland area. Determination of jurisdictional wetlands must be made either by the U.S. army corps of engineers, or its successor, or by a wetland
specialist. If completed by a wetland specialist, the wetland delineation must be reviewed and accepted by the U.S. army corps, or its successor.
Delineation of wetland areas must be completed prior to the submittal of a sensitive areas development plan for review.
2. If the property owner certifies that no development activity will occur within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the apparent edge of a suspected or
potential wetland area on the site, the requirement for delineation by a wetland specialist or the corps may be waived by the city. In the case of a
waiver, the property owner shall grant an easement running in favor of the city, an approved conservation group, or other approved organization for
the purpose of retaining the wetland and the surrounding one hundred fifty foot (150') protection area as undeveloped natural open space.
E. Wetland Buffer Requirements:
1. An undisturbed, one hundred foot (100') natural buffer shall be maintained between any development activity and a regulated wetland unless said
development activity is exempted pursuant to subsection 14-5I-2C, "Exemptions", of this article. The required setbacks established for the base zone
shall be measured from the buffer edge, and are in addition to the required buffer. This setback requirement applies to parking lots as well. (For
example, the RS-5 district requires a 20 foot rear setback, which would be measured from the outside edge of the required 100 foot buffer. As a
result, no building or parking lot could be located within 120 feet of the wetland.)
2. Buffer averaging may be permitted or required where an increased buffer is deemed necessary or desirable to provide additional protection to one
area of a wetland for aesthetic or environmental reasons. In this situation, the width of the required buffer around other areas of the wetland may be
reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), but the area of the provided buffer must be equal to or greater than the total area of the required buffer. Any
request for buffer averaging requires a level II sensitive areas review. Buffers that have been reduced according to the provisions of subsection E3 of
this section may not be averaged.
3. The applicant may request a reduction of the required natural buffer in certain instances enumerated below. Any request for a reduction in the
natural wetlands buffer requires a level II sensitive areas review. Buffers that have been averaged according to the provisions of subsection E2 of
this section may not be reduced.
a. The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to fifty feet (50') if it can be demonstrated by a wetland specialist that the wetland:
(1) Is less than five (5) acres in area; and
(2) Does not contain species listed by the federal or state government as endangered or threatened, or critical or outstanding natural habitat for
those species; and
(3) Does not contain diverse plant associations of infrequent occurrence or of regional significance; and
(4) Is not located within a regulated stream corridor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 506/715
b. The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to seventy five feet (75') if it can be demonstrated by a wetland specialist that the wetland:
(1) Satisfies the criteria for natural buffer reduction in subsection E3a of this section; and
(2) Does not, in a year of average precipitation, contain standing water at any time during the calendar year; and
(3) Is not a forested wetland; and
(4) Does not provide a known habitat for migratory birds of local or regional significance.
c. In addition to the qualifying criteria listed above, the city shall consider the following factors in determining whether or not to reduce the required
buffer:
(1) The proposed land use of the property and its potential impact on the wetland; and
(2) The design and layout of the proposed development in relation to the wetland; and
(3) The physical characteristics of the site and the wetland; and
(4) Any other factor related to the short or long term environmental stability and health of the wetland.
F. Design Standards:
1. No grading, dredging, clearing, filling, draining, or other development activity is allowed within a regulated wetland or required buffer area, unless
said activity is part of an approved wetland mitigation plan or is a use, activity or structure allowed according to subsection 14-5I-2D, "Uses, Activities
And Structures Allowed Within Protected Sensitive Areas", of this article.
2. For property not served by a city sanitary sewer system, the location of septic tanks, soil absorption systems, holding tanks, or any other element of
an on site sewage disposal system must meet the required setbacks specified in the base zone, as measured from the buffer edge.
3. To mitigate negative impacts of development and limit sedimentation, the direct discharge of untreated surface water from a development site or a
developed area into a wetland may be prohibited. The partial treatment of storm water runoff through the use or combined use of constructed
wetlands, detention basins, vegetative filter strips, sediment traps or other means before the storm water runoff reaches a wetland may be
considered as part of a wetland mitigation plan. In such case, the discharge should not increase the rate of flow or decrease the water quality of the
wetlands unless it can be shown by a wetland specialist that an increase in the rate of flow will enhance rather than adversely impact the wetland.
4. On any lot containing a regulated wetland, erosion control measures, whether required under title 17, chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code,
or as part of a wetland mitigation plan approved under the provisions of this article, must be installed prior to any development activity occurring on
the site.
5. The planting of foreign or invasive species, including intrusive native varieties, in regulated wetland or buffer areas is prohibited. Only nonintrusive
native species shall be used to supplement existing vegetation.
6. The removal of foreign or invasive species, including intrusive native varieties, within a regulated wetland or buffer area may be permitted when
approved as part of an approved wetland mitigation plan.
7. Where it is determined that the area occupied by the required buffer provides little natural protection to the wetland due to previous land disturbance,
enhanced vegetative cover must be provided within the buffer area to help filter and slow the flow of surface water. The enhanced vegetation shall
consist of species that are known to be noninvasive to wetland areas.
G. Compensatory Mitigation: Compensatory mitigation may be permitted only if it is clearly demonstrated that avoiding and minimizing the impact on a
wetland is unreasonable. A permit for any development activity within a wetland area is required by the U.S. army corps of engineers or its successor. If
a permit is granted for development activity within a wetland, compensatory mitigation shall be required based on the following criteria, unless a greater
degree of compensation is required by the corps or its successor:
1. Wetlands containing the following characteristics shall be considered protected, "no build" wetland areas. Compensatory mitigation will be
considered only if the wetland disturbance is relatively small in relation to the overall wetland and if it can be shown that the disturbance will not have
an adverse impact on the overall wetland. In wetlands with the following characteristics, if compensatory mitigation is permitted, the required
replacement ratio of comparable habitat replaced to habitat lost shall be at least three to one (3:1):
a. Wetlands containing species listed by the federal or state government as endangered or threatened, or containing critical or outstanding natural
habitat for those species; or
b. Wetlands containing the presence of diverse plant associations of infrequent occurrence or of regional importance; or
c. Wetlands located within regulated stream corridors as defined in this article.
2. The replacement ratio of comparable habitat replaced to habitat lost shall be at least two to one (2:1) for wetlands not containing the characteristics
listed in subsection G1 of this section, but which do contain the following characteristics:
a. Standing water throughout the calendar year under average precipitation;
b. Forested wetlands; or
c. Wetlands providing a known habitat for migratory birds of regional or local significance.
3. Compensatory mitigation for all other regulated wetlands shall be at a ratio of at least one to one (1:1). If said wetland or the replacement habitat is
enhanced so that it contains one or more of the defining characteristics listed in subsection G1 or G2 of this section, the required replacement ratio
may be reduced to 0.5:1.
4. When compensatory mitigation is proposed, the wetland mitigation plan described in this section must be prepared by a wetland specialist. A
wetland mitigation plan that includes compensatory mitigation must include the following components:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 507/715
a. An assessment of the value of the wetland being replaced to determine the appropriate replacement ratio;
b. A clear statement of the goals of the mitigation plan, including specific statements regarding the expected rate of establishment of a vegetative
cover over specified periods of time;
c. Analysis of the soils, substrate and hydrology of the proposed site of the constructed or expanded wetland in terms of their suitability to provide a
proper growing medium for the proposed vegetation;
d. A list of the plant species to be used, which should include only native, noninvasive species, and their proposed locations. Transplanting as much
of the native vegetation from the original wetland as possible, as well as the upper six (6) to twelve inches (12") of the soil is encouraged; and
e. Provisions for monitoring the condition of the new or enhanced wetland area for a period of five (5) years, and identification of the party
responsible for replanting in the event of poor initial growth or predation resulting in a failure of over thirty percent (30%) of the planted stock.
Information collected during the monitoring process must be submitted to the city annually and include the following:
(1) Data on plant species diversity and the extent of plant cover established in the new or enhanced wetland;
(2) Wildlife presence;
(3) Data on water regimes, water chemistry, soil conditions and ground and surface water interactions; and
(4) Proposed alterations or corrective measures to address deficiencies identified in the created or enhanced wetland, such as a failure to
establish a vegetative cover or the presence of invasive or foreign species. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-7: STREAM CORRIDORS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around stream corridors is to:
1. Preserve the value of stream corridors in providing floodwater conveyance and storage;
2. Promote filtration of storm water runoff;
3. Reduce stream bank erosion; and
4. Protect and enhance wildlife habitat.
B. Stream Corridor Regulation By Other Agencies: The approval of a sensitive areas development plan shall be in addition to the applicant's need to
obtain permits required by other local, state or federal agencies, and does not alter the applicant's obligation to satisfy and obtain all other applicable
local, state or federal regulations and permits.
C. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing a regulated stream corridor must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the following information: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
1. A delineation of the stream corridor and the required natural buffer area is required. If, in the course of delineating a blue line stream, it is determined
through field verification by a qualified professional, such as a geologist, hydrologist, or wetland specialist, that the blue line or a portion of a blue line
on the current U.S. geological survey quadrangle maps does not represent a watercourse with a bed and bank defined by an "ordinary high water
mark", as defined herein, and a definite direction of flow, either continuously or intermittently, then said watercourse or portion of a watercourse will
not be considered a regulated stream corridor for purposes of this title. In such an event, a report prepared by said qualified professional must be
submitted to the city that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the subject watercourse does not have the aforementioned defining
characteristics of a stream corridor. (Ord. 10-4398, 7-12-2010)
2. Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of associated restrictions thereof.
3. Information regarding the characteristics of the stream corridor necessary to determine the allowable buffer reduction as provided in subsection D,
"Stream Corridor Buffer Requirements", of this section if a reduction is requested.
D. Stream Corridor Buffer Requirements:
1. Unless exempt pursuant to subsection 14-5I-2C, "Exemptions", of this article, the following natural buffers must be maintained along regulated
stream corridors. When other regulated sensitive features are located within a stream corridor, a fifty foot (50') buffer is required.
a. Along the Iowa River, a fifty foot (50') natural buffer must be maintained between any development activity and the stream corridor, which includes
the floodway.
b. Along tributaries to the Iowa River that have a delineated floodway, a thirty foot (30') natural buffer must be maintained between any development
activity and the stream corridor, which includes the floodway. These tributaries include, but are not limited to, Ralston Creek, Willow Creek, Snyder
Creek, Clear Creek and Rapid Creek.
c. Along tributaries or drainageways that do not have a delineated floodway, a fifteen foot (15') natural buffer must be maintained between any
development activity and the stream corridor limits.
2. The applicant may request a reduction of the required natural buffer in certain circumstances enumerated below:
a. The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%) if the applicant demonstrates that the portion of the buffer being reduced:
(1) Does not contain significant existing vegetative cover, such as native trees or prairie remnants; and
(2) Does not contain other sensitive areas subject to the requirements of this article; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 508/715
(3) Enhanced vegetative cover will be provided in the remaining buffer area.
b. The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to one hundred percent (100%) if the applicant demonstrates that:
(1) The property is adjacent to or contains a stream corridor located in a "developed area of the city"; and
(2) The portion of the buffer being reduced does not contain other sensitive areas subject to the requirements of this article; and
(3) Requiring the full stream corridor buffer would preclude reasonable use of the property; and
(4) Enhanced vegetative cover will be provided in any remaining buffer area, to the extent possible.
c. In addition to the qualifying criteria listed above, the city will consider the following factors in determining whether to reduce the required buffer:
(1) The proposed land use of the property and its potential impact on the stream corridor;
(2) The design and layout of the proposed development in relation to the stream corridor;
(3) The characteristics of the site and the stream corridor; and
(4) Any other factors related to the short or long term environmental stability and health of the stream corridor. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-8: REGULATED SLOPES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of regulating development on and near steep slopes is to:
1. Promote safety in the design and construction of developments;
2. Minimize flooding, landslides and mudslides;
3. Minimize soil instability, erosion and downstream siltation; and
4. Preserve the scenic character of hillside areas, particularly wooded hillsides.
B. Regulated Slopes Defined:
ALTERED PROTECTED SLOPES: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper created by human activity such as cutting or filling, which activity
occurred prior to December 13, 1995, and which slope is not otherwise approved by the city.
CRITICAL SLOPES: A slope of twenty five percent (25%), but less than forty percent (40%).
PERCENT OF SLOPE: The slope of a designated area determined by dividing the horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope
and converting the resulting figure into a percentage value.
PROTECTED SLOPES: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper.
STEEP SLOPES: A slope of eighteen percent (18%), but less than twenty five percent (25%).
C. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing regulated slopes must include evidence demonstrating
that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the following information:
1. Delineation of all steep, critical, and protected slopes and any required buffer area.
2. Submission of a grading plan that is in conformance with title 17, chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code.
3. Delineation of construction area limits and specification of associated restrictions thereof.
D. Buffer Requirements:
1. A buffer will be required around all protected slopes. Two feet (2') of buffer must be provided for each foot of vertical rise of the protected slope, up to
a maximum buffer of fifty feet (50'). The buffer area is to be measured from the top, toe and sides of the protected slope. No development activity,
including removal of trees and other vegetation, will be allowed within the buffer.
2. The buffer requirements may be reduced under certain circumstances. If a buffer reduction is requested, a level II sensitive areas review is required.
A reduction of a protected slope buffer may only be approved if a geologist or professional engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that
the proposed development activity can and will be designed to eliminate hazards and will not undermine the stability of the slope or the buffer area.
E. Design Standards For Regulated Slopes:
1. Construction areas must be delineated on the sensitive areas development plan and must indicate the boundaries of all intended development
activities, including grading, excavation, and storage of construction materials. Accordingly, construction areas must be in concert with required
grading plans. Except for driveways and utilities installation, no grading or excavation is allowed outside the construction area.
2. Except for commercially or industrially zoned properties, construction areas on lots containing protected slopes must be of a size equal to at least
forty percent (40%) of the minimum lot size required by the zone in which it is located. (For example, the construction area for a lot in an RS-5 zone
must be at least 3,200 square feet, which is 40 percent of the 8,000 square foot minimum lot size.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 509/715
3. Designated construction areas must not extend into protected slopes or protected slope buffers unless expressly permitted according to the
provisions of this section.
4. Encroachment of construction areas into steep and critical slopes must be minimized. If disturbance of more than thirty five percent (35%) of critical
slopes is proposed a level II sensitive areas review is required.
5. Any area designated as a natural protected slope (40+ percent) must not be graded and must remain in its existing state, except natural vegetation
may be supplemented by other plant material.
6. Development activities may be allowed within areas containing "altered protected slopes", as defined in this section. In such cases, a level II
sensitive areas review is required. Approval will be based on the following criteria:
a. A geologist or professional engineer must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that development activity will not undermine the stability of the
slope; and
b. The city further determines that the proposed development activities are consistent with the intent of this article.
7. Cut slopes must be constructed to eliminate sharp angles of intersection with the existing terrain and must be rounded and contoured as necessary
to blend with existing topography to the maximum extent possible. The city will not accept the dedication and maintenance of cut and fill slopes,
except those within the required street right of way.
8. Street rights of way and public utility corridors must be located so as to minimize cutting and filling.
9. To maintain the stability of ungraded areas, existing vegetation must be retained to the maximum extent possible, and additional plantings to stabilize
the slope may be allowed. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-9: WOODED AREAS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around wooded areas is to:
1. Reduce damage to wooded areas, particularly wetlands, steep slopes and stream corridors;
2. Reduce erosion and siltation;
3. Minimize destruction of wildlife habitat; and
4. Encourage subdivision and site plan design which incorporate groves and woodlands as amenities within a development.
B. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing regulated wooded areas must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the following information:
1. All "groves of trees" and all "woodlands", as these terms are defined in this title, must be delineated on the plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
2. The plan must also delineate all woodlands that are to be protected according to the woodland retention and replacement requirements in
subsection C of this section and all groves that are to be protected. The delineated woodlands must include the required buffer area or, alternatively,
must delineate the drip line of trees to be retained as specified in subsection C of this section.
3. The total acreage of woodlands must be listed on the plan, along with the percentage of woodlands to be disturbed and the percentage that will be
retained. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
4. Woodland and tree protection methods for proposed development activity shall be shown on any plan or plat required to be submitted prior to
commencement of development activity. Protection methods should comply with generally accepted tree protection guidelines and be approved by
the city.
5. The plan must indicate the location of the planting area for any replacement trees required under this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord.
13-4530, 5-14-2013)
C. Woodland Retention And Replacement Requirements: Regulated woodlands must be retained according to the following provisions. The percentage of
the regulated woodland that must be retained is specified in table 5I-1 of this section according to the underlying base zone.
Table 5I-1: Woodland Retention Requirements
Base Zone Retention Requirement
ID, RR-1 70 percent
RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, RNS-12 50 percent
RM-12, RM-20, RM-44, RNS-20 20 percent
RDP, ORP 20 percent
C and I 10 percent
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
1. The required woodland area to be retained must include a buffer area that extends fifty feet (50') outward from the trunks of the trees to be
preserved, unless otherwise allowed by subsection C2 of this section. This buffer area is intended to protect the trees within the specified retention
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 510/715
area. Since trees within this buffer area may be prone to damage during construction, they may not be included when calculating the required
retention area.
2. Alternatively, a fifty foot (50') buffer area need not be provided if an on site tree survey is completed and the construction limit line is established at
least five feet (5') beyond the drip line of trees to be preserved. The tree survey must identify the species, size and location of trees at the perimeter
of the woodland to be protected. Said on site tree survey and a map delineating the drip line of the trees located near the construction limit line must
be submitted to the city for verification by the city forester or designee. Additional spacing from the drip line (beyond the minimum 5 feet) may be
required if needed to protect the health of trees specified for protection, as determined by the city forester or designee.
3. All efforts shall be made during construction to protect the woodlands and groves designated for retention, including placement of durable fencing or
other sturdy barrier along the designated construction limit line.
4. If the city determines that the required woodland area cannot be retained due to site constraints or infrastructure requirements, replacement trees
must be planted. At the discretion of the city, replacement trees may also be allowed in cases where woodlands are determined to be of low quality,
such that planting replacement trees would improve the health of a wooded area or create a new grove or wooded area of higher quality. One tree
must be planted for every two hundred (200) square feet of woodland removed from the otherwise required retention area. Existing healthy trees (not
located within the woodland) may be counted as replacement trees, at the discretion of the city, based on the health, species, maturity, location, and
likelihood of survival during and after construction. Existing trees approved for preservation will count toward the required replacement trees at the
ratio of substitution stated in table 5E-2 within article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this chapter. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
5. Where it is not feasible to replace trees on site, replacement trees may be planted to supplement reforestation of an off site woodland approved by
the city. Any designated off site woodland must be either publicly owned property or property subject to a conservation easement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
6. Replacement trees must be approved by the city, and to the extent possible, should be of the same or equivalent species as the trees being
removed, unless it is determined that the trees being removed are of a species that is considered low quality. In such a case, alternative tree species
will be considered by the city. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
7. Replacement trees must meet the specifications set forth in general tree planting requirements contained in article E, "Landscaping And Tree
Standards", of this chapter, and must be secured by a performance guarantee for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
D. Design Standards For Wooded Areas:
1. Woodlands, groves, and existing trees designated for protection according to the approved sensitive areas site development plan, shall be protected
from construction activity with durable fencing or other sturdy barrier approved by the city. Said protective fencing shall be placed a minimum of five
feet (5') beyond the drip line of the tree or trees to be preserved. Additional spacing of protective fencing from the drip line (beyond the minimum 5
feet) may be required if needed to protect the health of trees specified for protection, as determined by the city forester or designee. The drip line is
an imaginary circle that could be drawn on the soil around a tree directly under the tips of its outermost branches. The drip line encompasses the
ground area under the entire spread of the tree canopy.
2. Measures must be taken to protect and retain groves of trees, as defined in this title, to the extent practicable.
3. Trees preserved within groves may be counted as replacement trees, if it is determined that the required woodland retention ratio on a site cannot be
met as allowed in subsection C4 of this section. Preserved trees within groves may count toward replacement trees at the ratio of substitution stated
in table 5E-2 within article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this chapter. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
4. When other environmentally regulated sensitive features are present in combination with a regulated woodland, the regulations related to all the
sensitive areas contained on the property will be considered, with the most stringent regulations applying.
5. To the extent possible, woodlands located on steep or critical slopes or within 100-year floodplains must be given the highest retention priority when
meeting the woodland retention and replacement requirements.
6. Street right of way, public utility corridors and building sites should be located so as to minimize their impact on woodlands and groves.
7. Where possible, woodlands and groves to be protected should be located within designated public or private open space, either through dedication,
a conservation easement, or control by a homeowners' association. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
14-5I-10: FULLY HYDRIC SOILS:
A. Purpose: Fully hydric soils may indicate the potential existence of jurisdictional wetlands and the probable existence of a high water table. The purpose
of regulating lands that contain fully hydric soils is to recognize the constraints imposed on urban development projects by potential wetlands or high
water tables. That is:
1. Wetlands are protected under state and federal law, and as such, are considered no build areas unless appropriate and approved mitigation
measures are undertaken.
2. High water tables on a property require special construction practices both for infrastructure such as streets, and for structural development such as
residences.
B. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing regulated hydric soils must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the following information:
1. Delineation of areas on the property where hydric soils exist.
2. Report from a wetland specialist regarding whether wetlands exist on the property.
3. Delineation of a construction area limit, if applicable, and specification of associated restrictions thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 511/715
C. Regulations:
1. If fully hydric soils exist on a property where development activity is proposed, the property owner shall have a wetlands specialist verify whether
wetlands exist on the site. If wetlands are found to exist on the site, compliance with the wetlands provisions of this article will be required.
2. More stringent construction safeguards, as specified by the city, will be required for streets and storm water management facilities located in fully
hydric soils. Sump pump discharge tiles and elevations of window openings may also be regulated, as specified by the city.
D. Design Standards: To the extent possible, urban development projects will be designed so that areas of fully hydric soils will be treated as an
environmental asset; used for storm water detention, wetland enhancement or buffers, protective greenbelts along stream corridors and neighborhood
open space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-11: PRAIRIE REMNANTS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of protecting prairie remnants is to:
1. Preserve the value of prairie remnants for holding soil in place, absorbing pollutants and taking up large amounts of moisture. These functions are
particularly important when prairie remnants are located along streambanks, adjacent to wetlands or on areas of highly erodible soil.
2. Protect and enhance the function of prairie remnants to provide wildlife habitat, ecological diversity and environmental education opportunities in an
urban setting.
B. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing regulated prairie remnants must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the following:
1. Delineation of all regulated prairie remnants on the property; and
2. Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of associated restrictions.
C. Prairie Remnant Regulations:
1. Development of properties containing prairie remnants one acre in size or larger that are not associated with other sensitive features will be
designed to retain the maximum amount of prairie remnant possible, while not precluding reasonable, beneficial use of the property.
2. Prairie remnants associated with other sensitive features, such as stream corridors, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands or a stand of significant trees
will be treated as environmental assets, and will be considered no build areas to the extent possible, and used for buffers, filter strips along
waterways, or neighborhood open space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-12: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of regulating development of lands that contain archaeological sites is to:
1. Assure that sites that contain important information regarding the prehistory and history of the area are identified, studied, protected, or properly
excavated when appropriate.
2. Allow the opportunity for documentation and study of important prehistoric and historic sites.
3. Allow for the consideration of prehistoric and historic sites in the planning and development of a property to minimize delays when it is determined
that study or excavation of such sites is necessary.
4. Provide for the early identification of human burial sites to ensure that the code of Iowa, as amended, regarding such burial sites is not violated and
to avoid unnecessary delays in subdivision development and subdivision redesign if such sites are discovered after commencement of development.
B. Regulation Of Archaeological Sites By Other Agencies: The approval of a sensitive areas development plan under the provisions of this section is in
addition to the applicant's obligation to obtain permits required by other local, state or federal agencies, and does not alter the applicant's obligation to
satisfy and obtain all other applicable local, state or federal regulations and permits.
C. Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for property containing regulated archaeological sites must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must delineate any archaeological sites and any required buffer on the property
and must document efforts to retain or preserve significant archaeological sites and burial grounds. The plan must also delineate a construction area
limit, if applicable, and specify any associated restrictions thereof.
D. Notification: When the sensitive areas inventory map - phase I indicates that an archaeological site is located in the quarter section within which a site
plan, planned development or a subdivision is proposed, the city will forward the site plan or subdivision plan to the state archaeologist and the state
historic preservation officer for an opportunity to comment. The state may notify the city if a recorded archaeological site exists within the area of the
site plan, planned development or subdivision. The state will also notify the city if the site is of such archaeological importance that it requires further
study by the state or a state approved archaeologist. If the state identifies such site, the Iowa City historic preservation commission or its successor
shall be notified and may proceed toward historic designation of the site as set forth in chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval
Procedures", of this title.
E. Archaeological Study:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 512/715
1. If it is determined by the state that further study of an archaeological site is necessary, the city may approve a site plan, planned development or a
subdivision, subject to a requirement that the state or a state approved archaeologist be allowed to study the site and, if appropriate, complete an
excavation of the site for the purpose of documenting the significance of the site. The state shall have a period of up to thirty (30) calendar days in
which the site is frost free to study and, where appropriate, excavate the site. This requirement shall not prevent or delay activities which are
approved under the grading ordinance, site plan review, planned development or subdivision regulations for portions of the property which do not
contain archaeological materials.
2. The applicant may choose to hire an archaeologist approved by the state to complete a study or excavation plan approved by the state. In this way,
the study or excavation work may be completed in a more timely manner.
F. Significant Archaeological Sites:
1. If the state determines that the property includes a significant prehistoric or historic site that cannot be studied and excavated within a thirty (30)
calendar day period, the site plan, planned development or a subdivision plan may be approved subject to an archaeological assessment plan, which
specifies a period of time in which the state or a state approved archaeologist may document or excavate a site.
2. If the site is determined to be of such state or national significance that it should not be disturbed, an attempt must be made to design the site plan,
planned development or subdivision plan to allow retention of the site as private or public open space.
G. Burial Grounds: When a site contains a human burial ground, the state archaeologist shall determine the significance of the burial ground and whether
or not the human remains may be disinterred. If the state archaeologist determines that the human remains should not be disturbed, the portion of the
property containing the burial grounds, plus a twenty foot (20') buffer around the burial grounds, shall be set aside as permanent, private or public open
space.
H. Discovery Of Unrecorded Archaeological Sites: If, during the course of grading or construction, prehistoric artifacts, historic objects or significant
archaeological materials, such as human remains or a prehistoric human settlement, are encountered, the city must be notified. The city must notify the
state, which may take steps to excavate and preserve the objects, if practical, or in the case of human burial grounds, the state archaeologist shall
determine whether or not the human remains can be disinterred. If it is determined that the human remains cannot be disinterred, the portion of the
property containing the burial ground shall be returned to its preconstruction condition by those persons responsible for the disturbance. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
ARTICLE J. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
14-5J-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect and preserve the rights and privileges and property of Iowa City and its residents and to protect, preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing flood losses. The provisions of this article are designed
to:
A. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
B. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
C. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage.
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners to purchase flood insurance through the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-
2010)
14-5J-2: APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Application Of Provisions: The regulations within this article apply to all lands identified in the "Johnson County, Iowa, and incorporated areas flood
insurance rate map", dated February 16, 2007. The "Johnson County, Iowa and incorporated areas flood insurance study", as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference and is made a part of this article for the purpose of administering floodplain management regulations.
B. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this article are considered minimum requirements and will be liberally construed in favor of the governing
body and will not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
C. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. Where more specific provisions herein
conflict with other provisions of this title, this article shall prevail. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-3: LEGAL AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS OF FACT:
A. Legal Authority: Chapter 455B, code of Iowa, as amended, gives cities authority to adopt regulations governing development and redevelopment within
flood hazard areas, including designation of flood hazard maps.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 513/715
B. Legislative Findings:
1. The flood hazard areas of Iowa City are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents.
2. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages.
Such uses create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. This article relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards, which is consistent with the standards established by the Iowa
department of natural resources or its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article.
B. If a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article lawfully existed prior to May 2, 1977, and has existed continuously without
abandonment since that time, then improvements may be made to the structure, notwithstanding the provisions of this article, provided such
improvements do not constitute a substantial improvement as defined in chapter 9, article F, "Floodplain Management Definitions", of this title.
However, structures, uses, or development that are nonconforming with regard to other provisions of this title must comply with the applicable
regulations contained in chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-5: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Official Designated: The building official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the building official include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
1. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved
buildings or the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
2. Notify adjacent communities or counties and the Iowa department of natural resources, or its assignee, prior to any proposed alteration or relocation
of a watercourse.
3. Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and other such transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this article. (Ord.
10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-6: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: A floodplain development permit, issued by the building official, must be obtained prior to initiation of any development on a parcel of
land within a flood hazard area according to the applicable review and approval procedures contained in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title. Issuance of a floodplain development permit does not relieve the property owner from complying with federal, state, or other
agency regulations, including approval when required from the Iowa department of natural resources.
B. Compliance: Floodplain development permits based on approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth
in such approved plans and applications. Prior to use or occupancy of any structure, the applicant will be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, registered in the state, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this article. Any use, arrangement or construction not in compliance with the uses
authorized will be deemed a violation of this article. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
All properties subject to the regulations of this article must comply with the following applicable performance standards:
A. General Construction Requirements: All structures shall be:
1. Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; and
2. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and
3. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
B. Class 1 Critical Facilities:
1. Class 1 critical facilities may not be located within a flood hazard area.
2. Class 1 critical facilities must be located with a means of vehicular access that will remain passable during occurrence of the 0.2% flood event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 514/715
C. Residential Buildings:
1. All new or substantially improved residential structures must have the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
2. Where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill, alternate methods of elevating, such as piers, may be allowed,
subject to approval by the building official. In such a case, a licensed professional shall certify that the methods used will be adequate to support the
structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
D. Nonresidential Buildings:
1. All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings must have the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
2. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the flood hazard, and that the structure
below the flood hazard elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. Such certification must also indicate the
specific elevation, in relation to national geodetic vertical datum, to which any structures are floodproofed. A record of this certification will be retained
in the office of the building official.
E. All New And Substantially Improved Structures:
1. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer to meet or exceed the following minimum approval criteria:
a. There must be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. The openings shall not be located on the same wall.
b. The openings shall be located on exterior walls such that the 1% flood elevation, or shallow flood elevation, is above the bottom of the opening,
and in all cases the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
c. Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
2. New and substantially improved structures must be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
3. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities elevated or floodproofed to one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
F. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing, including those placed in existing manufactured housing parks, planned developments, or subdivisions,
must be:
1. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
2. Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
G. Utility And Sanitary Systems:
1. All new or replacement on site sewage waste disposal systems must be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination
from the system during flooding.
2. New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system. Water supply facilities and sanitary sewage systems must be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above
the flood hazard elevation.
3. Utilities, such as gas or electrical systems, must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damage or impaired systems.
H. Storage Of Flammable, Explosive Or Injurious Materials: Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation. Other material and equipment must either
be similarly elevated or:
1. Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters; or
2. Be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
I. Flood Control Structural Works: Flood control structural works, including, but not limited to, levees and flood walls, must provide, at a minimum,
protection from a 0.2% flood event with a minimum of three feet (3') of design freeboard and must provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition,
flood control structural works must be approved by the Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
J. Inhibiting Floodways And Drainage Facilities: No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main
stream, drainage ditch or other drainage facility or system.
K. Subdivisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 515/715
1. Subdivisions and planned developments, including manufactured housing parks, must be designed to minimize flood damage and must have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage, and must meet the applicable performance standards established by the city
engineer. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance
standards of this article. Any subdivision, planned development, or manufactured housing park intended for residential development must provide all
lots with a means of vehicular access that will remain passable during occurrence of the 1% flood event.
2. Proposals for subdivisions shall include the flood hazard elevation data for those areas located within flood hazard areas.
L. Residential Accessory Structures: The exemption of detached garages, sheds and similar structures from the general floodplain management for
residential buildings may result in increased premium rates for insurance coverage of the structure and contents; however, said detached garages,
sheds and similar accessory type structures are exempt from the general floodplain management for residential buildings when all of the following
conditions exist:
1. The structure is not used for human habitation.
2. The structure is designed so as to have low flood damage potential.
3. The structure is constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
4. The structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, which may result in damage to other structures.
5. The service facilities for the structure, such as electrical and heating equipment, are elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the flood
hazard elevation.
6. There shall be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding. The openings shall not be located on the same wall.
7. The openings shall be located on exterior walls such that the 1% flood elevation, or shallow flood elevation, is above the bottom of the opening, and
in all cases the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
8. Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
M. Recreational Vehicles:
1. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection F of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of manufactured homes
when the following criteria are satisfied:
a. The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
b. The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
2. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection F of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of manufactured homes. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-8: SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS:
In addition to the general floodplain standards listed above, uses within the floodway must meet the following applicable standards:
A. No use is permitted in the floodway that would increase the 1% flood hazard elevation, unless approved by the Iowa department of natural resources or
its assignee.
B. All uses within the floodway must:
1. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and
2. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and
3. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
C. No use is permitted that would affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system.
D. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, must meet the applicable general floodplain management standards and must be
constructed and aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E. Buildings, if permitted, must have low flood damage potential and must not be used for human habitation.
F. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the time available after flood warning.
G. Watercourse alterations or relocations, including channel changes and modifications, must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Iowa department of natural resources or its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 516/715
assignee.
H. Any fill or stream bank erosion control projects allowed in the floodway must have some beneficial purpose and will be limited to the minimum amount
necessary.
I. Pipelines that cross rivers or streams must be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to action of flood flows. Where floodway data has been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be
used to define the floodway limits.
J. Where no floodway data has been provided, the Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee shall be contacted to provide a floodway
delineation. Where floodway data is not available, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to produce engineered data delineating the floodway.
(Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-9: VARIANCES:
The board of adjustment may authorize, upon request, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this article that will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. To ensure
that the spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice done, no variance to the strict application of any provision of this article shall be granted by the
board unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following approval criteria are met. In addition, the applicant must meet all the provisions and
general approval criteria for variances as stated in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this
title, except subsection 14-4B-2A4 of this title.
A. Approval Criteria:
1. No variance shall be granted for any development within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood elevation unless approved by the
Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
2. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, and a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood elevation, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances or cause fraud on or victimization of the
public.
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
4. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this article, the applicant shall
be notified, in writing, over the signature of the building official, that the issuance of a variance will likely result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
5. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
B. Factors For Consideration: When considering applications for variances, the board of adjustment will consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this article in addition to the following factors:
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood elevation or velocities caused by encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others.
3. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community, and the risk of losing said services during a flood event.
4. The risk assumed by emergency personnel if it is necessary to evacuate the use/structure during a flood event.
5. After consultation with the historic preservation commission, a determination of whether compliance with the floodplain regulations would result in a
substantial alteration or destruction of defining architectural characteristics of landmark properties and properties located within historic or
conservation districts.
6. Such other factors that are relevant to the purposes of this article.
C. Conditions Of Approval: Upon consideration of the factors and approval criteria listed in this section, the board of adjustment may attach such
conditions and safeguards to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 10-
4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-10: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this article may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414,
11-16-2010)
14-5J-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods
of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by humanmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the regulated areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
does not imply that uses permitted within the regulated areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 517/715
Iowa City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
ARTICLE K. NEIGHBORHOOD OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
14-5K-1: PURPOSE:
The neighborhood open space requirements ensure that adequate usable neighborhood open space, parks and recreation facilities are provided in a
manner that is consistent with the neighborhood open space plan, as amended, by using a calculable method to equitably apportion the costs of acquiring
and developing land for those purposes. The provisions of this article require development, which creates increased needs for neighborhood open space
("open space impact"), to pay a proportionate share of the city's capital improvements to fulfill said open space impact. Usable neighborhood open space
includes pedestrian/bicycle trails, preferably located within natural greenway systems, and neighborhood parks that serve nearby residents. Portions of
larger community parks may be adapted for neighborhood use, but this article is not intended to fund the acquisition of community parks or large playing
fields for organized sports. This article is also intended to encourage, wherever reasonably feasible, the dedication of sensitive areas in conjunction with
usable open space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5K-2: APPLICABILITY:
As a condition of approval for residential subdivisions, commercial subdivisions containing residential uses, and planned developments, the applicant shall
dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu of land, or a combination thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and open space purposes, as determined by the city and
in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5K-3: DEDICATION OF LAND:
A. Amount Of Land To Be Dedicated: The amount of land dedication shall be determined by the following formula. This formula is deemed a reasonable
calculation of the additional need for neighborhood open space created by the subject subdivision or planned development.
A x 0.65DU x PDU x 3/1000, where
A = Acres of undeveloped property;
DU = Maximum dwelling units per undeveloped acre (43,560 divided by the minimum lot area requirement for the highest density residential use
allowed in the subject base zone);
0.65 = This percentage figure reflects the average development density occurring in Iowa City;
PDU = Persons per dwelling unit based on the most recent census; and
3/1,000 = The community standard of acres for active neighborhood open space required per 1,000 persons, as determined by the formulas set out in
the neighborhood open space plan, as amended.
B. Nature Of Land To Be Dedicated: Except as otherwise required by the city, all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria:
1. Usability: At least ninety percent (90%) of the land required to be dedicated shall be located outside of floodways, lakes or other water bodies, areas
with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), wetlands subject to federal or state regulatory jurisdiction and other areas the city reasonably deems
unsuitable for neighborhood open space due to topography, flooding or other appropriate considerations. Dry bottom storm water detention facilities
and dry creek areas may be credited toward reaching a portion of the required land dedication when the city determines that such areas are suitable
for use as neighborhood open space. The city encourages the dedication of lakes, ponds, creeks, other water bodies, wetlands falling under the
jurisdiction of state or federal agencies and other sensitive areas including woodland areas, both as ten percent (10%) of and in addition to the
dedicated land required by this article, if sufficient abutting land is dedicated as a usable, public recreation area or park.
2. Unity: The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land, except where the city determines that two (2) or more parcels or greenways/trails would
best serve the public interest, given the type and distribution of neighborhood open space needed to adequately serve the proposed development. If
the city determines that two (2) or more parcels would best serve the public interest, the city may require that such parcels be connected by a
dedicated strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide in order to provide access and continuity between said parcels.
3. Location: The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably serve the recreation and open space needs of the residents of the subdivision or
planned development.
4. Shape: If a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate recreational facilities and activities, such as fields, courts or playground
equipment, the shape of the dedicated land shall be suitable for such facilities and activities. Linear open space should be of sufficient width to
accommodate trails and adjacent greenways.
5. Access:
a. Greenways/Trails: Public access to greenways/trails shall be provided by a public access easement at least twenty feet (20') in width. In addition,
greenways/trails shall be connected to existing or proposed greenways/trails on adjacent property.
b. Parks: Public access to the dedicated land to be used for parks shall be provided either by adjoining public street frontage or by a dedicated public
access easement at least fifty feet (50') in width, which connects the dedicated land to a public street or right of way. The grades adjacent to
existing and proposed streets shall permit reasonable access to the dedicated land. The parcel shall be safely accessible to pedestrian traffic.
6. Responsibility For Site Preparation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 518/715
a. The city may require the subdivider or developer to grade and seed those portions of the dedicated land to be improved prior to dedication of the
property and prior to the city's acceptance of the dedication.
b. Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a street, the subdivider or developer shall remain responsible for the installation of utilities,
sidewalks and other improvements required along that street segment.
c. Prior to dedication, the subdivider or developer shall be responsible for restoring satisfactory ground cover and controlling erosion on land to be
dedicated that has been disrupted as a result of development activities by the subdivider or developer.
C. Procedure For Dedication Of Land:
1. The dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary planned development plan, whichever is applicable.
The subdivider or developer shall designate the area or areas of land to be dedicated pursuant to this article on the preliminary subdivision plat or
planned development plan. Where wetlands have been delineated on the property, the preliminary subdivision plat or planned development plan
shall also identify the boundaries of such wetlands.
2. Upon receipt of the preliminary subdivision plat, the director of planning and community development (PCD) shall submit a copy to the director of the
department of parks and recreation for review by the parks and recreation commission. The parks and recreation commission shall submit
recommendations concerning the land to be dedicated to the planning and zoning commission within twenty one (21) business days of the receipt of
a complete application for preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary planned development.
3. Once the final subdivision plat or final planned development is approved, and any public improvements required to be installed by the subdivider or
developer within the land to be dedicated have been installed, approved, and accepted by the city, and the subdivider or developer has completed
site preparation pursuant to subsection B6 of this section, the subdivider or developer shall provide a properly executed warranty deed conveying the
dedicated land to the city within two (2) years of final plat approval (or final planned development approval) or by the time the city issues fifty percent
(50%) of the certificates of occupancy for the subdivision, at the discretion of the city, or as otherwise specified in the subdivider's or developer
agreement.
4. The city shall formally accept the dedication of land for open space, parkland or greenways/trails by resolution. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5K-4: PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION:
A. General: The payment of fees in lieu of dedication of land may occur at the request of the subdivider or developer with approval by the city, or may be
required by the city. The payment of fees in lieu of land dedication shall be reviewed and approved as part of the preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary planned development.
B. Request By Subdivider Or Developer:
1. If a payment in lieu of open space is requested, the subdivider or developer must include such request in a letter submitted with the application for a
preliminary subdivision or preliminary planned development, whichever is applicable.
2. The PCD director will forward a copy of the preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary planned development, along with a copy of the letter
requesting payment of fees in lieu of land dedication to the director of the department of parks and recreation for review by the parks and recreation
commission. The commission shall submit any and all recommendations concerning the payment of fees in lieu of dedication to the planning and
zoning commission within twenty one (21) business days of the date a complete application for preliminary subdivision plat or planned development
is submitted.
3. The planning and zoning commission will consider the request for payment of fees in lieu of land dedication during the subdivision or planned
development review process and forward its recommendations to the city council.
C. Determination Of Fees In Lieu Of Dedication Criteria: The city may, at its discretion, require the payment of fees in lieu of the subdivider dedicating land,
if the city finds that all or part of the land required for dedication is not suitable for public recreation and open space purposes, or upon a finding that the
recreational needs of the proposed subdivision can be met by other park, greenway, or recreational facilities planned or constructed by the city within
reasonable proximity to the subdivision. The city shall consider the following factors in making its determination:
1. Recreational and open space elements of the city comprehensive plan, as amended, and the relation of the subdivision to the proposed open space
and recreational areas;
2. Topographic and geologic conditions of the land available for dedication;
3. Size, shape, location of and access to the land available for dedication;
4. The character and recreational needs of the neighborhood where the subdivision is located;
5. The costs of developing open space and recreational areas in the subdivision;
6. The actual or potential development of open space and recreational areas on land adjacent to the subdivision which will serve the needs of the
subdivision;
7. Recommendations of staff, the parks and recreation commission and the planning and zoning commission; and
8. Any other relevant information.
D. Time Of Payment: Fees in lieu of dedication must be paid in full by the subdivider/developer prior to the issuance of the first building permit for a lot in
the subdivision or planned development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 519/715
E. Amount Of Payment: The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land that otherwise would have been required for dedication. The fair market
value of the undeveloped land shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser who is acceptable to both the city and the subdivider or
developer. The city and subdivider/developer will equally share the appraisal costs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5K-5: REQUIRING BOTH DEDICATION OF LAND AND PAYMENT OF FEE:
The city may, at its discretion, require a subdivider or a developer of a planned development to dedicate a portion of the land required under the formula
set forth in this article, and also to pay a fee in lieu of dedication for the remaining portion of the land by said formula. The fee for the remaining portion
shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser who is acceptable to both the city and subdivider or developer. The city and subdivider/developer
will equally share the appraisal costs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5K-6: USE OF FUNDS:
A. The city's neighborhood open space plan, as amended, divides the city into neighborhood open space districts. All payments in lieu of dedication shall
be deposited in a special neighborhood open space account designated by the name of the contributing development. All payments will be used to
acquire or develop open spaces, parks, recreation facilities and greenways/trails that are located within the neighborhood open space district
containing the subject subdivision or planned development and will benefit the residents of the subdivision or planned development for which payment
has been made.
B. The city must use the payment in lieu of dedication within five (5) years from the date received. This period will be automatically extended an additional
five (5) years if the subdivider/developer has not constructed at least fifty percent (50%) of the units within the subdivision or planned development for
which payment in lieu of dedication has been made.
C. If the city has not spent the funds by the last day of the five (5) year period or, if extended, by the last day of an additional five (5) years, the city shall,
within ninety (90) days thereafter, mail to the property owner, at the address on file with the Johnson County treasurer's office, a proportional refund
based on the percentage of the platted lots they own of the total platted lots in the subdivision or planned development. The subdivider's
agreement/development agreement for each subdivision/planned development for which the subdivider/developer has made payments in lieu of
dedication shall inform all property owners and successors in interest to properties in the subdivision/planned development of the right to a refund as
provided for herein. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 6
AIRPORT ZONING1
14-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the IOWA CITY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE or the AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to:
A. Exercise, to the fullest extent possible, the powers granted to municipalities under the code of Iowa, as amended, and to codify existing regulations of
the federal aviation administration relating to land uses incompatible with or constituting a hazard to aviation at the Iowa City municipal airport.
B. Promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare through the prevention of obstructions and noncompatible land
uses, to the extent legally possible, by proper exercise of the police power, without compensation.
C. Achieve the mitigation of noncompatible uses and hazards to safe air navigation through prevention, removal, or alteration, through the marking and
lighting of obstructions, which are public purposes for which the city of Iowa City and Johnson County may raise and expend public funds, or through
the acquisition of land or interests in land; to that end, the city council of Iowa City and the board of supervisors of Johnson County hereby declare that:
1. A hazard created by failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter may be abated in the manner prescribed by law for the abatement of public
nuisances; and
2. Neither political subdivision shall become liable for the expenditure of its public funds unless such expenditure shall have been approved in advance
by its governing body. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context requires otherwise. In each case, the singular shall include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular.
AERIAL NAVIGATION: The movement of an aircraft through the air.
AIRCRAFT: Any human controlled contrivance used or designed for carrying humans in flight through the air, but not including parachutes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 520/715
AIRPORT: The Iowa City municipal airport.
AIRPORT COMMISSION: The Iowa City municipal airport commission or its duly appointed representative.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: Six hundred eighty four feet (684') (MSL).
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, or tree, or use of land, which would exceed the federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR FAR, part 77,
and which obstructs or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or departure of any aircraft at the airport, or hazardous to persons or property on the ground.
Any structure or tree that the federal aviation administration has found, or determined, to be a hazard.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided by this chapter.
AIRPORT ZONING MAP: The Iowa City municipal airport zoning map, dated March 25, 2002, and as thereafter amended by ordinance, which map is
adopted by this chapter and which map is on file in the office of the city clerk, Iowa City, Iowa.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official of Iowa City, Iowa, or a duly authorized designee thereof.
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
COUNTY: Johnson County, Iowa.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA): An agency of the United States government that administers the federal regulations that relate to the use
and flight of aircraft, and related regulations. The location of the controlling FAA office may be found in subsection 14-6-19A, "Appendix I", of this chapter.
INNER EDGE: That edge of any zone that is closest to the runway end to which the zone applies. The inner edge is perpendicular to the runway
centerline. The elevation of each inner edge is the same as the elevation of the runway threshold to which it applies, and which is depicted on the airport
zoning map, dated March 25, 2002, and as thereafter amended by ordinance, which map is adopted by this chapter and which map is on file in the office
of the city clerk, Iowa City, Iowa.
MSL: Altitude above mean sea level.
NONCOMPATIBLE USE: Any activity that would degrade the safety of people on the ground, or occupants of aircraft in flight, including, but not limited to,
storage of hazardous materials, aboveground storage of flammable liquids in excess of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, and those that lead to an assembly
of people, including, but not limited to, residences, theaters, churches, schools, athletic fields, campgrounds, hospitals, office buildings, shopping centers,
hotels and motels, and other uses with similar concentrations of persons.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure or portion of any structure that is located within or underlying any of the zones created by this chapter
and that does not conform to the height and/or use provisions of this chapter.
NOTICE OF PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION: A requirement of 14 CFR chapter 1, part 77, providing for persons who propose any kind
of construction or alteration of the type described in the section to provide notice to the FAA of such action. A copy of part 77 may be found in subsection
14-6-19C, "Appendix III", of this chapter.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure or tree, the height of which exceeds that which is allowed by this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee,
assignee or other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY THRESHOLD: A designated point on any airport runway that establishes the end of the runway. The runway threshold may or may not
correspond with the end of the paved portion of the runway.
STRUCTURE: Any object, whether permanent or temporary, stationary or mobile, constructed or installed by humans, including, but not limited to:
buildings, towers, smokestacks, scaffolds, lighting fixtures, public and private roads, railways, and overhead transmission lines, including poles or other
structures supporting the same.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator of Johnson County, Iowa, or a duly authorized designee thereof. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-4: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this section there are hereby created and established certain zones which are adopted and described herein, and
which are depicted on the Iowa City airport zoning map, dated March 25, 2002, and as thereafter amended by ordinance, which map is adopted by this
chapter and which map is on file in the office of the city clerk, Iowa City, Iowa. Any structure or tree located in more than one zone is considered to be only
in the zone with the more restrictive height and use limitation. The various zones hereby established and defined are as follows:
A. Approach Overlay Zone (AO) Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane extending outward from each end of each runway, rising uniformly at a fixed
ratio, and of fixed size, through which aircraft commonly operate when arriving at, and departing from, the airport. AO zones vary in size and slope
based upon the present or future use that can be expected for each airport runway.
1. AO Zones Designated: The AO zones at the airport are as follows:
a. Runway 25 (AO25): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the runway threshold to the northeast, and centered on the extended centerline of
the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of sixteen thousand feet
(16,000'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the airport zoning
map. For each fifty feet (50') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (50:1) for a horizontal distance of
ten thousand feet (10,000'), and then rising, for each forty feet (40') of horizontal distance, one foot (1') (40:1) for an additional distance of forty
thousand feet (40,000').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 521/715
b. Runway 7 (AO7): Beginning one thousand feet (1,000') beyond the paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted
on the airport zoning map. For each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (20:1),
continuing for a total horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000').
c. Runway 30 (AO30): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the threshold at the southeast end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand
five hundred feet (3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the
airport zoning map. For each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (34:1), for a
total horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000').
d. Runway 12 (AO12): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of one thousand
five hundred feet (1,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the
airport zoning map. For each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (20:1), continuing
for a total horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000').
e. Runway 36 (AO36): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at the south end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand
five hundred feet (3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the
airport zoning map. For each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (34:1), for a
total horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000').
f. Runway 18 (AO18): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the threshold at the north end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of one thousand
five hundred feet (1,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the
airport zoning map. For each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (20:1), continuing
for a total horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000').
2. Height Limitations:
a. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, nor plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any approach
overlay zone created herein.
b. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any AO zone by any portion of any
vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
B. Controlled Activity Zone (CA) Defined: An area of fixed size, underlying the innermost portion (closest to the runway end) of the AO zone for that
runway, descending from the floor of the AO zone to the ground. The width and length of CA zones may vary, and may be different on each runway
end.
1. CA Zones Designated: The CA zones for the airport are as follows:
a. Runway 25 (CA25): Underlying the innermost one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') of the AO zone at the northeast end of the runway, the
width of the CA zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred ten feet
(1,510').
b. Runway 7 (CA7): Underlying the innermost one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') of the AO zone at the southwest end of the runway, the
width of the CA zone is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a width of one thousand ten feet (1,010').
c. Runway 30 (CA30): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet (1,000') of the AO zone at the southeast end of the runway, the width of the CA
zone is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a width of seven hundred feet (700').
d. Runway 12 (CA12): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet (1,000') of the AO zone at the northwest end of the runway, the width of the CA
zone is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a width of seven hundred feet (700').
e. Runway 36 (CA36): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet (1,000') of the AO zone at the south end of the runway, the width of each CA
zone is two hundred fifty feet (250') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a width of four hundred fifty feet (450').
f. Runway 18 (CA18): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet (1,000') of the AO zone at the north end of the runway, the width of the CA zone is
two hundred fifty feet (250') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a width of four hundred fifty feet (450').
2. Use Limitations:
a. No person shall establish or maintain any noncompatible use in any controlled activity zone.
b. No structures, other than airport structures, the location of which is dictated by function, either permanent or temporary, shall be permitted in any
portion of any controlled activity zone on land that is the property of the city of Iowa City, Johnson County, or the state of Iowa.
C. Horizontal Overlay Zone (HO) Defined:
1. The airspace above a horizontal plane, the perimeter of which is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand foot (10,000') radii from the center of
the inner edge of the AO zones of runways 25, 30, and 36, and an arc of five thousand foot (5,000') radius from the center of the inner edge of the
AO zone of runways 12, 7, and 18, and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The floor of the HO zone is one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation, or eight hundred thirty four feet (834') above mean sea level.
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate the horizontal
overlay zone created herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
3. The proposed structure may penetrate the HO if the airport operations specialist determines that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 522/715
a. The FAA has issued a "determination of no hazard to navigation";
b. The proposed structure does not exceed any TERPS zone or any other 14 CFR part 77 zone; and
c. The proposed structure does not require a change to instrument approaches, minimum safe altitude, traffic patterns altitude, takeoff/departure
procedures or weather minimums or a change similar in nature either to the approach or departure of an aircraft. (Ord. 14-4589, 6-17-2014)
D. Transitional Overlay Zone (TO) Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane along each side of each runway, and from the sides of each AO zone. For
each seven feet (7') horizontally the floor of the zone rises at the rate of one foot (1') of elevation (7:1).
1. TO Zones Designated: The TO zones for the airport are as follows:
a. Runway 25 (TO25): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right
angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at the northeast end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO zone is interrupted at the point where it intersects the HO zone, and resumes at the outer edge of the CO zone and continues
outward at right angles to the extended runway centerline, for a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the outer edge of the AO zone.
b. Runway 7 (TO7): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right angles
to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at the northwest end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway centerline.
The TO zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
c. Runway 30/12 (TO30/12): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point two hundred fifty feet (250') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at each end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
d. Runway 36/18 (TO36/18): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point two hundred fifty feet (250') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at each end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
2. Height Limitations:
a. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any transitional
overlay zone created herein.
b. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any transitional overlay zone by any
portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
E. Conical Overlay Zone (CO) Defined:
1. The airspace above a sloped horizontal plane beginning at the periphery of the HO zone. For each twenty feet (20') horizontally, the floor of the zone
rises one foot (1') in height (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate the conical overlay
zone created herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-5: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained a building
permit from the building official, or a zoning permit from the zoning administrator. No person shall be issued a permit for any construction or alteration in
any AO, CA, or TO zone, without a determination or finding from the FAA, pursuant to the submission of an applicable notice of proposed construction
or alteration. Such finding or determination must not find or determine that the proposed construction or alteration:
1. Would create a hazard.
2. Would endanger the general safety, health and welfare of persons in the vicinity of the airport, or occupants of aircraft in flight.
3. Would result in the raising of the minimum instrument flight altitude of any federal airway, approved off-airway route, or instrument approach
procedure to the airport.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, no change in the use or occupancy of land, or change of use or occupancy in an existing building or in any zone
created herein shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until an occupancy permit has been issued by the building official or zoning
administrator.
C. No occupancy permit obtained for a specific use shall apply to any other use.
D. No person shall be issued an occupancy permit for any noncompatible use in any CA zone.
E. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any zone created herein by any portion of
any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
F. Within five thousand feet (5,000') of the nearest point of the nearest airport runway, no person shall establish or maintain any structure or use that would
create a bird strike hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 523/715
G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall, in any zone created by this chapter, or upon any land or water underlying such
zones:
1. Establish any putrescible waste landfill.
2. Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use in such a manner as to create electrical or radio interference with aviation navigational signals or
aircraft communications.
3. Install, align or use any lighting devices that make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, create glare in the eyes of
pilots, or otherwise impair visibility.
4. Produce steam, smoke, or other visual hazard that would impair visibility.
5. Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would endanger or interfere with landing, takeoff or maneuvering of any aircraft.
6. Plant, or allow the growth of, any tree, which, during the normal life cycle of such tree, can be expected to grow into any zone created herein. (Ord.
02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-6: LIGHTING AND MARKING:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person constructing or altering any structure located in any zone created by this chapter shall
install all lighting or markings upon said structure as shall be recommended by the FAA as a part of its review of the applicant's notice of proposed
construction or alteration. Such lighting or markings shall be made in a manner consistent with FAA regulations and advisories.
B. Any permit or variance granted under the provisions of this chapter may be so conditioned so as to require the owner of the land, structure, or tree in
question to permit the city or county to install, and/or operate and maintain such lighting and/or markings as the city or county deems necessary to
indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of an airport obstruction. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
A. The building official or zoning administrator shall perform the administration of these zoning regulations.
B. Any person who proposes to construct or alter any structure in or underlying any AO, CA, or TO zone created herein, and who is required to provide
notice of proposed construction or alteration to the administrator of the FAA by requirements of part 77, shall furnish to the building official or zoning
administrator, a copy of said notice.
C. Except as otherwise provided herein, the building official or zoning administrator shall not issue any building permit or occupancy permit without first:
1. In any AO, CA, or TO zone created herein, having received from the applicant a copy of the applicable notice of proposed construction or alteration
as provided to the FAA, and the corresponding finding or determination from the FAA that the proposed construction or alteration complies with
section 14-6-4 of this chapter.
2. Having determined that the proposed use is consistent with the zoning provisions contained herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-8: EXCEPTIONS:
A. No notice of proposed construction or alteration is required to be submitted to the FAA or to the building official or zoning administrator for a building
permit for construction or alteration of any structure when the building official or zoning administrator has determined that:
1. The proposed structure meets the requirements for shielding. Each and all of the following requirements are required for a determination of
shielding:
a. The property upon which the construction or alteration is proposed is located within the congested area of a city.
b. The proposed structure does not lie within any CA zone.
c. There exists a structure or structures of a permanent and substantial nature at least as tall and at least as wide as the proposed structure, and
which lie(s) between the location of the proposed construction or alteration, and a point on the runway centerline at the threshold of the closest end
of the closest runway of the airport.
d. The shielding structure is within five hundred feet (500') of the structure that is proposed for construction or alteration.
e. It is evident beyond a reasonable doubt that the shielded structure will not adversely affect aerial navigation.
2. The proposed structure is an antenna that is no greater than twenty feet (20') in height, and does not increase the height of an existing antenna
structure.
3. The proposed structure is an airport, aerial navigation, or meteorological device, of a type approved by the FAA, the location and height of which is
fixed by function.
B. No notice of proposed construction or alteration is required because the proposed structure does not lie within twenty thousand feet (20,000') of the
nearest point of the nearest runway, or does not penetrate an imaginary surface, beginning at the nearest point of the nearest runway and at the
elevation of the runway threshold, rising one foot (1') in elevation for each one hundred feet (100') of horizontal distance (100:1). This exception does
not apply to structures located in any CA zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 524/715
C. There exists an emergency, involving essential public services, public health, or public safety, that requires immediate construction or alteration,
providing that the applicant complies with the requirements of 14 CFR FAR, part 77.17 (d)2. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-9: NONCONFORMITIES:
A. The regulations prescribed herein are not retroactive and shall not be construed to require the removal of any tree, or the reconstruction or alteration, or
the discontinuation of any use of any structure made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter.
B. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction or alteration, or the intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and which was conforming prior to the adoption of this chapter, and is completed within one year
thereafter.
C. No preexisting nonconforming structure, use, or tree shall be rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or be replanted, so as to constitute a greater
airport hazard than it was at the time that these regulations were adopted.
D. Whenever the building official or zoning administrator determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned, torn down, physically
deteriorated, damaged, or decayed, to such an extent that its value is no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the average value of the structure and the
land over the preceding ten (10) years, no building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued that would allow such structure to exceed the applicable
height and use provisions of this chapter. Any tree so damaged or destroyed shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 14-6-5G6 of this chapter.
E. Not withstanding the previous provisions of this section the owner of any preexisting nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to permit the
installation, operation, or maintenance thereon of any markers and/or lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city or county to indicate to the
operators of aircraft, the presence of such structure or tree. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-10: AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.9 of the Iowa Code, there shall be an Iowa City municipal airport zoning commission, consisting of five (5)
members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the city of Iowa City, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the board of supervisors of Johnson County,
and one additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the city and county appointed members, and who shall serve as chairperson of said
commission. The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.9 of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-11: AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.12 of the Iowa Code, there shall be an Iowa City municipal airport zoning board of adjustment, consisting of five
(5) members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the city of Iowa City, two (2) of who shall be appointed by the board of supervisors of Johnson County,
and one additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the city and county appointed members, and who shall serve as chairperson of said
board. The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.12 of the Iowa Code. The airport zoning board of adjustment shall have the duties
and powers established by the Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-12: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
With the concurrence of a majority vote, the airport zoning board of adjustment (the board) may, based upon a written determination from the FAA, reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official and may modify the provisions of this chapter in favor of an applicant,
providing:
A. Any height or use limitations contained in this chapter that is modified by the board shall not result in a hazard to any aircraft in flight.
B. No use of land shall be permitted that would not be compatible with airport operations.
C. Any application for a special exception to the provisions of this chapter shall include as a part thereof, the written determination of the FAA pertaining to
the application, and no application shall be set for hearing by the board in the absence of such FAA determination. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-13: VARIANCES:
A. Any person desiring to construct or alter any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in a manner that would constitute a
violation of this chapter, may apply to the board for a variance from these regulations. The board shall consider no application for a variance to the
requirements of this chapter unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the airport commission for their opinion as to the aeronautical
effects of such a variance. If the airport commission fails to respond to the board within forty five (45) days from its receipt of the copy of the
application, the board may make its decision in the absence of the airport commission opinion. Such variances may be granted by the board only
where the literal application of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship, and are subject to the following:
1. Such variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
2. Such variance would be in the spirit of this chapter and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 525/715
3. Such variance shall be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
4. Such variance be subject to the requirement that the applicant shall install, operate, and maintain such markings and lighting, at the applicant's own
expense, as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft operators the existence of an airport obstruction as determined by the board.
5. Such variance shall be subject to the reservation of the right of the city and the airport, to go onto applicant's property to install, operate, and
maintain thereon such FAA approved markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the existence of an airport
obstruction.
B. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the airport zoning board of adjustment may appeal such decision, pursuant to the provisions of the
Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-14: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city manager or such persons as the city manager shall, from time to time,
direct. However such duties of enforcement and administration shall not include any of the powers herein delegated to the airport zoning board of
adjustment. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-15: EQUITABLE REMEDIES:
The city or the airport may, pursuant to section 329.5 of the Iowa Code, maintain an action in equity to restrain and abate as a nuisance the creation,
establishment or maintenance of an airport hazard, in violation of any provision established by this chapter, on any property, whether within or without the
territorial limits of the city. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-16: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or alter any structure, use any land, or grow any tree in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-17: PENALTIES:
Each violation of these regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor and the perpetrator thereof, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day a violation occurs or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-18: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In the event of any conflict between regulations contained in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be
with respect to height of structures or trees, use of structures or land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall prevail. (Ord.
02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-19: APPENDICES:
A. Appendix I: The controlling federal authority for the Iowa City municipal airport is:
Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region
Office of the Manager, Airports Division
901 Locust
Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
B. Appendix II: Notice of proposed construction or alteration, FAA form 7460-1 shall be sent to:
Federal Aviation Administration
Manager, Air Traffic Division
901 Locust
Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
C. Appendix III: Code of Federal Regulations Title 14-Aeronautics and Space Chapter 1-Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation,
Subchapter E-Airspace Part 77-Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, Subpart B-Notice of Construction or Alteration (Current through December 3,
2002; 67 FR 71903):
§77.17 Form and time of notice.
(a) Each person who is required to notify the Administrator under §77.13(a) shall send one executed form set (four copies) of FAA Form 7460-1, Notice
of Proposed Construction or Alteration, to the Manager, Air Traffic Division, FAA Regional Office having jurisdiction over the area within which the
construction or alteration will be located. Copies of FAA Form 7460-1 may be obtained from the headquarters of the Federal Aviation Administration
and the regional offices.
(b) The notice required under §77.13(a)(1) through (4) must be submitted at least 30 days before the earlier of the following dates:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 526/715
(1)The date the proposed construction or alteration is to begin.
(2)The date an application for a construction permit is to be filed.
However, a notice relating to proposed construction or alteration that is subject to the licensing requirements of the Federal Communications Act may
be sent to FAA at the same time the application for construction is filed with the Federal Communications Commission, or at any time before that filing.
(c) A proposed structure or an alteration to an existing structure that exceeds 2,000 feet in height above the ground will be presumed to be a hazard to
air navigation and to result in an inefficient utilization of airspace and the applicant has the burden of overcoming that presumption. Each notice
submitted under the pertinent provisions of this Part 77 proposing a structure in excess of 2,000 feet above ground, or an alteration that will make an
existing structure exceed that height, must contain a detailed showing, directed to meeting this burden. Only in exceptional cases, where the FAA
concludes that a clear and compelling showing has been made that it would not result in an inefficient utilization of the airspace and would not result in
a hazard to air navigation, will a determination of no hazard be issued.
(d) In the case of an emergency involving essential public services, public health, or public safety that requires immediate construction or alteration, the
30-day requirement in paragraph (b) of this section does not apply and the notice may be sent by telephone, telegraph, or other expeditious means,
with an executed FAA Form 7460-1 submitted within 5 days thereafter. Outside normal business hours, emergency notices by telephone or telegraph
may be submitted to the nearest FAA Flight Service Station.
(e) Each person who is required to notify the Administrator by paragraph (b) or (c) of §77.13, or both, shall send an executed copy of FAA Form 117-1,
Notice of Progress of Construction or Alteration, to the Manager, Air Traffic Division, FAA Regional Office having jurisdiction over the area involved.
(Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
Footnote 1: See title 13 of the city code for airport regulations.
Footnote 2: See subsection 14-6-19C, "Appendix III", of this chapter.
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE A. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
14-7A-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Commission Established; Membership; Compensation: The planning and zoning commission consists of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by
the mayor, subject to the provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended, and the approval of the city council. All members of the commission shall be
qualified electors of the city of Iowa City. Commission members shall serve without compensation.
B. Purpose: In order to provide for the general welfare of the citizens of Iowa City, a planning and zoning commission is established to advise the city
council on all matters pertaining to the physical development of Iowa City, including the comprehensive plan and any laws pertaining to land
development necessary to implement the comprehensive plan.
C. Powers: The planning and zoning commission shall have the following powers, in addition to any other conferred by law:
1. Make such surveys, studies, maps, plans or plats of the whole or any portion of the city and of any land outside the city which, in the opinion of the
commission, bears relation to the city's comprehensive plan. The commission shall submit such surveys, studies and plans to the city council along
with its recommendations, and it may publish the same.
2. Make recommendations to the city council regarding planned developments and plats or replats of subdivisions in the city which show streets, alleys
or other areas intended to be dedicated for public use.
3. Make recommendations for streets, parks, rights of way, boulevards, trafficways, or other public improvements or for the vacation thereof.
4. Carry on comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of the city in order to guide and achieve a coordinated and harmonious
development of the city in accordance with the city's present and future needs to the end that the health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare of the community may be best promoted.
5. Prepare a zoning ordinance regarding the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of ground that may be
occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location, design, and use of buildings, structures and
land for commercial, industrial, residential or other purposes. To this end, the commission shall prepare a preliminary report regarding any proposed
amendments to the zoning ordinance and hold public meetings thereon. After such meetings have been held, the commission shall also submit a
final report and recommendations to the city council. The commission shall hold public meetings on and make recommendations to city council
regarding repealing amendments to this title.
6. Conduct public hearings on and adopt a comprehensive plan and recommend to the city council, from time to time, as conditions require,
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications to the comprehensive plan.
7. Do all things necessary or advisable in order to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and state law.
D. Commission Bylaws: The commission shall adopt bylaws to establish the time and place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a chairperson and
vice chairperson, who shall act as chairperson when the chairperson is absent or abstaining, and a secretary and such other bylaws as are necessary
to implement the provisions of this article. Copies of all bylaws shall be kept on file in the department of planning and community development and in
the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7A-2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 527/715
A. Board Established; Membership; Compensation: The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the City Council for a term of five (5) years. Members shall be qualified electors of Iowa City. A majority of the members of the board shall be persons
representing the public at large; a majority of the board shall not be involved in the business of purchasing or selling real estate. Board members shall
serve without compensation.
B. Purpose: The purpose of the board is to provide relief from the requirements of this title when a variance is warranted, provide extra scrutiny in cases
where special exceptions allowed by this title are requested, and provide an avenue for appeal of administrative decisions regarding the enforcement
and implementation of this title. The decisions of the board should serve the public interest, meet the intent of this title, and be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan of the City, as amended.
C. Powers: The board shall have the following powers:
1. Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City
Manager or designee in the enforcement of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
2. Special Exceptions: To hear and decide applications for special exceptions to the terms of this title in accordance with the general and specific
approval criteria set forth in this title and specifically in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional
Uses", of this title.
3. Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest, where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship and so the spirit of this title shall be
observed and substantial justice done. No variance to the strict application of any provision of this title shall be granted by the board unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the approval criteria for variances set forth in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title have been met.
D. Procedural Rules: The board shall adopt rules to establish the time and place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson, who shall act as Chairperson when the Chairperson is absent or abstaining, and such other procedural rules as are necessary to
implement the provisions of this article. Copies of all rules shall be kept on file in the Office of the board's Secretary and in the Office of the City Clerk.
The Chairperson or, in the Chairperson's absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths or compel the attendance of witnesses. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
E. Alternate Member: An alternate member, if available, shall be appointed as provided herein, to replace a member who is unable to participate in an
appeal of an administrative decision due to a conflict of interest. Any person who has served as a member of the board within the five (5) years
preceding the filing of the appeal, and who represents the public at large and is not involved in the business of purchasing or selling real estate, shall
be qualified to serve as an alternate. When the member has recused himself/herself due to a conflict and the date of hearing before the board has
been set, the Secretary of the board shall notify all such persons and the first to agree to serve as the alternate is hereby appointed to do so. (Ord. 18-
4749, 5-1-2018)
14-7A-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. Commission Established; Membership: The Historic Preservation Commission consists of at least seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor for terms of three (3) years, subject to the provisions of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and the approval of the City Council. All members of the
commission shall be qualified electors of the City of Iowa City. At least one resident of each designated historic district shall be appointed to the
commission. Other members shall be chosen at large from any part of the City and shall have some expertise in history, urban planning, architecture,
archaeology, law, sociology or other closely related field, or shall demonstrate interest in the area of historic preservation. At least four (4) of the
members shall hold appointments at large. Should the number of officially designated historic districts exceed three (3) in number, a new member shall
be added to the commission for each new district in excess of three (3) districts. The new member shall be appointed by the City Council as soon as
practicable after the official designation of the historic district triggering the operation of the preceding clause.
B. Purpose: The purpose of the Historic Preservation Commission is to:
1. Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of historic
districts and historic and cultural landmarks located in the City;
2. Safeguard the City's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving districts, historic landmarks and properties of historical, architectural and
cultural significance;
3. Stabilize and improve property values by conserving historic properties;
4. Foster civic pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
5. Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors and thereby support and stimulate business;
6. Strengthen the economy of the City; and
7. Promote the use of districts of historic and cultural significance as sites for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
C. Powers And Duties:
1. The commission shall be authorized to conduct studies for the identification and designation of "conservation districts", "historic districts" and
"historic landmarks" meeting the definitions established by this title. The commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from any
person, group or association.
2. The commission shall review and act upon all applications for certificates of appropriateness.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 528/715
3. The commission shall further the efforts of historic preservation in the City by making recommendations to the City Council and City commissions
and boards on preservation issues when appropriate, by encouraging the protection and enhancement of structures with historical, architectural or
cultural value, and by encouraging persons and organizations to become involved in preservation activities.
D. Commission Bylaws: The commission shall adopt bylaws to establish the time and place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson, and such other bylaws as are necessary to implement the provisions of this article. The commission shall have the authority to adopt
rules of procedure in connection with the approval or disapproval of certificates of appropriateness subject to approval of the City Council. Copies of all
bylaws shall be kept on file in the Department of Planning and Community Development and in the Office of the City Clerk.
E. Secretary: The City Manager shall designate a person to serve as Secretary to the commission. The Secretary shall keep a record of all applications for
certificates of appropriateness, resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the Historic Preservation Commission and may be authorized to make
decisions regarding applications for minor historic reviews.
F. Design Review Subcommittee: The commission shall have the authority to establish a Historic Preservation Design Review Subcommittee to review and
make recommendations to the commission regarding applications for certificates of appropriateness. Said subcommittee shall consist of three (3)
members of the commission, appointed annually by the commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. DEVELOPMENT FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
ARTICLE C. PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
14-7C-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; APPEALS:
A. Enforcement Officials: It is the duty of the city manager or designee to enforce this title. It is also the duty of all officers and employees of the city and
especially all members of the police department to assist the city manager or designee by reporting any new construction, reconstruction, land uses or
other seeming violations.
B. Appeals: Appeals from a decision of the city manager or designee in enforcing this title may be made to the board of adjustment as provided in chapter
8, article C, "Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-2: PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND APPROVALS:
A. No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for regulated building activity that would create a violation of this title;
B. No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for a regulated building activity on a lot of record on which there is a violation of this title, except when
the construction described in the permit application will eliminate the violation;
C. No authorization for utility connection shall be issued for premises on which there is a violation of this title; and
D. No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for an activity to occur on any lot of record on which there is a violation of this title or any other
applicable title of this code or on which the conduct of such activity would constitute a violation of this title or any other applicable title of this code. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificate Required:
1. No change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building, other than for single-family dwelling
purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city manager or designee. If
a building permit has not been issued prior to the effective date hereof, every certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies
with all provisions of this title.
2. No permit for excavation, or for the installation or alteration of any building, shall be issued before an application has been made for a building
permit, and no building or premises shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
B. Certificate Of Occupancy For Nonconforming Uses: A certificate of occupancy may be obtained for nonconforming uses. An application for a certificate
of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be accompanied by an affidavit of proof that such nonconforming use was not established in violation of
this title after July 26, 1962, and before the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 529/715
C. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: The building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy when a delay in the planting of required trees
and landscaping is warranted, as allowed in chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", and chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering
Standards", of this title; or a delay in paving of parking and stacking spaces, drives or aisles is warranted, as provided in chapter 5, article A, "Off Street
Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
D. Records Kept: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-4: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The city manager or designee may revoke or modify any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this title if any of the following occurs:
A. The grantee has not complied with the conditions of approval under which the permit was granted.
B. The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud or was issued in error.
C. The use or activity authorized pursuant to the permit is subsequently determined to be a violation of an applicable statute, ordinance, law or regulation.
D. Suspension of work under the subject permit for six (6) months or more. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Penalties:
1. The owner or manager of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provision of this title has been committed or exists or the lessee
or tenant of a building or premises in or upon which violation has been committed or exists or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other
person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation exists or who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title may be found guilty of
a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code and shall be subject to the
penalties specified in subsection 1-4-2D of this code, except for environmental infractions, which shall be subject to the penalty for same as specified
in subsection 1-4-2B2 of this code, as amended. Each day that a violation occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense, and civil
and/or criminal penalties shall be computed accordingly. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
2. In case any building or structure is installed, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this title, the appropriate authorities of the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful installation, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to
correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land.
3. Any person who constructs, alters, relocates or demolishes any designated landmark or a building or structure in a historic or conservation district in
violation of this title may be required to restore the subject building or structure to its appearance or setting prior to the violation as required and
approved by the historic preservation commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4253, 2-20-2007)
B. Stop Work Order:
1. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this title being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this title or
dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
2. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
3. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
C. Remedies Are Cumulative: Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation of this title including, but not limited to, revocation of any permit, certificate, or approval, and shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal
of prohibited conditions. Such remedies are deemed cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 8
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROCEDURES
14-8A-1: GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Forms And Fees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 530/715
1. Forms: Applications and submittal materials required under this title shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the city.
Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
2. Fees:
a. The applicable filing fee shall be paid at the time any appeal or application is filed;
b. Filing fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council to defray the actual cost of processing the application; and
c. All required fees shall be made payable to "The City Of Iowa City".
d. No fee shall be charged for an appeal or application filed by any officer, department or board of the city or for any other governmental entity.
B. Determination Of Completeness:
1. The city will not process an incomplete application.
2. The start date for any applicable time limitations for the application under review will be the date when a complete application is submitted. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL PROCEDURES
14-8B-1: ACCESSORY APARTMENT RENTAL PERMIT:
A. Permit Required:
1. Prior to the establishment of any accessory apartment, the owner of the principal dwelling unit must obtain a rental permit from the department of
housing and inspection services. The permit will be effective for two (2) years. At the end of every two (2) years, renewal of the accessory apartment
rental permit will be granted after completion of a routine housing inspection verifying that the property remains the principal residence of the owner
and that all of the conditions of this section and approval criteria for accessory apartments set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title have been met.
2. No rental permit for an accessory apartment will be issued unless all the requirements and standards for accessory apartments set forth in chapter 4,
article C of this title have been met.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. The owner shall file an application for a rental permit with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by said
department.
2. Prior to issuance or renewal of an accessory apartment rental permit, the owner must submit a notarized affidavit to the city, verifying owner
occupancy.
3. Prior to the issuance of an accessory apartment rental permit, the owner shall file, in the office of the county recorder, a declaration of covenants
stating that the right to maintain an accessory apartment ceases upon transfer of title, and that the right to maintain an accessory apartment in no
way constitutes approval of the dwelling as a duplex. The owner shall provide a copy of the declaration to the department of housing and inspection
services, or its successor, prior to the issuance of the accessory apartment permit.
C. Approval Procedure: When all provisions of this section and approval criteria applicable to accessory apartments set forth in chapter 4, article C of this
title, and all applicable provisions of title 17, "Building And Housing", of this code, are met, the department of housing and inspection services will issue
an accessory apartment rental permit upon payment of all permit and inspection fees. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-2: ACCESS PERMIT:
A. Permit Required:
1. Prior to cutting any curb or establishing any driveway on any street in the city, an access permit must be obtained from the department of public
works, unless exempted as set forth in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
2. No access permit shall be issued unless all applicable requirements and standards of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this
title.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. The owner of property for which access is being requested shall file an application for an access permit with the department of public works on
application forms provided by the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form. A traffic study may be required for any request for access to an arterial
street.
C. Approval Procedure:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application, the city engineer and the building official will jointly review said application for compliance with the provisions
of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 531/715
2. If access to an arterial street is requested, the city engineer and the building official will consult with the director of planning and community
development or designee. Joint approval from all three (3) city officials or their designees is required prior to granting access to an arterial street.
3. Joint approval from the city engineer and the building official or their designees is required prior to granting access to a local or collector street.
4. Once it is determined that the standards of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title will be met, and the requisite approvals
have been obtained, the city engineer or designee will issue the access permit. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-3: DESIGN REVIEW:
A. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person or persons intending to make application for design review may request a meeting with the design
review committee or a representative of the design review committee to discuss basic intentions and plans before investing time in detailed designs.
This step is optional but recommended for large or complex projects. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to discuss preliminary design
plans, review applicable design guidelines, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures for design review.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. The applicant must file an application for design review with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by the
city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
C. Approval Procedure:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application, the design review committee will review said application for compliance with the applicable standards and
approval criteria as set forth in chapter 3, article C, "Design Review", of this title.
2. Within thirty (30) working days of the date a complete application is submitted to the city, the design review committee will approve, approve with
modifications agreed to by the applicant, or disapprove the application.
3. If the committee does not act within the thirty (30) day time period and the applicant does not agree to an extension of time, the application will be
deemed approved.
4. For level I design review applications, the committee's findings on each application shall be set forth in a written decision, which will be filed in the
respective property file in the department of housing and inspection services. A copy of said decision will be mailed to the applicant at the time of
filing.
5. For level II design review applications, the committee's findings on each application will be set forth in a written recommendation to the city council.
The city council will, after receipt of the recommendation of the committee, or after the time of any extension thereof has passed for the committee to
file their recommendation, make approval or rejection of the application. City council approval of the plans shall require a majority of votes cast at any
meeting at which a quorum is present. The city council's findings on each application shall be set forth in a written resolution, to be filed in the office
of the city clerk. A copy of said resolution will be mailed to the applicant at the time of filing. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-4: FENCE PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Prior to construction of any of the following types of fences or walls, a building permit must be obtained from the department of
housing and inspection services:
1. Electric fences;
2. Barbed wire fences;
3. Any fence or wall over six feet (6') in height;
4. Any retaining wall over four feet (4') in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall; and
5. A retaining wall of any height that supports a surcharge or impounds flammable liquids.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a building permit must be filed with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
C. Approval Procedure:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application, the building official or designee will review said application for compliance with the standards and
requirements for fences, walls, and hedges as set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
2. The building official will issue the permit once it has been determined that all applicable provisions of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title have been met. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-5: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 532/715
A. Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the building official shall be secured prior to initiation of any development on a tract of land
within a flood hazard area.
B. Submittal Requirements: The building official may require the following information:
1. Description of the work to be covered by the permit.
2. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify
and locate the work to be done.
3. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Elevation of the flood hazard event. Where flood elevation data is not provided in the flood insurance study, the applicant shall contact the Iowa
department of natural resources to obtain such data.
5. Elevation in relation to national geodetic vertical datum of the lowest floor, including basement, of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be
floodproofed.
6. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
7. Such other information as the building official deems reasonably necessary for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of
chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title.
C. Approval Procedure: The building official shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development
meets the applicable standards of chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title, and shall approve or disapprove, in writing, the
application. For disapprovals, the applicant will be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons why the application was disapproved. The building official
shall not issue permits for variances, except as approved by the board of adjustment according to the approval criteria for such variances set forth in
chapter 5, article J of this title. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-8B-6: HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Prior to establishment of a type B home occupation, as defined in subsection 14-4C-2M, "Home Occupations", of this title, a home
occupation permit must be obtained from the department of housing and inspection services.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a home occupation permit must be filed with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by
the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
C. Approval Procedure:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application, the building official or designee will review said application for compliance with the standards and
requirements for home occupations as set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title, and will issue the permit once it
has been determined that said standards and requirements have been met.
2. The home occupation permit is effective for two (2) years. At the end of every two (2) years, it is the responsibility of the applicant to request a
renewal of the permit. Renewal of the permit will be granted if the applicant is in compliance with the standards and requirements for home
occupations as set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
D. Revocation Of Permit: A home occupation permit may be revoked at any time for failure to comply with the provisions of this title. When a home
occupation permit has been revoked, a new permit will not be issued to the applicant or other persons residing with the applicant for at least two (2)
years. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-7: LEVEL I SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
A. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a level I sensitive areas review must be filed with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided
by the city.
2. All supporting materials, including a sensitive areas development plan, must be submitted as specified on the application form.
B. Review And Approval:
1. The application for a level I sensitive areas review will be reviewed and approved administratively. This application process may occur concurrently
with an application for site plan review or subdivision review.
2. Approval of the sensitive areas development plan submitted with the application will be based on compliance with the applicable regulations and
requirements of chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title. The sensitive areas development plan must delineate construction
area limits and establish restrictions for current or future development activity within protected sensitive areas. Any such restrictions must be set forth
in the legal papers approved as part of the plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 533/715
C. Issuance Of Permits: Sensitive areas development plans approved under a level I sensitive areas review will be retained in the department of housing
and inspection services, and permits will be issued only for structures and development activity conforming to the approved sensitive areas
development plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-8: MINOR MODIFICATION:
A. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a minor modification must be filed with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by the
city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
B. Approval Procedure:
1. Upon receipt of a complete minor modification application, an administrative hearing will be set.
2. Ten (10) days prior to the administrative hearing, written notice shall be sent to property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior
boundaries of the property.
3. Following the administrative hearing, the building official will approve, in whole or in part, the minor modification requested, with or without
conditions, provided all approval criteria as set forth in section 14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title are met. The building official will issue a
written decision listing the findings upon which the decision is based.
4. The applicant or property owner shall record the decision in the office of the county recorder. Evidence of such recording is required prior to issuance
of a building permit.
C. Expiration: A minor modification must be exercised within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval, or the minor modification shall
become null and void.
D. Time Extensions: For good cause, the building official may grant time extensions not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months from the date of the
decision. Prior to granting an extension, the building official will ensure that the minor modification complies with all current provisions of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-9: SIGN PERMIT:
A. Permit Required:
1. No sign requiring a permit in accordance with the requirements of chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title shall be installed, altered,
moved, improved or converted without first obtaining a sign permit from the building official or designee. A permit is not required for incidental repairs
or routine maintenance.
2. Certain types of signs are allowed without a permit, and such exemption from the sign permit requirements is clearly specified in chapter 5, article B,
"Sign Regulations", of this title. A permit is required for any sign that is not specifically exempted from the permit requirements.
3. Only a person holding a valid sign installer's license issued by the city may obtain a permit to perform work pursuant to the regulations of chapter 5,
article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
4. Every applicant, before being issued a sign permit, shall pay to the city such fee as shall be established by resolution of the city council. However,
any person found to be installing, altering, moving, improving or converting any sign prior to the issuance of a permit or who has installed altered,
moved, improved or converted a sign prior to the issuance of a permit shall be charged double the normal fee. The payment of such double fee shall
not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the applicable sign regulations in the execution of the work nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a sign permit must be filed with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by the city.
2. All supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
C. Approval Procedures:
1. Upon the filing of a complete application for a sign permit, the building official or designee shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to
whether the proposed sign meets the applicable standards of chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, and any other applicable laws and
ordinances of the city, and shall approve or disapprove the application.
2. For proposed illuminated signs, the building official or designee will examine the plans and specifications for all wiring and connections to determine
if they comply with the electrical code. No sign permit will be issued unless such compliance is ascertained.
D. Expiration Of Permit: If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, said permit shall
become null and void. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 534/715
14-8B-10: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Prior to establishing any temporary use, a temporary use permit must be secured from the building official or designee.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. Application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted to the department of housing and inspection services upon a form provided by the city.
2. All supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form. The building official or designee may also request other data, plans,
and information deemed necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.
C. Approval Procedure: Upon receipt of a complete application, the building official or designee shall approve, modify, condition, or deny the application
within ten (10) working days after submittal based on compliance with the standards and approval criteria specified for such temporary use set forth in
chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE C. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES
14-8C-1: PROCEDURES GENERALLY:
The board of adjustment shall conduct public hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Public Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public.
B. Public Notice: Notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not more than twenty (20) days
nor less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing. It shall contain the street address or location of the property and a brief description of the nature of the
appeal.
C. Record Of Proceedings: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of
the secretary of the board and shall be a public record.
D. Written Decisions: The board shall render written decisions, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall be filed with the city clerk and
recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder. A copy of said decision shall be provided to the applicant.
E. Orders; Lapse Of Approval: Unless otherwise determined by the board, all orders of the board shall expire six (6) months from the date the written
decision is filed with the city clerk unless the applicant shall have taken action within the six (6) month period to establish the use or construct the
building permitted under the terms of the board's decision, such as obtaining a building permit and proceeding to completion in accordance with the
terms of the permit. Upon written request and for good cause shown, the board may extend the expiration date of any order without further public
hearing on the merits of the original appeal or application.
F. Petition For Writ Of Certiorari: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment under the provisions of
this title or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the city may present to a court of record a petition for writ of certiorari, duly verified,
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision in the office of the city clerk, setting forth that such board decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of the illegality. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8C-2: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES:
A. Application Filing:
1. An application for a special exception or a variance must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
3. Monthly application deadlines for the board of adjustment are published in the department of planning and community development. The board of
adjustment will review all complete applications received by the deadline at their regularly scheduled, monthly meeting.
4. The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the approval criteria for the specific proposed exception or variance, as set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title, by a preponderance of the evidence.
B. Optional Preapplication Conference: Prior to application for a special exception or a variance, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the staff from the
department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to review the applicable city standards and requirements and to ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and
approval procedures for a special exception.
C. Approval Procedures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 535/715
1. Once a complete application has been received, city staff shall review the application for compliance with the approval criteria applicable to the
specific proposed exception or variance and issue a report and recommendation to the board of adjustment.
2. At a public hearing, the board shall review all applicable evidence presented regarding the proposed exception or variance.
3. The board of adjustment will approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application based on the facts presented in evidence. In order to approve
a special exception or variance, the board must find that the specific proposed exception or variance meets the applicable approval criteria as set
forth in chapter 4, article B of this title or as set forth elsewhere in this title.
4. In permitting a special exception or a variance, the board may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards, including, but not limited to,
landscaping and screening, fencing, construction commencement and completion deadlines, lighting, operational controls, improved traffic circulation
requirements, highway access restrictions, increased minimum setback requirements, parking requirements, limitations on the duration of a use or
ownership or any other requirement which the board deems appropriate under the circumstances upon a finding that the conditions are necessary to
fulfill the purpose and intent of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8C-3: APPEALS:
A. Initiation Of Appeal:
1. Where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city manager or designee in the enforcement of
this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, any person aggrieved by such order, requirement, decision, or determination may appeal
same to the board of adjustment.
2. Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city manager or designee in the enforcement
of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, any officer, department or board of the city aggrieved by such order, requirement, decision
or determination may appeal same to the board of adjustment.
B. Appeal Procedures:
1. The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the city clerk on forms provided by the city, specifying the grounds of the appeal. Such appeal must be
submitted within a reasonable time from the date of the action appealed from as provided by the rules of the board. A duplicate copy of such notice
shall be filed with the secretary of the board of adjustment.
2. The city manager or designee shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
3. At a public hearing, the board shall review all applicable evidence presented regarding the subject appeal.
4. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this title or ordinances adopted
pursuant thereto, affirm, or upon finding error, reverse or modify, wholly or partly, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, including, without limitation, the right of the permittee
to proceed with development or other activities authorized under a building permit, the issuance of which is a subject of the appeal, unless the city
manager or designee certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the
city manager's or designee's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or development shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record and on notice to the city manager or designee for
due cause shown. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8C-4: RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION APPEALS:
A. Authority: The board of adjustment may consider a special exception to avoid or resolve any alleged violation of the freedom of religion based rights
afforded to any person under federal or state law caused by the enforcement of any regulation or requirement of this title.
B. Application And Submittal Requirements:
1. Any person or persons may submit an application to the board of adjustment for a special exception under the provisions of this section.
2. Such application must be submitted to the city clerk on application forms provided by the city for a special exception and must include the following
additional information:
a. A statement specifying the particular regulation or requirement of this title to which the requested exception relates;
b. A description of the intended use of land or activity for which the exception is being sought;
c. Documented evidence of how the specified regulation or requirement allegedly violates the person's freedom of religion based rights afforded
under federal or state law;
d. A description of how granting the exception would be in the public interest and not be contrary to health, safety and welfare considerations; and
e. Any additional information requested by the board of adjustment that will assist them in making a determination regarding the application.
C. Approval Criteria: In considering an exception from the requirements of this title under the provisions of this section, the board must find, based on the
evidence presented, that all the following approval criteria are met. The general special exception approval criteria specified in section 14-4B-3,
"Special Exceptions", of this title do not apply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 536/715
1. The exception is necessary to avoid or resolve a substantial burden on the freedom of religion based rights afforded to any person under federal or
state law caused by the enforcement of a specific regulation or regulations of this title; and
2. The subject regulation or requirement under review does not constitute or further a compelling governmental interest; or alternatively, the subject
regulation or requirement under review is not the least restrictive means for satisfying or achieving the governmental interest; and
3. The specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare; and
4. Except for the specific regulations and standards applicable to the exception being considered, the specific proposed exception, in all other respects,
conforms to the applicable regulations or standards of the zone in which it is to be located.
D. Approval Procedure: Evidence shall be presented at a public hearing according to the approval procedures set forth for special exceptions in section
14-8C-2 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION APPROVAL PROCEDURES
14-8D-1: ANNEXATION OR SEVERANCE OF TERRITORY - VOLUNTARY:
A. Submittal Requirements:
1. Requests for annexation or severance must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form and as required by state law or state administrative rules. For
annexation requests, the applicant must specify a desired zoning designation or zoning designations for the territory.
B. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person or persons intending to request an annexation or severance is encouraged to meet with staff from the
department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to discuss the purpose for the requested annexation or severance, review applicable comprehensive plan and district plan
policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures for an annexation or
severance.
C. Staff Review: Upon receipt thereof, the application will be reviewed for completeness by city staff, and upon verification of a complete application, staff
will prepare a staff report and recommendation based on comprehensive plan policies, ability of the city or neighboring communities to provide
services, and other appropriate policies and information. The staff report and recommendation will be forwarded to the planning and zoning
commission for their review. There shall be no time limitation for review regarding a rezoning associated with annexation of territory.
D. Planning And Zoning Commission Review: The commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the requested annexation
or severance. In a separate motion, the commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the requested zoning designation
of a parcel to be annexed. In the event the commission recommends approval of the annexation, but denial of the requested zoning designation, it shall
make an additional recommendation as to what zoning designation it recommends.
E. City Council Public Hearing Notice Requirements:
1. The city council shall set and publish notice regarding a public hearing on the proposed annexation or severance following planning and zoning
commission review. The city council shall also set a public hearing on the zoning designation of the property to be annexed. Notice of such hearings,
and the time and place of such hearings must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more
than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting following the published notice.
2. Following planning and zoning commission review but prior to the city council public hearing, city staff shall complete the notification requirements to
other units of government, utilities, owners of railway right of way, and others as prescribed by state law and state administrative rules.
3. In the event the public hearing on the annexation or severance is held before the notification requirements have been fulfilled, the public hearing on
the annexation or severance shall be continued until said notification requirements are fulfilled.
F. City Council Review And Decision:
1. Following the public hearing, the city council will consider a resolution approving the proposed annexation or severance. In those instances when the
city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed annexation that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter until a discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning and
zoning commission.
2. Following approval of a resolution approving annexation of territory, the city council will consider an ordinance approving a zoning designation for the
annexed territory. In those instances when the city council has reached an informal consensus on the proposed zoning designation for property to be
annexed that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter until a
discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning and zoning commission.
G. State Review: Following approval of a severance or an annexation and associated zoning classification by the city council, the necessary
documentation shall be forwarded to the state of Iowa city development board and to state officials as required by state code and state administrative
rules. The annexation or severance shall be considered final once acknowledged by the secretary of state, and recorded with the office of the county
recorder. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 537/715
14-8D-2: ANNEXATION OR SEVERANCE - INVOLUNTARY:
A. Initiation Of Involuntary Annexation Or Severance: Whenever, after public hearing thereon, the city council determines that involuntary annexation or
severance proceedings should be undertaken, the matter shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for their review and
recommendation.
B. Staff Review: Staff will prepare a report and recommendation regarding the proposed involuntary annexation or severance for the planning and zoning
commission based on comprehensive plan policies, the public interest in annexing or severing said territory, recommendations regarding zoning
designation of areas to be annexed, and other pertinent information. At a minimum, the report shall contain all of the information required by state code
and state administrative rules.
C. Notification Requirements: Staff will notify all affected property owners, units of government, utilities, owners of railway right of way, and other parties as
required by state code and state administrative rules.
D. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
1. Once notification requirements are completed, the staff report and recommendation for the zoning of annexed territory shall be forwarded to the
planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendation.
2. After discussion at a public meeting, the commission will recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the involuntary annexation or
severance. For annexations, the commission will also make a recommendation as to the zoning of said territory.
E. City Council Public Hearing:
1. Once the planning and zoning commission has completed their review, the city council shall set a public hearing on the proposed annexation and
zoning, or severance. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation
in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than
the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice.
2. After the public hearing, the city council will consider a resolution approving the annexation or severance.
3. Following approval of a resolution to annex territory, the city council will consider an ordinance approving a zoning designation for the annexed
territory.
4. In those instances when the city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed involuntary severance, annexation, or the proposed
zoning designation for property to be annexed that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will
defer formal action on the matter until a discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning and zoning commission.
F. State Review:
1. Following approval of a resolution approving an involuntary annexation or involuntary severance, all necessary documentation will be forwarded to
state officials and the state of Iowa city development board as required by state code and state administrative rules. state officials will then conduct a
process as required in state code and state administrative rules to consider the involuntary annexation or severance request.
2. The involuntary annexation or severance request shall be considered final once approved by state officials, published according to state code
requirements, and once proceedings of the process as required by state code are filed with the secretary of state, the city clerk, the state department
of transportation, and recorded with the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT:
A. Authority:
1. The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend by resolution the city's comprehensive plan, including any district
plans or other amendments thereto. Any proposed amendment initiated by the city council shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for its recommendation and report.
2. The planning and zoning commission may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, recommend to the city council amendments to the
city's comprehensive plan, including any district plans or other amendments thereto.
B. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request an amendment to the city's comprehensive plan is encouraged to meet with staff
from the department of planning and community development. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to discuss basic intentions, review the
applicable comprehensive plan and district plan policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review
and approval procedures for a comprehensive plan amendment.
C. Submittal Requirements: Unless the comprehensive plan amendment is initiated by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, the
following application submittal procedures must be followed:
1. Applications for a comprehensive plan amendment must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning and
community development.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form and must provide evidence that the approval criteria as set forth in
subsection D of this section are met.
3. The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of planning and community development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 538/715
D. Approval Criteria: Applications for a comprehensive plan amendment must include evidence that the following approval criteria are met:
1. Circumstances have changed and/or additional information or factors have come to light such that the proposed amendment is in the public interest.
2. The proposed amendment will be compatible with other policies or provisions of the comprehensive plan, including any district plans or other
amendments thereto.
E. Staff Review: After receipt of a complete application, the director of planning and community development or designee will forward a written report and
recommendation to the planning and zoning commission.
F. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
1. After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the planning and zoning commission will schedule a public hearing. Notice of such
hearing, and the time of place of such hearing will be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not
more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing.
2. Following the public hearing, the commission will consider a motion to recommend approval, modification, or denial of the proposed amendment. Not
less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan.
3. The commission will forward their report and recommendation to the city council for their review.
G. City Council Public Hearing:
1. After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning commission have been filed, the city council shall, before enacting any amendment
to the city's comprehensive plan, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be
published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In
no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The city council
may set such public hearing either before or after it submits the proposed amendment to the commission for its recommendation or during the period
while the commission is considering such matter.
2. Following the public hearing, the city council will consider a resolution implementing the proposed comprehensive plan amendment. Any proposal for
an amendment to the comprehensive plan that is counter to the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the city council. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-4: DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY (ODR) REZONING:
A. Initiation:
1. The city council may, on its own motion or on petition, designate by ordinance areas of the city as design review districts. Any proposed design
review district initiated by the city council shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report.
2. The planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or on petition, recommend to the city council areas of the city for designation as a
design review district.
B. District Report: Once the proposal for a design review district is initiated by the city council or the planning and zoning commission, the commission will
direct city staff to prepare a district report. The district report will include background information and recommendations regarding the proposed district,
including the following:
1. A map defining the boundaries of the proposed district; and
2. A study of the characteristics of the proposed district, including zoning and existing land use, elements of the streetscape, property ownership
patterns, and the architectural characteristics, physical condition, and age of buildings in the proposed district; and
3. A list of any proposed design guidelines for the district.
C. Approval Procedure: The process of designating an area as a design review district is considered a design review overlay rezoning and must therefore
follow the procedures for a zoning map amendment (rezoning) as specified in section 14-8D-5 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-5: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS) AND ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENTS:
A. Initiation:
1. The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend by ordinance the boundaries of zoning districts or the regulations or
restrictions of this title. Any proposed amendment initiated by the city council shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its
recommendation and report.
2. The planning and zoning commission may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, recommend to the city council amendments to this title
or to the boundaries of zoning districts or to the zoning of particular tracts.
B. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request a zoning map amendment or zoning code text amendment is encouraged to meet
with staff from the department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose
of the preapplication conference is to review the existing zoning, discuss the purpose for the requested amendment, review applicable comprehensive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 539/715
plan and district plan policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures
for a zoning map or zoning code text amendment.
C. Submittal Requirements: Unless the zoning map or zoning code text amendment is initiated by the planning and zoning commission or the city council,
the following application submittal procedures must be followed:
1. Applications for a zoning map or zoning code text amendment must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of
planning and community development.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form and must include a statement from the applicant explaining the reasons
and justification for the requested amendment.
3. The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of planning and community development.
D. Staff Review: After receipt of a complete application, the director of planning and community development or designee will forward a written report and
recommendation to the planning and zoning commission.
E. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
1. After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the planning and zoning commission will schedule one or more public meetings to
receive public comment regarding the proposed request. The commission will then make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions,
or denial to the city council.
2. If the planning and zoning commission makes no report within forty five (45) days from the date a complete application was received, it shall be
considered to have made a report approving the proposed amendment.
3. Not less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend approval of an amendment to this title or to the boundaries of zoning districts or to the
zoning of a particular parcel of land.
F. City Council Public Hearing:
1. After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning commission have been filed, the city council shall, before enacting any proposed
amendment, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall
the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The city council may set such
public hearing either before or after it submits the proposed amendment to the commission for its recommendation or during the period while the
commission is considering such matter.
2. Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an ordinance implementing the proposed zoning map amendment or zoning code text
amendment. In those instances when the city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed zoning map amendment or zoning code text
amendment that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter until
a discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning and zoning commission. In such instances, if the planning and zoning
commission declines the city council's offer to meet, formal action on the matter may commence forthwith.
G. Protests: If a protest against such amendment is presented in writing to the city clerk, duly signed and notarized by the owners of twenty percent (20%)
or more of the area of the lots included within the area for which the amendment is proposed or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the
property which is located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundaries of the area for which the amendment is proposed, such amendment
shall require the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the city council for passage.
H. Effect On Development Activity:
1. Regulated Development Activity: When a proposed text or map amendment to this title would prohibit or be counter to a use, building, structure,
portion of a building or structure, attachment to a building or structure, demolition of a building or structure or portion thereof, or any other type of
development activity for which a permit or license is currently required, the setting of a city council public hearing on the amendment shall suspend
the following for sixty (60) days:
a. Issuance of a permit or license for the establishment, conversion, or enlargement of any use that would be counter to or prohibited by the existing
code or by the proposed amendment; and
b. Issuance of a permit or license for any land clearing, grading, construction, demolition, or other development activity that would be counter to or
prohibited by the existing code or by the proposed amendment; and
c. Any issued permit or license for the establishment, conversion, or enlargement of any use, or for any land clearing, grading, construction,
demolition, or other development activity that would be counter to or prohibited by the proposed amendment, if no substantial part of the permitted
or licensed use or development activity has begun.
2. Currently Unregulated Development Activity: When a proposed text or map amendment to this title would prohibit or regulate a use, building,
structure, portion of a building or structure, attachment to a building or structure, demolition of a building or structure or portion thereof, or any other
type of development activity for which a permit is not currently required, the official publication of a notice of public hearing on the proposed
amendment shall suspend for sixty (60) days the establishment, conversion or enlargement of any use, or commencement of any land clearing,
grading, construction, demolition, or other development activity that would be counter to or prohibited by the proposed amendment, provided no
substantial portion of the previously unregulated development activity has begun.
3. Subsequent To City Council Action:
a. If, within the sixty (60) day period, the city council enacts the proposed amendment, this title, as amended, shall apply. Any permit or license for a
use or development activity counter to or prohibited by such amendment shall not be issued, or if already issued, shall be revoked, provided no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 540/715
substantial part of the permitted development activity has begun. Any required permit or license for a previously unregulated use or development
activity must be obtained prior to continuation.
b. If, at any time in the sixty (60) day period, the city council rejects the proposed amendment or if, by the end of the sixty (60) day period, has not
enacted or has rejected the proposed amendment, the suspension shall be terminated. Review of any suspended applications for a permit under
the current title shall resume, uses or development activity may proceed under permits or licenses that have already been issued, and unregulated
uses or development activity may proceed.
c. No already issued permit or license may be suspended under this subsection more than once, nor shall any property be subject to suspension
under this subsection within twelve (12) months of a previous suspension applied to the same property under the same proposed amendment.
Said twelve (12) month period will commence from the final day of the sixty (60) day suspension period. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-6: LEVEL II SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
A level II sensitive areas review and its associated sensitive areas development plan is considered a type of planned development and as such, will be
reviewed according to the approval procedures for a planned development overlay rezoning as set forth in section 14-8D-7 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-8D-7: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (OPD) REZONING:
A. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request an OPD rezoning is encouraged to meet with staff from the department of
planning and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the preapplication conference
is to review the existing zoning, discuss the purpose for the requested planned development, review applicable comprehensive plan policies, including
any district plan policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures for a
planned development overlay rezoning.
B. Submittal Requirements: Applications for an OPD rezoning must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning
and community development.
1. Preliminary Approval:
a. Supporting materials for preliminary approval of a planned development overlay rezoning must be submitted as specified on the application form
and must include a preliminary OPD plan, a statement from the applicant listing the category or categories of planned development applied for, a
list of all requested variations from the underlying zoning requirements or from city street standards, and a proposed time schedule for the
completion of various phases of the development. The preliminary OPD plan may show a range of dimensions and need not have the specificity of
the final plan.
b. A preliminary OPD plan for developments containing regulated sensitive features must be entitled "Preliminary Sensitive Areas Development
Plan". Such sensitive areas development plans, in addition to illustrating all the applicable elements for a planned development, must delineate all
regulated sensitive areas and associated buffers according to the applicable regulations contained in chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And
Features", of this title and must delineate construction area limits and list all proposed restrictions for current or future development activity within
protected sensitive areas.
2. Final Approval:
a. Supporting materials for the final OPD plan must be submitted as specified on the application form.
b. If the application is for a final sensitive areas development plan, the plan must establish restrictions for current or future development activity within
protected sensitive areas. Any such restrictions must be set forth in the legal papers approved as part of the final plan.
C. Approval Procedures For Planned Development Overlay Rezoning: Approval of a planned development overlay rezoning shall be by ordinance in
accordance with the following procedures. Approval of a rezoning to OPD shall constitute approval of the preliminary OPD plan or, if applicable, the
preliminary sensitive areas development plan.
1. Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, staff from the department of planning and community development will review the application
for compliance with the applicable approval criteria as set forth in chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title. Staff
will forward a report and recommendation to the planning and zoning commission for their consideration.
2. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
a. After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the planning and zoning commission will schedule one or more public meetings to
receive public comment regarding the application. The commission will then make a written report of its findings to the city council with a
recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the planned development overlay rezoning. The report shall include findings
with regard to the applicable approval criteria as set forth in chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title. If the
planning and zoning commission makes no report within forty five (45) days from the date a complete application was received, it shall be
considered to have made a report approving the proposed planned development overlay rezoning.
b. Not less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend approval of a planned development overlay rezoning.
3. City Council Hearing:
a. After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning commission have been filed, the city council shall, before approving any planned
development overlay rezoning, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of such public hearing, and the time and place of such hearing,
must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public
hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice.
The city council may set such public hearing either before or after it submits the proposed planned development overlay to the commission for its
recommendation or during the period while the commission is considering such matter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 541/715
b. Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an ordinance approving the proposed planned development overlay rezoning. In those
instances when the city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed planned development overlay rezoning that is contrary to the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter until a discussion has taken place
between the city council and the planning and zoning commission. In such instances, if the planning and zoning commission declines the city
council's offer to meet, formal action on the matter may commence forthwith.
4. Lapse Of Approval: A preliminary OPD plan or preliminary sensitive areas development plan shall be valid for no more than twenty four (24) months
unless otherwise specified in the ordinance approving the OPD overlay zone. If no building permit has been issued for the development within the
twenty four (24) month period, the area of land to which the OPD ordinance applies may be considered by the city for rezoning.
5. Protests And Effect On Development Activity: Since a planned development overlay rezoning is a type of zoning map amendment (rezoning), a
planned development overlay rezoning is subject to the same provisions for protest and effect on development activity as for a zoning map
amendment as set forth in subsections 14-8D-5G and H of this article.
D. Final OPD Plan Approval:
1. Administrative Review And Approval:
a. Approval of a final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan shall be by administrative review. Approval shall be based on compliance
with an approved preliminary OPD plan or preliminary sensitive areas development plan. Such plan may be submitted concurrently with an
application for site plan review or subdivision review.
b. Requests for minor changes from the approved preliminary OPD or sensitive areas development plan that do not constitute substantive changes,
as described in subsection E of this section, may be approved administratively without further city council action.
c. Appropriate legal papers must be submitted and approved prior to approval of the final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan.
d. A final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan of only a portion of the area rezoned to OPD may be approved if:
(1) The plan of such subarea meets all requirements of a final OPD plan; and
(2) The final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan for the subarea complies with the approved preliminary plan; and
(3) The dwelling unit density in the subarea does not exceed the dwelling unit density approved under the preliminary plan for the specific area
under review; and
(4) The subarea can function as an independent development with adequate vehicular and pedestrian access, services, utilities, open space, etc.;
and
(5) The developer dedicates all public right of way necessary to support the subarea.
2. Issuance Of Permits:
a. The approved final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan for the entire development and/or any subareas shall be filed in the
department of housing and inspection services, and permits will be issued only for structures and development activity conforming to the approved
final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan, whichever is applicable.
b. Requests for minor changes to a final OPD or final sensitive areas development plan that do not constitute substantive changes, as described in
subsection E of this section, may be approved administratively without further city council action.
c. If the underlying base zone is residential and commercial uses are approved as a part of the planned development, no building permit for a
commercial use shall be issued until a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the housing units planned for the area or approved subarea have
been completed, or unless twenty five percent (25%) of the housing units planned for the area or approved subarea will be built simultaneously.
E. Amending Approved OPD Plans Or Sensitive Areas Development Plans: Requests for substantive changes to an approved preliminary or final OPD or
sensitive areas development plan may not be approved administratively, but must be submitted as an amendment to such a plan and will be reviewed
according to the procedures for approval of a planned development overlay rezoning, as specified in this section. A substantive change is any
significant change in the land uses, street locations, or character of the development from what is shown on the approved OPD plan or sensitive areas
development plan or any variation from the underlying zoning requirements or street standards beyond the ranges approved on the preliminary OPD
plan or preliminary sensitive areas development plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-8: VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to apply for a vacation of public right of way is encouraged to meet with staff from the
department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to review the proposed vacation and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures for a
vacation of public right of way.
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for a vacation of public right of way must be filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning and
community development.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
3. The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of planning and community development.
C. Staff Review:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 542/715
1. The director of planning or designee will review the application with regard to the following factors:
a. Impact on pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation.
b. Impact on emergency and utility vehicle access and circulation.
c. Impact on access of adjacent private properties.
d. Desirability of right of way for access or circulation needs.
e. Location of utilities and other easements or restrictions on the property.
f. Any other relevant factors pertaining to the specific requested vacation.
2. Once information regarding utilities, adjacent property owners, and access issues has been collected and reviewed, the director of planning or
designee will forward a written report and recommendation to the planning and zoning commission regarding the requested vacation.
D. Planning And Zoning Commission Review: After receipt of a report and recommendation from staff, the planning and zoning commission will schedule
one or more public meetings to receive public comment regarding the proposed vacation request. The commission will consider the evidence
presented in the application, in the staff report, and at the public discussion(s) and make a recommendation for approval or disapproval to the city
council.
E. Purchase Offer: Unless the vacated right of way is to remain public property, the applicant must make a purchase offer for the area proposed to be
vacated. The purchase offer should reflect the applicant's estimate of fair market value of the property. The estimate of the value of the property to be
vacated should be based on the assessed and/or appraised value of adjacent or similar properties. Once a written purchase offer for the property is
received, a public hearing before the city council will be scheduled.
F. Public Hearing On Vacation And Disposition:
1. After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning commission have been filed, and a written purchase offer has been received from
the applicant, the city council will hold a public hearing on an ordinance to vacate the subject right of way and on a resolution to dispose of the
property to the applicant. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held
earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The city council may set such public hearing before,
after, or during the period when the planning and zoning commission is considering such matter.
2. If the city council approves the ordinance and resolution to vacate and dispose of the property, the office of the city attorney will complete the
necessary documents to deed the property to the applicant and complete the transaction. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION APPROVAL PROCEDURES
14-8E-1: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS, CONSERVATION DISTRICTS AND LOCAL HISTORIC LANDMARKS:
A. Initiation:
1. The city council may, on its own motion or on petition, designate by ordinance areas of the city as historic or conservation districts or may designate
by ordinance local historic landmarks. Any proposed historic landmark or historic or conservation district initiated by the city council must first be
submitted to the historic preservation commission for its recommendation and report. Designating a historic district, conservation district, or local
historic landmark is considered an overlay rezoning, and as such, must also, subsequent to consideration by the historic preservation commission,
be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report regarding the rezoning.
2. The historic preservation commission may, on its own motion or on petition, recommend to the city council areas of the city for designation as historic
or conservation districts or properties for designation as local historic landmarks. Designating a historic district, conservation district, or local historic
landmark is considered an overlay rezoning, and as such, must also be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation
and report regarding the rezoning.
B. Historic Landmark Applications:
1. Applications for a historic landmark designation must be filed in the department of planning and community development on application forms
provided by the city. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
2. If the property has been registered on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), the NRHP registration form must accompany the application.
C. Historic Preservation Commission Public Hearing:
1. Upon receipt of an application for historic landmark designation or following initiation of a proposal to designate a historic or conservation district, the
historic preservation commission will hold a public hearing on the proposal.
2. The historic preservation commission will give notice of the time, date, place and subject matter of such public hearing at least seven (7) days prior
to the hearing. Such notice must be served by ordinary mail addressed to each property owner of land included in such proposed district at the
property owner's last known address. If the address of any property owner is unknown, such notice must be served by ordinary mail addressed to
"owner" at the street address of the property in question. An affidavit of mailing will be filed with the city clerk setting forth the date that notice was
mailed and the names and addresses of all property owners notified pursuant to this subsection.
3. Following the public hearing, the historic preservation commission will consider a motion recommending approval of the proposed district or historic
landmark.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 543/715
4. Upon approval of the motion, the historic preservation commission will submit an application to rezone the proposed area to historic district overlay
or conservation district overlay, whichever is applicable. For properties proposed as local historic landmarks, an application for a historic district
overlay rezoning must be submitted.
D. State Historic Preservation Office Review: Following the public hearing before the historic preservation commission, the proposal will be submitted to
the state historic preservation office (SHPO) for review and recommendations. The city will make any recommendations made by the state historic
preservation office available to the public for viewing during normal business hours at a city government place of public access.
E. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
1. After receipt of the rezoning application and the report and recommendation of the historic preservation commission, the planning and zoning
commission will schedule one or more public meetings to receive public comment regarding the proposed district.
2. The planning and zoning commission will review the proposed overlay rezoning based on its relation to the comprehensive plan, as amended, to the
provisions of this title, and to any proposed public improvements and other plans for the renewal of the area involved. The planning and zoning
commission will recommend approval, denial, or modification of the proposed historic district or conservation district overlay zone.
3. If the planning and zoning commission makes no report to the city council within forty five (45) days from the date the rezoning application was
received, it shall be considered to have made a report approving the proposed rezoning.
4. A two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the commission present at the meeting, but not less than four (4) votes, shall be required in consideration
of such a rezoning.
5. If the planning and zoning commission alters the area of the proposed district as approved by the historic preservation commission, the planning and
zoning commission must submit a description of the altered proposed area or the petition describing the area to the state historic preservation office
and the historic preservation commission for review and recommendations concerning the altered proposed district.
F. City Council Public Hearing:
1. After receiving the report and recommendation of the historic preservation commission and the planning and zoning commission regarding the
proposed historic district or conservation district overlay zone, the city council shall, before enacting any proposed historic district or conservation
district overlay zone, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall
the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The city council may set such
public hearing either before or after the proposed rezoning is submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation or during the
period while the planning and zoning commission is considering such matter.
2. Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an ordinance implementing the proposed historic district or conservation district overlay
zone. The city council may approve or deny the ordinance or may refer the overlay zoning to the historic preservation commission for modification.
Comments from the state historic preservation office must be received by the city council prior to approval, denial, or modification of the proposed
rezoning.
3. If the city council refers the overlay zoning back to the historic preservation commission for modification, the commission will follow the procedures
as set forth in this subsection and subsections C, D and E of this section, with the following exceptions:
a. Unless substantial modifications are proposed, the public hearing before the historic preservation commission may be waived.
b. Only property owners affected by the city council's proposed modification shall be notified by mail of the modification prior to action by the historic
preservation commission.
G. Protests And Effect On Development Activity: Since a historic district or conservation district overlay rezoning is a type of zoning map amendment
(rezoning), such an overlay rezoning is subject to the same provisions for protest and effect on development activity as for a zoning map amendment
as set forth in subsections 14-8D-5G and H of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8E-2: HISTORIC REVIEW:
A. Submittal Requirements:
1. Applications for historic review must be filed with the department of planning and community development on application forms provided by the city.
2. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B. Levels Of Historic Review:
1. Minor Review:
a. A minor review will be conducted if the change proposed in the application is of a type specifically defined and listed as eligible for minor review in
the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended.
b. Applications for minor review will be reviewed by a designated commission member or designated staff to the commission. Applications will be
approved upon finding that the proposed change to the property will have no material effect on the historic character of the property or the historic
or conservation district. Decisions may be appealed to and reviewed by the historic preservation commission, if so requested by the applicant. If
there is evidence that the proposed change may have a material effect on the historic character of the property or historic or conservation district,
the application for minor review will be deferred and will be forwarded for major review by the historic preservation commission.
c. A written report of the minor reviews processed shall be made to the commission at the next scheduled commission meeting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 544/715
2. Intermediate Review:
a. An intermediate review will be conducted if the change proposed in the application is of a type specifically defined and listed as eligible for
intermediate review in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended.
b. Applications for intermediate review will be reviewed jointly by the designated commission staff and the historic preservation commission chair or
the chair's designee. Decisions may be appealed to the historic preservation commission, if so requested by the applicant. If the designated
commission staff or the historic preservation commission chair determines that an application warrants review by the full commission, said
application will be forwarded for major review.
c. A written report of the intermediate reviews processed shall be made to the commission at the next scheduled commission meeting.
3. Major Review:
a. A major review will be conducted for applications that meet one or more of the following criteria:
(1) The application is for a specific change that does not qualify for minor or intermediate review; or
(2) The application is for minor or intermediate review and has been recommended for major review by the designated commission staff or the
historic preservation commission chair; or
(3) An appeal of a decision regarding a minor or intermediate review.
b. Major reviews will be conducted by the historic preservation commission. Applications that are denied may be appealed to the city council if the
property is a historic landmark or a property located within a historic district; or appealed to the board of adjustment if the property is located within
a conservation district. (Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010)
C. Approval Procedure: Applications for historic review will be reviewed for compliance with the applicable approval criteria for historic review as set forth
in chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of this title. Historic review will result in one of the following outcomes:
1. If the proposed material change to the property will have no effect on any architecturally significant feature, or there will be no change in appearance
to a landmark or property located within a historic or conservation district, a certificate of no material effect will be issued, signed by the chair of the
historic preservation commission or designee and be transmitted along with the application to the building official and the city clerk.
2. If the application is approved or approved with modifications acceptable to the applicant, a certificate of appropriateness will be issued, signed by the
chairperson or designee and be transmitted along with the application to the building official and the city clerk.
3. If the application is disapproved, the commission will issue a written decision setting forth the factual basis for the decision and the vote of each
member participating therein. The decision will be issued, signed by the chairperson or designee, and be transmitted along with the application to the
building official and the city clerk.
D. Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for historic review in a historic district or for a historic
landmark may appeal the action to the city council. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for historic
review in a conservation district may appeal the action to the board of adjustment. Procedures for such appeals are as follows:
1. Any appeal submitted by the applicant must be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk no later than ten (10) business days after the filing of
the above mentioned decision. An appeal submitted by an aggrieved party, other than the applicant, must be in writing and must be filed with the city
clerk no later than ten (10) business days after construction work pursuant to an approved certificate of appropriateness, certificate of no material
effect, or certificate of economic hardship is observable from adjacent properties or the public right of way or ten (10) business days after an alleged
violation of this article is similarly observable.
2. The city council or board of adjustment, as applicable, shall, within a reasonable time, hold a public hearing on the appeal, give the public notice as
required by state law, as well as provide written notice to the applicant and to the appellant, if different from the applicant, and decide the appeal
within a reasonable time.
3. In deciding such appeal, the city council or the board of adjustment, as applicable, shall consider whether the commission has exercised its powers
and followed the guidelines established according to this title, and whether the commission's action was patently arbitrary or capricious.
4. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the city council or the board of adjustment, as applicable, may, in conformity with the provisions of this
article or ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, affirm, or upon finding error, reverse or modify, wholly or partly, the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all
the powers of the historic preservation commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8E-3: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
A. Initiation Of Review: After receiving written notification from the commission of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness, the owner of record
may apply for a certificate of economic hardship. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B. Submittal Requirements:
1. Applications for a certificate of economic hardship must be filed with the department of planning and community development.
2. The application shall consist of a letter and supporting materials that provide evidence of the approval criteria for a certificate of economic hardship
as set forth in chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of this title are met.
3. The owner must, in good faith, consult with the historic preservation commission, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort
to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. Documentation of such effort must be presented to the commission. (Ord. 10-
4404, 9-7-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 545/715
C. Approval Procedures:
1. The historic preservation commission will hold a public hearing on the application for the certificate of economic hardship within sixty (60) days
following receipt of a complete application and all information requested by the commission.
2. The public hearing will result either in approval or denial of the application for a certificate of economic hardship. The commission will issue a written
decision setting forth the factual basis for the decision and vote of each member participating therein. The written decision will be issued, signed by
the chairperson or designee, and be transmitted along with the application to the building official and the city clerk. If the commission finds that
unreasonable economic hardship exists, a certificate of economic hardship will be issued, specifying the material changes that are authorized
thereto.
3. For the purpose of developing alternative solutions to the economic hardship, the historic preservation commission may consult with professional
architects, engineers, contractors, realtors, appraisers or other consultants that have expertise in the rehabilitation, repair, maintenance and value of
historic properties. If the commission chooses to use said consultation, the commission may delay issuing any certificate for a period of ninety (90)
days. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 9
DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
14-9A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except when alternate definitions apply as specified in articles B through F of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms used in this title.
Descriptions and definitions of land use categories are set forth in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title; although, where it is deemed
necessary for clarification, more specific definitions of certain land use category subgroups and specific land uses are defined in this section.
ABUT/ABUTTING: Contiguous; having a common boundary, wall, or property line.
ACCESS: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles have ingress and egress to a property or parking area.
ACCESSORY APARTMENTS: A temporary accessory dwelling unit located within an owner occupied, single-family home or in an accessory building and
meeting the requirements of this title.
ACCESSORY BUILDING/USE/STRUCTURE: A building, structure, or use which:
A. Is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees
of the principal use; and
B. Is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the property; and
C. Does not include structures, structural features, or activities inconsistent with the uses to which they are accessory; and
D. Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved through a special exception, is located on the same lot as the principal use or
uses to which it is accessory.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADULT: A person that is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
ADULT BUSINESS USE: See "adult business use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
ADULT DAYCARE: An organized program of short term supportive daycare in a group environment for adults who need supervision, assistance or both.
Services may include, but shall not be limited to, nursing and rehabilitative services, personal care, transportation services, social or recreational activities
and preventative or restorative services. See "daycare uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
AGRICULTURE USE: See "agricultural uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
AISLE: A permanent, durable surface connected directly to a parking or loading space and designed to permit ingress or egress of a vehicle. An "aisle" is
not the same as a drive. (See definition of drive/driveway.)
ALCOHOL SALES ORIENTED RETAIL USE: See "retail uses" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
ALLEY: An open public way intended for use as a means of vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTER/ALTERATION: A structural alteration, enlargement or remodeling of a building or the moving of a building from one location to another.
ANIMAL RELATED COMMERCIAL USE: See "animal related commercial use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See "household living, multi-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
ARCADE: A continuous, covered passageway parallel to and open to a street, private or public open space, or building, and typically accessible and open
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 546/715
to the public.
ARTERIAL STREET: See definition of street, arterial.
ASSESSED VALUE: The value of real property as established by the City Assessor. It is the value upon which the next fiscal year's Real Estate Taxes are
based.
AVIATION RELATED USE: See "aviation related uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a building, enclosed by a railing, accessible from above grade and not
attached to the ground.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partially underground but having three and one-half feet (3.5') or more of its floor to ceiling height above grade.
A "basement" is counted as a story for the purpose of height and setback regulations.
BASIC UTILITIES: See "basic utility uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
BED AND BREAKFAST HOMESTAY: An accessory use within an owner occupied, single-family dwelling unit, in which no more than three (3) bedrooms
are provided to guests who stay for periods not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: An accessory use within an owner occupied, single-family dwelling unit with a maximum of five (5) bedrooms provided to
guests who stay for periods not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: A quasi-judicial board, the creation of which is authorized by the Code of Iowa, as amended. The "Board of Adjustment" is
authorized to grant variances and special exceptions and is authorized to hear appeals of administrative decisions of the City Manager or designee in the
enforcement of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
BUILD: To construct, assemble, install, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally alter a building or structure.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area remaining on a lot after the minimum open space requirement for setbacks has been met.
BUILDING: Any structure with a roof and designed or intended to support, enclose, shelter or protect persons, animals or property.
BUILDING AREA: The area of a building within its largest outside dimensions, computed on a horizontal plane at the first floor level, exclusive of open
porches, breezeways, terraces and exterior stairways.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by building area, usually measured in terms of lot percentage.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building that is not connected to another building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from grade to the roofline. (See definitions of grade and roofline.)
BUILDING LINE: The front setback line as specified for principal buildings.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The city employee designated to enforce this title.
BUILDING PERMIT: Official certification that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions of this title and other applicable ordinances. A "building
permit" is required for new construction, demolition, and for alterations or additions to existing structures, prior to commencement of construction or
demolition. (See title 17, "Building And Housing", of this code.)
CELLAR: A portion of a building located partially or wholly underground and having less than three and one-half feet (3.5') of its floor to ceiling height
above grade. A "cellar" is not counted as a story for the purpose of height and setback regulations.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of this title and other applicable ordinances and may be used
or occupied. A "certificate of occupancy" is granted upon completion of new construction or completion of alterations or additions to existing structures.
CHILDCARE CENTER: A nonresidential daycare use which provides less than twenty four (24) hours' per-day care or supervision for twelve (12) or more
children, and is licensed by the state. (See "daycare", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
CHILDCARE HOME: A daycare use that is accessory to a household living use, which provides less than twenty four (24) hours' per-day care or
supervision in a residence for a maximum of sixteen (16) children at any one time. (See "daycare", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
this title.)
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Iowa City, Iowa.
COLLECTOR STREET: See definition of Street, Collector.
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES: See "colleges and universities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
COMMERCIAL PARKING: See "commercial parking uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE: See "commercial recreational uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
COMMUNICATIONS/BROADCAST TOWER: A structure that is intended to support equipment used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals.
Examples of such towers include monopoles and lattice steel structures. (See "communication transmission facility uses", as defined in chapter 4, article
A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMISSION FACILITY USES: See "communications transmissions facility uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
Categories", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 547/715
COMMUNITY SERVICE USE: See "community service uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
CONFINEMENT FEEDING OPERATIONS: One or more roofed or partially roofed enclosures intended to confine animals for feeding and growth prior to
slaughter and which are designed to contain liquid or semiliquid animal waste.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT: See section 14-3B-2, "Conservation District Overlay Zone", of this title for a detailed definition of a "conservation district".
CONSIGNMENT STORE: A retail establishment engaged in selling used merchandise, such as clothing, furniture, books, shoes or household appliances,
on consignment, or a retail establishment engaged in selling donated used merchandise which is operated by an organization granted federal tax
exemption pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, as amended. Merchandise is brought to the establishment and processed by
marking, cleaning, sorting and storing as a major part of the principal use. Such stores do not include those selling vehicles, auto parts, scrap or waste.
CONVERSION: Any change from one principal use to a principal use in another use category. "Conversion" also includes any change from one principal
use to another principal use in a different use category subgroup. For example, it is considered a "conversion" if the use of a site is changed from a singlefamily
use to a multi-family use or if a sales oriented retail use is changed to a repair oriented retail use.
COTTAGE INDUSTRY: A firm that manufactures and/or assembles goods that are intended for retail sale to the general public. The goods may also be
sold at wholesale to other outlets or firms, but retail sales is a significant component of the operation. The manufacturing component for such a firm is
small in scale. Size limitations may apply to such uses in commercial zones to keep the uses in scale and character with surrounding land uses.
CREMATORIUM/CREMATORY: A furnace or establishment for the cremation of corpses. "Crematoriums" for human corpses are sometimes established
as accessory uses to a cemetery, mortuary, funeral home, or hospital; however, if established as a principal use on a property, will be considered a
personal service oriented retail use for purposes of this title. "Crematoriums" for pets are sometimes established as an accessory use to a cemetery,
mortuary, funeral home, or veterinary clinic; however, if established as a principal use on a property, will be considered a general animal related
commercial use for purposes of this title.
CUL-DE-SAC: See definition of Street, Cul-De-Sac.
DAYCARE: See "daycare uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
DECK: A covered or uncovered platform area abutting the wall of a building, accessible at or from above grade and attached to the ground.
DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICE USE: An individual, group of individuals, partnership, association, corporation, or any other business unit or legal entity,
who for a fee accepts a check dated subsequent to the date it was written or a check dated on the date it was written and holds said check for a period of
time prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to an agreement with, or any representation made to, the maker of the check, whether express or implied.
For purposes of this title, this definition includes only those individuals and entities to which Iowa Code chapter 533D is applicable. For the purposes of this
title, "check" means a check, draft, share draft, or other instrument for the payment of money.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per unit area of land, usually expressed as "dwelling units per acre".
DESIGN REVIEW DISTRICT: An area designated by the city council that contains contiguous parcels of real property, the built portions of which:
A. Are expressive of the defining architectural and other physical and aesthetic properties that give evidence to the physical traditions of Iowa City
and/or unique features of the area; or
B. Lack any defining physical or aesthetic qualities but constitute areas in which the city wishes to establish such qualities.
DETENTION FACILITIES: See "detention facilities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
DEVELOPMENT/DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved property, including, but not limited to, placement of
manufactured housing, buildings or other structures, construction, demolition, clearing, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling.
"Development activity" does not include transfer of ownership.
DISABILITY/HANDICAP: With respect to an individual person, a verifiable physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such
person's major life activities and is expected to be long continued and of indefinite duration.
DOWNZONING: A change in the zoning classification of land to a classification permitting less intensive or less dense development, such as from a multifamily
zone to a single-family zone or from a commercial or industrial zone to a residential zone.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: See "eating and drinking establishments" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
DRIVE/DRIVEWAY: A permanent, durable surface designed to provide vehicular access from a street to a lot or to provide vehicular access between
different parts of a lot or parking area. A drive that is internal to a parking area is not the same as an aisle. (See definition of aisle.)
DWELLING: A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for residential occupancy.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A single-family use that is not attached to any other dwelling unit. (See "single-family use", as defined in
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A "two-family use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
DWELLING, FARM: A detached single family dwelling located on a farm and occupied by the household that maintains and operates, owns or leases the
farm on which the dwelling is located.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: See "multi-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: See "single-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 548/715
DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities used or
intended to be used by one household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating meals. Multiple dwelling units exist if there is more than one meter for any
utility, more than one address to the property, more than one kitchen, and/or if there is a lockable, physical separation between rooms within the dwelling
unit such that a room or rooms on each side of the separation could be used as a dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY: A dwelling unit within a multi-family use consisting of one principal room, in addition to a bathroom, hallway and closets,
which serves as the occupant's living room and bedroom. The kitchen may be located in this principal room or may be located in a separate room.
DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE: A single-family use with one or more walls located on a side lot line that is not a street or alley right-of-way line. Zero lot line
dwellings may be attached or detached. (See "single-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
EASEMENT: A right given by the owner of land to another person or persons for specific limited use of that land, e.g., to allow access to another property
or for utilities.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT: See "eating and drinking establishments" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES, GENERAL: Elementary and secondary schools below university grade (ordinarily grades 1 through 12), including
denominational and sectarian schools, kindergartens and military academies. (See "educational facilities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
Categories", of this title.)
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES, SPECIALIZED: Schools primarily engaged in offering specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, but not academic
training. Also specialized nondegree granting schools, such as music schools, dramatic schools, dance studios, martial arts studios, language schools and
civil service and other short term examination preparatory schools. (See "educational facilities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
title.)
ELDER: A person at least fifty five (55) years old.
ELDER APARTMENT HOUSING: A multi-family use intended for use and occupancy by elders and persons with disabilities.
ELDER FAMILY HOME: A group household that is managed or owned by a responsible party and offers a social living arrangement for at least two (2), but
for no more than eight (8), persons living in the residence, the majority of whom are elders, who are essentially capable of physical self-care.
ELDER GROUP HOME: A group household that is the residence of a person who is providing room, board and personal care for up to five (5) elders who
are not related to the caregiver. Personal care, in this case, means assistance with the essential activities of daily living which the recipient can perform
personally only with difficulty, and may include bathing, personal hygiene, dressing, grooming and the supervision of self-administered medications, but
does not include the administration of medications.
ELDERLY HOUSING: A multi-family use, group household use, or group living use intended for use and occupancy by elders and persons with disabilities.
ENLARGEMENT/EXPANSION: An increase in the volume of a building, an increase in the area of land or building occupied by a use, an increase in the
number of bedrooms within a dwelling unit or an increase in the number of dwelling units. For nonresidential buildings, an increase in the occupancy load
of a building is considered an enlargement/expansion. For alcohol sales oriented retail uses, any change in the type of liquor license that would increase
the types of alcohol or alcoholic beverages that can be sold is considered an enlargement/expansion of the use. For group living uses, any alteration that
allows an increase in the number of residents is considered an enlargement/expansion of the use. For nonconforming drinking establishments, neither
sidewalk cafes nor any alteration or addition to a commercial kitchen that does not result in an increase in the allowable occupancy load shall be
considered an enlargement/expansion of the use.
EXTRACTION USE: See "extraction uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or placement by a governmental or social service agency, occupying
a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping organization. A "family" may also include the following:
A. Two (2), but not more than two (2), persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption; or
B. Up to eight (8) persons with verifiable disabilities, as defined by the fair housing amendments act of 1988, who are occupying a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping organization.
FAMILY CARE HOME: A type of group household, such as a residential care facility, a child foster care facility, a supervised apartment living arrangement
or other small group residential arrangement for not more than eight (8) persons with verifiable disabilities, as defined by the federal fair housing act, as
amended, that are occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. Certain types of "family care homes" may require a government license or
approval and may provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and supervision by counselor(s) or a resident family. An individual foster
care family home licensed under chapter 237 of the code of Iowa, as amended, is not considered a "family care home"; such a living arrangement would
be considered a "family" under this title. Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents of the facility are placed by order of the
court and are under twenty four (24) hour supervision of employees or contractees of the Iowa department of corrections are classified under this title as
"detention facilities" and not as "family care homes".
FARM: An area of not less than ten (10) acres for which the principal use is growing farm products, such as vegetables, fruits and grain, for sale and
storing those products on the land. The term "farm" includes the necessary accessory uses and buildings for treating and storing the food produced.
FEEDLOT: A lot, yard, corral or other area where livestock are confined, primarily for the purposes of feeding and growth prior to slaughter. The term does
not include areas which are used for raising crops or other vegetation or upon which livestock are allowed to graze.
FLOOR AREA: The total area of all floors of a building, or a portion of a building, measured to the outside surface of exterior walls or to the centerline of
walls of attached buildings or uses. Floor area includes all space within the building, including space in the basement or cellar, if such space is used for a
principal or accessory use. However, floor area does not include the area of porches, balconies and other appurtenances. When calculating the floor area
of a principal dwelling, the area of any attached garage is excluded. Floor area of basements and cellars is excluded from the calculation of FAR. (See
definition of Floor Area Ratio.)
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 549/715
floor area of a basement or cellar is not included in this calculation.
FRATERNITY/SORORITY: A fraternal group living use used as a residence and as a center for activities and operations by a chapter of a nonprofit
fraternity or sorority recognized by a "college" or "university", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title. This definition does not
include a rooming house.
FRONTAGE: The distance as measured along a right of way line from one intersecting street to another, from one intersecting street to the end of a dead
end street or from one intersecting street to the end of a cul-de-sac.
FUNERAL HOME: A personal service oriented retail use where the deceased are prepared for burial, funerals are conducted, and which provides for
viewing of the deceased. Funeral homes may include crematoriums as an accessory use subject to compliance with any state or federal regulation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building that is used primarily for storing motor vehicles and which is under the control of and used by the occupants of
the principal building on the site.
GRADE (Adjacent Ground Elevation): The average point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the
building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and a line five feet (5') from the
building. When the finished surface of the ground has been raised by adding fill to create a higher grade around a building, the slope of the fill within
twenty feet (20') of the building shall not exceed four (4) horizontal to one vertical or twenty five percent (25%).
GROUND FLOOR/FIRST FLOOR: The lowest floor of a building having its floor to ceiling height at or above the grade.
GROUP CARE FACILITY: An assisted group living use that is government licensed or approved and that provides services in a residential setting to more
than eight (8) individuals, not including resident staff. These individuals are persons with one or more disabilities, as defined by the Federal Fair Housing
Act, as amended, who are in need of adult supervision and who are provided services in accordance with their individual needs. This definition also
includes facilities, such as nursing homes, that provide residential services and skilled care to convalescents or the elderly.
GROUP HOUSEHOLD: A "family care home", "elder family home", "parental group home", or "elder group home", as defined in this title, wherein a
collective number of individuals live together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, where the relationship between the individuals is of a
regular and permanent nature and has a distinct domestic character, similar to a family.
GROUP LIVING USE: See "group living uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title. "Group living uses" include assisted group
living uses, independent group living uses, and fraternal group living uses.
GUEST: An individual who shares a dwelling on a temporary basis for not more than thirty (30) days in any given calendar year; or a person who stays in a
hospitality oriented retail use.
GUESTHOUSE: A small hospitality oriented retail use containing nine (9) or fewer bedrooms providing lodging for guests, which is licensed as a hotel by
the State and subject to City inspection and compliance with the Iowa City Housing Code.
HEDGE: A boundary formed by a row of closely planted shrubs or bushes.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: See definition of "historic districts" in section 14-3B-1, "Historic District Overlay Zone", of this title.
HISTORIC LANDMARK: See definition of "historic landmark" in section 14-3B-1, "Historic District Overlay Zone", of this title.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use consisting of an occupation or profession carried on by a person residing on the premises.
HOSPITAL: See "hospitals", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
HOSPITALITY ORIENTED RETAIL USE: See "retail uses, hospitality oriented", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
HOTEL: A hospitality oriented retail use that is licensed by the State and occupied and used principally as a place of lodging for guests. "Hotels" may or
may not provide meals and there are usually no cooking facilities in the guestrooms.
HOUSEHOLD: An individual or group of individuals that reside within a single family dwelling or within a dwelling unit of a two family dwelling or multifamily
dwelling as a single housekeeping organization, where the responsibilities and expenses of maintaining the household are shared among the
members; also a group of individuals that meet the definition of a group household, as defined in this title.
HOUSEHOLD LIVING USE: See "household living uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE USE: See "industrial service uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 550/715
KENNEL: An establishment where small animals are bred, raised, trained, groomed, or boarded for compensation, sale or other commercial purposes.
LIVESTOCK: Cattle, sheep, swine, poultry and other animals or fowl that are produced primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: Space logically and conveniently located and designed for bulk pick ups and deliveries and accessible to delivery
vehicles from aisles.
LOCAL STREET: See definition of Street, Local.
LODGING HOUSE: See definition of Rooming House.
LONG TERM CARE FACILITY: See definition of Group Care Facility.
LOT: A plot, separate tract or parcel of land with fixed boundaries suitable for occupancy by a use.
LOT AREA: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any public or private street rights of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by certain specified elements of development. There are a number of lot coverage standards
within this title, including building coverage standards, setback coverage standards, and standards related to the amount of land that can be covered by
accessory uses.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line or the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and
the midpoint of the rear lot line. On a double frontage lot, lot depth is the average horizontal distance between the two parallel or approximately parallel
front lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT FRONTAGE: The continuous width of a lot measured along the street right of way line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot bounded by a street on only one side.
LOT LINE: A line oriented by stable points of reference which establishes one boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A lot line separating a lot from the street right of way. On corner lots, the front lot line is the shortest street dimension, unless the lot is
square or almost square, having dimensions at a ratio between three to two (3:2) and three to three (3:3). In that case, the front lot line may be along either
street. On double frontage lots, there are two (2) front lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangular shaped lot, it is an imaginary line within the lot,
ten feet (10') long, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line. However, on a double frontage lot, there is no rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a street-side lot line, front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET-SIDE: Any lot line that separates a lot from a public or private street (not including alleys or private rear lanes).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 551/715
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.
LOT WIDTH: The length of the front setback line. On corner and double frontage lots, the "lot width" is measured along the shortest street frontage, unless
the lot is square or almost square, having dimensions at a ratio between three to two (3:2) and three to three (3:3). In that case, the lot width may be
measured along either street.
MAIN ENTRANCE (To A Residential Use): The primary entrance located on the exterior wall of a building used by residents of a dwelling to gain access to
their dwelling unit. Such an entrance is typically located on a street-facing wall of the dwelling. An entrance to a dwelling from a parking garage is not a
"main entrance".
MANUFACTURED HOME: A detached single-family dwelling which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403, federal
manufactured home construction and safety standards, as amended, which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be
moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
A mobile home constructed to the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards, as amended, is not a "manufactured home" unless it has
been converted to real property and is taxed as a site built dwelling as provided in the code of Iowa, as amended.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING LEASE LOT: A plot of ground in a manufactured housing park designed to accommodate one dwelling unit and which is
leased to the owner or tenant of the dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 552/715
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK: A tract of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes, mobile homes or
modular homes on leased lots.
MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION USE: See "manufacturing and production uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
MIXED USE BUILDING: A building that contains a mix of residential dwelling units and commercial or institutional uses.
MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle without motive power used, manufactured or constructed so as to permit its conveyance upon the public streets and
highways and designed, constructed or reconstructed so as to permit its use for year round occupancy as a dwelling. The vehicle must contain water
supply, waste disposal, heating and electrical conveniences. A "mobile home" is factory built housing built on a chassis. A "mobile home" shall not be
construed to be a travel trailer or other form of recreational vehicle. A "mobile home" shall be construed to remain a "mobile home", subject to all
regulations applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the
foundation provided. "Mobile homes" are classified as detached single-family dwellings if converted to real property and taxed as a site built dwelling, as
provided in the code of Iowa, as amended, or if they are located within a manufactured housing park approved through a planned development overlay
rezoning process.
MODEL DWELLING UNIT: A permanent structure within a residential zone, which is primarily intended to be used as a dwelling unit, but which is
temporarily being used for marketing purposes as an example of other units to be built in the same development. "Model dwelling units" are considered
provisional temporary uses as set forth in chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.
MODULAR HOME: Any detached single-family dwelling manufactured, in whole or in components, at a place other than the location where it is to be
placed; which is assembled, in whole or in components, at the location where it is to be permanently located; which rests on a permanent foundation or
slab; which does not have wheels or axles affixed as a part of its normal construction; and which does not require a license by any agency as a motor
vehicle, special equipment, trailer, motor home or mobile home.
MOTEL: A hospitality oriented retail use that is licensed by the State, usually located along highways, occupied by and used principally as a place of
lodging for guests. The term "motel" includes "motor hotel".
MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITY: A commercial parking facility owned and operated by the City, and designed to accommodate the off street parking of
motor vehicles as a capital improvement. Such parking may be located in a structured parking facility, a surface lot or a combination thereof.
NEAR SOUTHSIDE PARKING FACILITY DISTRICT: That area of Iowa City bounded by Burlington Street on the north, Gilbert Street on the east, the Iowa
Interstate Railway Main Line on the south and Madison Street on the west, except for Blocks 10 and 21 of County Seat Addition; Lots 5 and 6 of Block 13,
County Seat Addition; Lots 3, 4, 5, the east 50 feet of Lot 6, and the south 40 feet of Lot 2, Block 11, County Seat Addition; and Lots 10-15, Lyon's First
Addition.
NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER: A use owned and operated by a nonprofit organization, as defined by section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as
amended, providing a place for social services, such as childcare, supervised recreation, counseling referral for children and adults or support groups for
children and adults. Such services should be intended primarily, though not exclusively, for those persons living within a mile radius of the center.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT: An element of a development, such as a parking area, a loading area, outdoor lighting, landscaping, screening, or
signage, that was established in conformance with this title, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zoning or to the requirements of this title, is no
longer in conformance with the current applicable standards.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot of record that was established in conformance with the minimum lot area, width, and frontage requirement of this title, but
which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or the requirements of this title, is no longer in conformance with one or more of these requirements.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or portion of a structure that was established in conformance with the setback, building height, building
width, and lot coverage standards, or other requirements or standards of this title that relate to the design of the building or structure, but which
subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the requirements of this title, is no longer in conformance with one or more of these standards.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use that, when established, was a permitted use, was allowed as a provisional use, or was approved as a special exception,
but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the requirements of this title, is no longer allowed. This definition includes residential uses that
exceed the allowable residential density of a zone (minimum lot area per unit requirements) and uses that exceed the maximum floor area ratio or
maximum floor area standards specified for a particular use or zone.
NURSING HOME: See definition of group care facility.
OFFICIALLY APPROVED PLACE: A private street permitted prior to 1984. Such streets were established either by the City Council or by the Board of
Adjustment as a variance to the requirement that a lot front on a public street.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Open space used by occupants of the dwelling unit or units on one lot. Such open space and any private recreational facilities
located therein are considered an accessory use to the principal use of the property.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE, SHARED: Open space, the use of which is shared by occupants of an entire subdivision or planned development, but which is
not generally open to the public. Such open space is typically managed and maintained by an owners' association.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: Open space that has been dedicated for public use or for which an easement has been granted for public use.
OPEN SPACE USE: See "parks and open space uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY: Includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. "Outdoor display" is an outdoor
showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products,
brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. "Outdoor display" does not include goods that are being stored or parked
outside. It does not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products.
Examples of uses that often have "outdoor display" are car and boat sales, and plant nurseries. See also definition of outdoor storage.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: Includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale
or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. "Outdoor storage" includes the storage of raw or finished goods
(packaged or bulk), including gravel; mulch; building materials, packing materials, salvage goods; machinery, tools and equipment; and other similar items.
Examples of uses that often have "outdoor storage" are lumberyards, vehicle repair; tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, salvage yards;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 553/715
and recycling processing facilities. See also definition of outdoor display.
OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY ORIENTED RETAIL: See "retail uses, outdoor storage and display oriented", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
"Use Categories", of this title.
OVERLAY ZONE: A set of zoning requirements imposed in addition to those of the underlying base zone. Development in overlay zones must conform to
the requirements of the overlay zone as well as those of the underlying base zone, unless modifications to base zone requirements are approved as a part
of the overlay rezoning process.
OWNER: The person holding fee simple or equitable title to the property.
PARCEL: See definition of lot.
PARENTAL GROUP HOME: A type of group household containing not more than three (3) teenagers or adults and up to four (4) children under five (5)
years of age, each of whom is related by blood to at least one of said teenagers or adults, placed in a residential dwelling unit by a government or social
service agency and occupying said dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit for purposes of social and/or economic support.
PARKING AREA: An off street facility intended and designed for the parking of more than four (4) motor vehicles. A parking area includes parking spaces,
aisles, landscaped islands and medians, and drives that provide circulation within a parking area or around the perimeter of a parking area. Drives that are
external to a parking area are not considered a part of the parking area.
PARKING SPACE: A permanent, durable surface intended for off street vehicular parking.
PARKS AND OPEN SPACE USES: See "parks and open space uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
PATIO: A covered or uncovered, surfaced outdoor living area located at grade, adjacent to and accessible from a dwelling.
PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED: "Pedestrian oriented" streets and developments are those that are designed to provide a safe, comfortable environment for
pedestrians. Important elements include sidewalks that are separated and buffered from vehicular traffic with limited interruption from driveways; the
provision of street trees and appropriate street furniture; and buildings that visually address the street with visible entranceways and windows, and, in the
case of commercial buildings, may include awnings or canopies that protect pedestrians from the weather. Buildings with blank facades along the street,
long stretches of repetitive building designs, entranceways that are difficult to find or identify, unscreened surface parking lots, and other expanses of
paving are contrary to a "pedestrian oriented" design.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Regulatory language stating the minimum requirement or the maximum allowable limit on the effects or characteristics of a
use.
PERMITTED USE: A principal use allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to compliance with the dimensional requirements, development
standards, and any other special requirement of the zone and the general requirements of this title.
PERSON: Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any entity, including state and local governments and agencies.
PERSONAL SERVICE: See "retail uses, personal service oriented", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
PLANTING AREA: An unpaved pervious area intended or used for the placement of a tree or other required landscaping elements.
PORCH: A covered entrance to a building consisting of a platform area, with open or enclosed sides, projecting from the wall of a building.
PREMISES: See definition of Lot.
PRIMARY STREET FRONTAGE: The frontage of a lot to which the address is assigned.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building containing the principal use.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary use of land or a structure as distinguished from an accessory use, e.g., a dwelling is a principal use on a lot in a residential
zone, while a garage or pool is an accessory use.
PROJECTIONS (INTO SETBACKS): Parts of buildings, such as architectural features, which protrude into required setback areas.
PROVISIONAL USE: A principal use allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to compliance with the specific requirements mentioned with the use
and all other dimensional and development requirements and special requirements, if any, of the zone as well as the general requirements of this title.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Property dedicated to public use and intended for the movement of the public.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A system owned and operated by a licensed public utility company or by a railroad company. Such systems do not include those owned
and operated by the city of Iowa City or other governmental agency.
PUBLIC VIEW, WITHIN: Visible from a public street, public sidewalk, public access easement, or other public way, or from a public park or other public
open space area.
QUARRY: Land used for excavating stone or slate.
QUICK VEHICLE SERVICING USES: See "quick vehicle servicing uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
REAL ESTATE SALES CENTER: A provisional temporary use consisting of an on site office within a model dwelling unit that is used as a real estate office
for the sale of dwelling units or lots within the same subdivision or development in which the sales center is located.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Reusable materials including, but not limited to, metal, glass, plastic, cardboard, and paper products which are intended for
reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. "Recyclable materials" does not include automobiles or other vehicles or
machinery and their components, structural steel materials and equipment, hazardous chemicals or materials such as used motor oil and discarded
automobile batteries, or biodegradable materials such as yard waste.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 554/715
RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY: A waste related use where recyclable materials are collected, stored, and processed for efficient shipment, or to
an end user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, sorting, shredding or cleaning, but not by
processes involving heat for melting, smelting or burning. A "recycling processing facility" does not include "salvage operations", as defined in this title.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any religious/private group assembly use primarily intended to provide a place of assembly for the practice of religion, which
has been granted a federal tax exemption as a section 501(c)(3) organization under the internal revenue code, as amended. For purposes of this title, not
all facilities, businesses, and institutions owned and operated by a "religious institution" are categorized as religious/private group assembly. (See
"religious/private group assembly uses", "educational facilities", "hospitals", "colleges and universities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
of this title.)
RELIGIOUS/PRIVATE GROUP ASSEMBLY USE: See "religious/private group assembly uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
title.
REMODEL/REPAIR: Any improvement in a building that is not a structural alteration.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A person who resides in and provides room and board in an elder family home. The "responsible party" may be, but is not
required to be, an elder.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: See "retail uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
REZONING: An amendment to the text of this title, including any amendment or change to any maps, graphic representations, or tables incorporated
herein; and/or an amendment to the zoning map, i.e., a change in the zoning designation of a particular parcel or parcels of land. Overlay rezonings are
considered a type of "rezoning".
ROOF: The top covering of a building constructed to shield the area beneath from the weather. The term "roof" includes the term "canopy".
ROOFLINE: The highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof or the midpoint between the eaves and ridge of a saddle, hip,
gable, gambrel or ogee roof.
ROOFTOP SERVICE AREA (RSA): An accessory use to an eating or drinking establishment, commercial recreational use, hospitality oriented retail use
or similar principal use that is designed as an outdoor seating or gathering space located on a rooftop or upper floor terrace of a building, and that is open
to the public for events, entertainment, meetings, and/or as a food and beverage service area. Rooftop patios or upper floor terraces intended for private
use by the residents or occupants of a building are not considered RSAs. If the RSA is accessory to an establishment that is licensed by the State to sell
alcoholic beverages, it is considered a type of "outdoor service area" as defined in section 4-1-1 of this Code, and is subject to the applicable regulations in
title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of this Code.
ROOMER: An individual who leases and resides within a rooming unit of a group living use. Staff, including live-in staff of an assisted group living use, are
not considered "roomers".
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling containing two (2) or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to four (4) or more roomers. A
rooming house is categorized as an independent group living use.
ROOMING HOUSE COOPERATIVE: A fraternal group living use that is organized as a nonprofit entity and that is an active member of North American
Students of Cooperation (NASCO) or one of its affiliates, whose primary mission is to provide a cooperative living environment for its members. Said use is
governed by a board that is democratically elected by members of the cooperative, with all members and board members having as their primary
residence a rooming unit governed by the cooperative.
ROOMING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms that form a single, private residential unit intended to be used primarily for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking, located within a group living use.
SALVAGE OPERATION: See "salvage operations", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
SCREENING: Structures and/or plantings that obscure an area from public view or from view of neighboring properties.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE: See "self-service storage uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
SERVICE STATION: See "quick vehicle servicing uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
SETBACK: The distance between a specified object, such as a building, and another point. "Setbacks" are usually measured from lot lines to a specified
object. Unless otherwise indicated, an unspecified setback refers to a building setback.
SETBACK AREA: A required area on a lot unoccupied by structures above grade, except for projections and specific accessory uses or structures allowed
in such area under the provisions of this title. A "setback area" extends from the grade upward.
SETBACK (AREA), FRONT: The area on a lot between the street-side lot line(s) and the front setback line.
SETBACK (AREA), REAR: On an interior lot, the rear setback is the area extending from one side lot line to another side lot line and between the rear
setback line and rear lot line. On a corner lot, the rear setback is the area extending from the side lot line to the front setback line between the rear lot line
and rear setback line. On a double frontage lot, there is no rear setback.
SETBACK (AREA), SIDE: Any setback area between a side lot line and a side setback line that is not a front setback area or a rear setback area.
SETBACK LINE: The line beyond which a specified use, object, building or structure shall not project, except as specified in this title.
SETBACK LINE, FRONT: A line drawn parallel to the street and as far back from the street as specified for the principal building, front setback.
SETBACK LINE, REAR: A line drawn parallel to the rear lot line and as far forward from the rear lot line as specified for the principal building, rear setback.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 555/715
SETBACK LINE, SIDE: A line drawn parallel to the side lot line and as far from the side lot line as specified for the principal building, side setback.
SHRUB: Any woody, perennial, bushy plant that branches into several stems or trunks at the base and is smaller than a tree. "Shrubs" are important
features in permanent landscape planting, being used for formal decorative groups, hedges, screens, and background plantings, to which they contribute
pattern, color, fragrance, or utility.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A principal or accessory use allowed in a particular zone only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
all the general and specific approval criteria for such a use as specified in this title and as approved by the board of adjustment. A "special exception" may
also mean an adjustment or waiver of certain zoning requirements allowed in certain circumstances specifically enumerated in this title, subject to
compliance with all the general and specific approval criteria for such an adjustment or waiver as specified in this title and as approved by the board of
adjustment.
STACKING SPACE: A permanent, durable surface designed to accommodate a motor vehicle waiting for entry to part of a development or use, such as a
loading or unloading area, drive-through, car wash, or other auto oriented use.
STOREFRONT: The ground level frontage of a building in which there is located a single business directly behind the frontage. A building may have more
than one storefront. The length of the storefront is measured from the outside edge of the exterior walls of the building, or if there are multiple storefronts
located in a single building, from the centerline of the wall that separates the business from another business, public area, or other area not occupied by
the subject business. Narrow storefronts are those that are less than or equal to forty feet (40') in width. Medium storefronts are those that are greater than
forty feet (40') and less than or equal to sixty feet (60') in width. Wide storefronts are those greater than sixty feet (60') in width.
STORY: The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above. The topmost "story" shall
be that habitable portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 556/715
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, the principal function of which is to provide for through traffic and which is designed to carry large volumes of traffic. Arterial
streets, as referenced in this title, are those streets shown on the Iowa City arterial street map as provided in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management
Standards", of this title.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, the principal function of which, is carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street terminating in a turnaround.
STREET FURNITURE: Manmade objects, other than buildings, which are part of the streetscape. Examples include, but are not limited to, benches, litter
containers, planting containers, sculptures, and bus shelters.
STREET, LOCAL: A street used primarily for access to abutting property and for moving local traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: A way that is intended to afford a means of access to abutting lots and for moving local traffic. A private street is not owned or
controlled by a government entity.
STREET, PUBLIC: A right of way, dedicated to and accepted for public use, which affords a means of access to abutting property and a means of
vehicular travel. A public street is owned or controlled by a government entity.
STREETSCAPE: The scene of a street or way composed of natural and manmade elements, including buildings, paving, plantings, street furniture and
miscellaneous structures.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the configuration of the exterior walls, foundation or roof of a building that results in an increase in the area,
height or volume of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or installed on the ground or which is attached to something located on the ground. "Structures" include buildings,
radio and TV towers, sheds and permanent signs. "Structures" exclude vehicles, sidewalks and paving.
SUBSTANDARD LOT: See definition of Nonconforming Lot.
SURFACE PASSENGER SERVICES: See "surface passenger services", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
TAILGATING: A home football game day informal social gathering that is noncommercial and may include eating and drinking beverages (alcoholic or
nonalcoholic) as part of the activities. Temporary parking on unimproved surfaces located on private property is allowed during tailgate events. No alcohol
is sold at a tailgate, nor is any admission fee charged, goods sold or given away, nor services provided for a fee.
TOWNHOUSE: Attached single-family dwellings containing not less than three (3) side by side, attached dwelling units (townhouse units), with each
dwelling unit being located on a separate lot.
TOWNHOUSE STYLE APARTMENTS/CONDOMINIUMS: A multi-family dwelling containing not less than three (3) side by side, attached dwelling units,
each with its own exterior entrance, and with all dwelling units located on the same lot.
TRACT: An abutting group of lots developed for a use or uses which share common facilities, e.g., off street parking, loading and driveways. A "tract" shall
be considered a single lot in the application of the requirements of this title.
TRANSIENT HOUSING: A community service shelter use owned and operated by a nonprofit organization, as defined by section 501(c)(3) of the internal
revenue code, as amended, providing a temporary residence, for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, for persons in need of emergency shelter and
temporarily unable to pay for housing. (See "community service - shelter", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
TREE: Perennial woody plant with a single main stem (the trunk or bole) from which branches and twigs extend to form a characteristic crown of foliage.
"Trees" are important features in permanent landscape planting, being used to define street edges, to lessen heat island effects through shading, and by
contributing pattern, color and utility. Small trees generally attain a height at maturity of up to fifty feet (50'). Large trees generally attain a height at maturity
greater than forty feet (40'). See the list of recommended "trees" for Iowa City, available through the city forester's office.
TRUCK TERMINAL FACILITY: A warehouse and freight movement use intended to provide storage of truck trailers, and for the loading and unloading and
temporary storage of goods and materials.
UPZONING: The opposite of downzoning. (See definition of Downzoning.)
USE: A purpose or activity for which land, structures, or a portion thereof, are designed, occupied and maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Building/Use/Structure.
USE, PERMITTED: See definition of Permitted Use.
USE, PRINCIPAL: See definition of Principal Use.
USE, PROVISIONAL: See definition of Provisional Use.
UTILITY SUBSTATION FACILITY: An assemblage of equipment used for the purpose of changing the strength, volume, or configuration of the utility flow
from a bulk quantity to smaller quantities to be used in the local distribution system. "Utility substation facilities" include, but are not limited to, electric
substations, gas regulator stations, telecommunications switching and relay facilities, and water and sewer pumps or lift stations. A "utility substation
facility" is classified as a "basic utility use" for purposes of this title.
VACATION: The process by which the city discontinues the use of a street, alley or easement as a public way.
VARIANCE: A means of granting a property owner relief from certain provisions of this title where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done. The authority to
grant "variances" is vested in the board of adjustment pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 557/715
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway.
VEHICLE REPAIR USE: See "vehicle repair uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
VEHICLE STORAGE: A vehicle or portion thereof which is parked in the same position for a period of forty eight (48) hours or more.
WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT USE: See "warehouse and freight movement uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
this title.
WASTE RELATED USE: See "waste related uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
WHOLESALE SALES USE: See "wholesale sales uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
YARD/COURTYARD, INTERIOR: An open area on a lot, which is bounded on at least three (3) sides by the exterior walls of one or more buildings and is
not open toward a street-side lot line. An interior courtyard is not a side yard.
YARD, FRONT: The area on a lot between the street-side lot line(s) and a line drawn parallel to and flush with the plane of any building facade of a
principal building that faces a street-side lot line. On lots with multiple buildings, there is no front yard adjacent to buildings that are behind or surrounded
by other buildings, such that there is no facade directly facing the street.
YARD, REAR: On an interior lot, the rear yard is the area extending from one side lot line to another side lot line and between the rear lot line and a line
drawn parallel to and flush with the plane of the rear building facade(s) of the principal building(s) on a lot. On a corner lot, the rear yard is the area
extending from the side lot line to the front yard line that is opposite the side lot line and between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel to and flush with
the plane of any building facade(s) of the principal building(s) that faces a rear lot line. On a double fronting lot there is no rear yard.
YARD, SIDE: The area on a lot bounded by any facade of the principal building that faces a side lot line and that same side lot line and excluding any area
that is front yard, rear yard, or interior courtyard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 558/715
ZONING CODE INTERPRETATION PANEL: A staff panel designated by the City Manager to interpret the provisions of this title in such a way as to carry
out its intent and purpose.
ZONING MAP: The map delineating the boundaries of zoning districts, which, along with the zoning text, comprises this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006; Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 08-4323, 12-16-2008; Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011; Ord. 11-4443, 9-6-
2011; Ord. 11-4446, 10-4-2011; Ord. 12-4477, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4495, 9-18-2012; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013; Ord. 14-4578, 4-1-2014; Ord. 14-4588, 6-3-
2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019)
ARTICLE B. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEFINITIONS
14-9B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions
contained in chapter 9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in chapter 3, article B of this title that are not defined in this section.
ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT: A term applied to features and components of a building that indicates that the characteristics of a feature, material
or component contributes to a building's architectural style, unique character or aesthetic qualities.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: The document that is evidence of approval by the historic preservation commission or designated historic review
body of a proposal to materially change a historic landmark or property located within a historic or conservation district. A "certificate of appropriateness"
must be obtained before a regulated permit may be issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 559/715
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: The document, issued in lieu of a certificate of appropriateness, that signifies that the owner is incapable of
earning a reasonable return or obtaining beneficial use from a property due to the regulations of a historic or conservation overlay zone.
CERTIFICATE OF NO MATERIAL EFFECT: The document, issued in lieu of a certificate of appropriateness, that signifies that the work contemplated in
the application will have no effect on any significant exterior features of a historic landmark or property located within a historic or conservation district. The
"certificate of no material effect" evidences approval by the historic preservation commission of a proposal to make the change or changes proposed in the
application.
CHANGE IN APPEARANCE: Any alteration, addition, demolition, new construction or other material change that modifies the visual aspect of the exterior
of a historic landmark or property located within a historic or conservation district.
COMMISSION: The Iowa City historic preservation commission, as established by ordinance in accord with this article.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A property within a conservation or historic district that is an integral part of the historic context and character of the said
district.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys a structure or building or any architecturally significant component of a structure or building.
EXTERIOR FEATURES: The architectural style, general design and arrangement of the exterior of a building, including the kind and texture of building
material and the type and style of all windows, doors, roof pitch, eaves, trim and brackets, porches, chimneys, signs and other appurtenant fixtures.
MATERIAL CHANGE: Any act that adds new materials or otherwise modifies an exterior feature of a property. Material changes include alterations to the
exterior features of a building or structure, demolition of a building or structure, demolition of a portion of a building or structure, and new construction on a
property, including construction of any new street access drives.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES (NRHP): A list of U.S. places of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering
and culture on a national, state, or local level and maintained by the U.S. department of the interior.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: Any property within a conservation or historic district that is not listed as a contributing property.
REGULATED PERMIT: A permit issued by the building official or other official of the city, according to the provisions of the building code, as amended; this
title, as amended; the house movers' ordinance, as amended; or the international fire code, as amended.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION: The basic principles, as listed in the federal code of regulations, for the
rehabilitation of a historic property and its site that provide for a property to be returned to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes
possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and
cultural value. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
ARTICLE C. SIGN DEFINITIONS
14-9C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in article A of this
chapter shall apply to all terms used in chapter 5, article B of this title that are not defined in this section.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which, through the use of moving structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other
automated method, results in movement, or the appearance of movement.
AWNING SIGN: A building sign placed on the surface of an awning.
BALLOON: An inflatable bag filled with gas or hot air and displayed in such a way as to attract attention to the premises on which it is located.
BANNER: A strip of flexible material, such as cloth, paper or plastic, securely fastened on all corners to a building or structure.
BILLBOARD: An off premises sign on which poster panels or bulletins are mounted. For purposes of this title, billboard signs are not considered
freestanding signs or monument signs.
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to a building or to an appurtenance of a building in any way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 560/715
CABINET SIGN: A sign constructed like a cabinet with a flat translucent face and structural and lighting components located within the cabinet.
CANOPY SIGN: A building sign attached to or in any way incorporated with the face, underside or roof of a canopy, marquee or any other similar building
projection. Extensions of a flat topmost roof past a building wall are not considered canopies for purposes of this section.
CHANGEABLE COPY/CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign, or part of a sign, such as a reader board, where the copy is easily changed manually or by
electronic means as specified in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
COMMON SIGN: A sign that serves two (2) or more uses.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
ELECTRONIC SIGN: A sign that displays a changing message through the use of an electronically controlled and illuminated medium. An "electronic sign"
is considered an animated sign.
ENTRANCEWAY SIGN: A nonbuilding sign incorporated into or mounted on the face of, or affixed above or below an entranceway arch that extends over
a walkway or driveway. Said sign type is intended to identify and direct traffic to a place, grounds, or parking lot.
FASCIA SIGN: A single faced building sign parallel to or at an angle of not more than forty five degrees (45°) from the wall of the building on which it is
mounted. Such signs do not extend more than one foot (1') out from vertical walls nor more than one foot (1') out at the sign's closest point from
nonvertical walls.
FLAG: A generally rectangular piece of fabric or vinyl displaying a name, insignia, logo or emblem.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces firmly and permanently anchored in or on the ground and not attached to any
building or wall.
FREESTANDING WIDE BASE SIGN: A freestanding sign in which the uprights or braces are clad in a permanent material such that the entire base has a
monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same contour.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 561/715
HAZARDOUS SIGN: A sign which, because of its construction or state of disrepair, may fall or cause possible injury to passersby, as determined by the
city; a sign which, because of its location, color, illumination or animation, interferes with, obstructs the view of or is confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device; or a sign which makes use of the words "stop", "go slow", "caution", "drive in", "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or
character in such a way as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign displaying the name, address, crest, insignia or trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant of a building or the
name of any building on the premises.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign in which a source of light is used to make the message readable. An "illuminated sign" need not be an electronic sign.
INTEGRAL SIGN: A sign carved into stone, concrete or other building material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction and
made a part of the building to which it is attached.
MASONRY WALL SIGN: An identification sign mounted on the face or inset into a fence or wall constructed of masonry materials. Such identification sign
or set of two (2) signs shall identify one entity or one group of entities, such as identifying an office research park or industrial park.
MONUMENT SIGN: A permanent sign, not attached to a building, which is mounted low to the ground and does not exceed five feet (5') in height.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign, other than a prohibited sign, that does not comply with the regulations of the zone in which it is located by reason of
these or any other regulations adopted after the installation of the sign.
OBSOLETE SIGN: A sign, or any portion of a support for that sign, that advertises an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a use conducted off the lot on which the sign is located.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign with the primary purpose of identifying or directing attention to the lot on which the sign is located.
PAINTED WALL SIGN: A sign painted directly on an exterior surface of a building other than the windows.
PARAPET SIGN: A fascia sign installed on a parapet or a parapet wall.
PERMITTED SIGN: A sign allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to compliance with the requirements of the sign regulations.
PLASTIC TRIM CAP LETTERS: A three-dimensional channel letter with a plastic or acrylic face affixed to the channel with a plastic trim piece.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign promoting candidates seeking public office, a political issue or containing other election information, such as "vote today".
"Political signs" shall not be considered off premises signs.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not firmly and permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground and not expressly permitted in chapter 5,
article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 562/715
POSTER: A temporary sign on a card or sheet of paper, plastic or other similar material.
PROHIBITED SIGN: A sign, other than a nonconforming sign, not permitted by this title.
PROJECTING SIGN: A building sign extending more than one foot (1') out from the wall of the building on which it is mounted. Subtypes include:
Banner: A fabric projecting sign located above the second floor windowsill and below the bottom of the roofline cornice or roofline if no cornice exists.
Storefront: A projecting sign installed on the ground floor street-facing facade of a building and located below the second floor windowsill.
Upper Level: A projecting sign made of solid durable materials located above the second floor windowsill and below the bottom of the roofline cornice
or roofline if no cornice exists.
PUBLIC ART: Any work of art exposed to public view from any street right of way which does not contain any advertising, commercial symbolism, such as
logos and trademarks, or any representation of a product.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, square, plaza, pedestrian mall or city owned right of way, or any other public property
owned or controlled by the city and dedicated for public use.
ROOF SIGN: A sign installed on or above a roof of a building and affixed to the roof.
SEASONAL DECORATION: A display, which does not constitute a sign, pertaining to recognized national, state or local holidays and observances.
SIGN: Any structure or medium, including its component parts, visible to the public from a street or public right of way and used or intended to be used to
direct attention to a business, product, service, subject, idea, premises or thing. "Signs" shall not include buildings or landscaping. The term "sign"
includes, but is not limited to, all reading matter, letters, numerals, pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks, inscriptions and patterns, whether
affixed to a building or separate from a building. This definition does not include public art, seasonal decorations and directional symbols on paved
surfaces.
SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign on which reading material, letters, numerals, pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks, inscription or patterns
are affixed.
SIGN WALL: The wall of a building on which a sign is mounted, including elements of the wall or any member or group of members which defines the
exterior boundaries of the side of the building on which the sign is mounted and which has a slope of forty five degrees (45°) or greater with the horizontal
plane.
SPINNER: A device shaped like a propeller and designed to rotate in the wind to attract attention to the premises on which it is located.
SWINGING SIGN: A sign that, because of its design, construction, suspension or attachment, is free to swing or move noticeably because of pressure
from the wind.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Temporary signs are constructed of temporary materials, such as paper, cardboard, wallboard or plywood, with or without a structural
frame, and are intended for a temporary period of display.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 563/715
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN: A projecting identification sign that shows the current time and temperature in an electronic, changeable copy format in
a manner similar to the following illustration:
WALL MURAL PAINTED SIGN: An identification sign painted directly on an alley wall or on a nonstreet-facing building wall that contains the main entrance
to a business and is incorporated into a larger painted mural.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign affixed to a window, embedded in a window, or hanging adjacent to a window and obviously intended to be viewed by the public
through the window. This type of sign is designed to be more permanent in nature and is intended to be displayed for an extended and indeterminate
period of time. This definition does not include merchandise or product displays, posters, temporary signs painted on windows or other temporary signs.
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
ARTICLE D. OUTDOOR LIGHTING DEFINITIONS
14-9D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in chapter
9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in chapter 5, article G of this title that are not defined in this section.
BULB: The part of a fixture or luminaire that produces light.
CUTOFF FIXTURE: A luminaire that has a light distribution where the candlepower does not exceed two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the lamp's rated
initial lumen output at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir, and does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the lamp's rated initial lumen output at a
vertical angle of eighty degrees (80°) above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire.
FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the bulb in a lighting system. It includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector (mirror)
or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.
FULL CUTOFF FIXTURE: A luminaire that has a light distribution where the candlepower does not exceed zero percent (0%) of the lamp's rated initial
lumen output at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir, and does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the lamp's rated initial lumen output at a vertical
angle of eighty degrees (80°) above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire.
FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE: A lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the bulb or a
diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by a photometrics
test or certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this shielding must be permanently affixed.
GLARE: The sensation produced by a bright light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted as to
cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility; blinding light. The magnitude of glare depends on such factors as the size,
position, brightness of the source, and on the brightness level to which the eyes are adapted.
IESNA: The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
INVENTORY OF LIGHTING: A list of bulbs indicating the bulb type, bulb wattage, and initial lumens for each bulb and the manufacturer through which the
rated lumens can be determined.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light projected onto a property from a fixture not located on that property. In some cases, such as with multi-family or mixed-use
development, trespass can result from on site fixtures projecting into residential portions of the development.
LUMEN (lm): Measure of brightness of the illumination exiting a bulb, as provided by the manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting unit, including the bulb, the fixture, pole or armature and other parts.
NADIR: The vertical line projecting downward to the ground from the center of the lens of a luminaire.
NONCUTOFF: A light fixture that does not cut off the upward transmission of light.
OUTDOOR LIGHT OUTPUT, TOTAL: The initial total amount of light, measured in lumens, from all bulbs used in outdoor light fixtures. Includes all lights
and luminous tubing used for display lighting, general illumination, architectural/accent lighting, and lights used for external illumination of signs, but does
not include lights used to illuminate internally illuminated signs or luminous tubing used in neon signs. For bulb types that vary in their output as they age
(such as high pressure sodium, fluorescent and metal halide), the initial lumen output, as defined by the manufacturer, in the value to be considered. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 564/715
ARTICLE E. SENSITIVE LANDS DEFINITIONS
14-9E-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in chapter
9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in chapter 5, article I of this title that are not defined in this section.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE, SIGNIFICANT: An archaeological site of prehistoric or historic significance that is considered by the state historic preservation
officer to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
BUFFER: An area of land that is located adjacent to a designated sensitive area and provides a transition area that protects slope stability, attenuates
surface water flows and preserves wildlife habitat and protected wetlands, stream corridors and woodlands.
BUFFER, NATURAL: A land area located adjacent to a protected sensitive area where development activity such as building, grading, or clearing are
prohibited unless otherwise exempt herein.
COMPENSATORY MITIGATION: Creating a new wetlands or enhancing or expanding an existing wetland in exchange for allowing development activities
to occur within an existing wetland.
CONSTRUCTION AREA: The portion of a parcel of land where development activity, including the temporary storage of heavy equipment, and other
improvements may take place and be located.
CONSTRUCTION AREA LIMITS: A line delineated on a proposed development plan or site plan that establishes the no build line around protected
sensitive areas, such as wetlands, streams, steep slopes, and woodlands, and their required buffers.
DEVELOPED AREA OF CITY: An area of the city where platted lots abut a regulated stream as of December 13, 1995, the effective date of the sensitive
areas ordinance.
DIAMETER, TREE TRUNK: The diameter of a tree trunk measured at four and one-half feet (4.5') aboveground; if on a slope, measured from the high
side of the slope. In the case of a tree with multiple trunks, the diameter shall be the average of the diameters of all the trunks.
DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of untreated surface water into a wetland from a developed or developing property through the use of an
underground pipe, culvert, drainage tile, ditch, swale, channel or other means.
FLOOD EVENT, 100-YEAR: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, or which on
the average will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 100-year floodplain is the
area of land susceptible to being inundated by a 100-year flood event.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters so that confinement of floodwaters to the floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood elevation. Where floodway data
has been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to define the floodway limits.
FULLY HYDRIC SOILS: Soils susceptible to water saturation, and designated as fully hydric soils by the USDA soil conservation service, or its successor,
as of December 1993.
GRADING: Any excavating or filling or a combination thereof, including compaction.
GROVE OF TREES: Ten (10) or more individual trees having a diameter of at least twelve inches (12"), and whose combined canopies cover at least fifty
percent (50%) of the area encompassed by the trees.
HISTORIC OBJECT: An artifact greater than one hundred (100) years old.
MITIGATION: The process of avoiding, minimizing, rectifying, reducing, or compensating for losses or potential losses to an environmental or sensitive
feature due to development activity. For example, a wetland mitigation plan is used to illustrate the methods that will be employed to avoid, minimize,
rectify, or reduce the impacts of development activity on a protected wetland. When impacts on a protected wetland are unavoidable, a wetland mitigation
plan will describe the methods of compensating for any losses.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: A line on the bank of a watercourse established by the regular presence and action of surface water and indicated by
physical characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank, shelving, changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation,
the presence of litter and debris, or by other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding area. The ordinary high water mark
defines the bed of a watercourse.
PRAIRIE REMNANT: Prairie areas that have remained relatively untouched on undeveloped, untilled portions of properties and contain primarily a mixture
of native warm season grasses interspersed with native flowering plants. Known extant prairie remnants are identified on the Iowa City sensitive areas
inventory map - phase I.
PREHISTORY: Relating to or existing in times antedating written history (prior to approximately 1700 AD) in Iowa City.
SENSITIVE AREAS CONSERVATION TRACT: A separate tract which protects sensitive areas and associated buffers within planned developments,
subdivisions and building site plans; held separately from buildable lots by an incorporated homeowners' association or a nonprofit conservation
organization, or dedicated to the city.
SENSITIVE AREAS DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan required to be submitted and approved in conjunction with a level I or level II sensitive areas review
that delineates construction area limits and designates protected sensitive areas and associated buffers within a planned development.
SENSITIVE AREAS INVENTORY MAP - PHASE I: The map of the Iowa City service area with designations of potential environmentally sensitive areas,
such as woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, hydric soils, prairie remnants and geological, historical and archaeological features.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 565/715
SENSITIVE AREAS, PROTECTED: Portions of a parcel of land containing environmentally sensitive features that are designated on an approved
sensitive areas site plan or a sensitive areas development plan and where no development activity is allowed.
SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW, LEVEL I: An administrative review of a sensitive areas development plan required prior to any development activity, which is
not otherwise exempted, on property that contains any regulated sensitive feature as specified in chapter 5, article I of this title, but for which a level II
sensitive areas review is not required.
SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW, LEVEL II: A planned development rezoning that is required prior to any development activity that is not otherwise exempted,
on any tract of land that contains regulated sensitive features as specified in chapter 5, article I of this title. Said rezoning requires the approval of a
sensitive areas development plan, which delineates construction area limits and designates protected sensitive areas and their associated buffers on said
tract.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, either naturally occurring or altered, with a vertical rise of at least ten feet (10'), and which is not otherwise approved
by the city, such as city approval of a grading plan, prior to December 13, 1995.
SLOPE, ALTERED PROTECTED: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper created by human activity such as cutting or filling, which activity has
occurred prior to December 13, 1995, and which slope is not otherwise approved by the city.
SLOPE, CRITICAL: A slope of twenty five percent (25%), but less than forty percent (40%).
SLOPE, PERCENT OF: The slope of a designated area determined by dividing the horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope and
converting the resulting figure into a percentage value.
SLOPE, PROTECTED: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper.
SLOPE, STEEP: A slope of eighteen percent (18%), but less than twenty five percent (25%).
SLOPES, REGULATED: Slopes defined herein as "steep" (18 to 24 percent), "critical" (25 to 39 percent), and "protected" (40+ percent).
STREAM CORRIDOR, REGULATED: Floodways designated on either the current federal emergency management agency flood boundary and floodway
maps for Iowa City and Johnson County or the Iowa City (1 inch = 100 feet scale) flood boundary and floodway maps and watercourses, such as a river,
stream or drainageway, which are shown in blue (the blue line) on the current U.S. geological survey quadrangle maps and have a bed and bank defined
by an "ordinary high water mark", as defined in this title and verified in the field by a qualified professional, and a definite direction of flow, either
continuously or intermittently. In cases where no floodway is delineated, the blue line will serve as the centerline within a thirty foot (30') wide stream
corridor.
TREE, FOREST: Any tree two inches (2") in diameter or greater, and included on the list of forest trees approved by the city.
WETLAND SPECIALIST: An individual certified as a "wetland specialist" by the society of wetland scientists, or its successor, or a person who can
demonstrate to the city that he or she has expertise in wetland areas which may include delineation, mitigation and evaluation.
WETLAND/WETLAND AREAS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. "Wetlands" generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. For the purposes hereof, "wetland" shall mean a jurisdictional wetland that is regulated by the U.S.
army corps of engineers, or its successor. Determination of jurisdictional wetlands shall be made either by the corps or its successor or by a wetland
specialist and accepted by the corps or its successor.
WOODED AREAS: Includes woodlands or "groves of trees", as defined in this article.
WOODLAND CLEARING: The destruction or removal of trees within regulated woodlands by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means, such that the
clearing results in a total opening in the woodland canopy of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more.
WOODLAND/WOODLAND AREA: Any tract of land with a contiguous wooded area not less than two (2) acres and containing not less than two hundred
(200) forest trees per acre. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 10-4398, 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE F. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS
14-9F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in
article A of this chapter shall apply to all terms used in chapter 5, article J of this title that are not defined in this section.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building that has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides (see definition of Lowest Floor).
CLASS 1 CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that must remain accessible during the 0.2% flood event because they are the base of operations for
emergency responders, are particularly difficult to evacuate during a flood event, or facilities that provide services essential to the life, health, and safety of
the community. Class 1 critical facilities include police and fire stations, emergency medical centers, communication centers, hospitals, jails, nursing
homes, and other residential uses for persons with limited mobility and/or dependency upon life sustaining medical equipment.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Structures that store public records; museums and libraries; schools; and other buildings that store rare and/or valuable items and
information that sustain the history and public records of a community. These structures are not expected to remain accessible or functioning during a
flood event, though in many instances their functions must resume as soon as possible after a flood event. Critical facilities also include public
infrastructure such as water distribution and wastewater treatment facilities, which are expected to remain functioning during a flood event although they
may be temporarily inaccessible or accessible only by watercraft during a flood event.
DEVELOPMENT: Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the placement of manufactured housing,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, streambank erosion control measures, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 566/715
Development is considered to commence with either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory built home on a
foundation.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURAL WORKS: Barriers or storage areas constructed to control floodwater, modify or redirect a channel.
FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation which floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific frequency flood. For instance,
the 1% flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters with a one percent (1%) likelihood of occurring in any given year. The 0.2% flood elevation is the
elevation of floodwaters with a two-tenths percent (0.2%) likelihood of occurring in any given year. In areas of shallow flooding, there is a one percent (1%)
or greater annual chance of flooding to an elevation specified on the flood insurance rate map.
FLOOD EVENT:
500-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or
which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500) years.
100-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
1% Annual Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (formerly
known as the 100-year flood event).
0.2% Annual Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(formerly known as the 500-year flood event).
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Land that is shaded and identified as "AE", "X" or "AH" on the flood insurance rate map.
FLOOD HAZARD ELEVATION: In AE zones, the elevation of the 0.2% flood as profiled in the flood insurance study for Johnson County, Iowa. In areas of
shallow flooding, the elevation of the flood as illustrated on the flood insurance rate map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: A study initiated, funded and published by the federal insurance administration for the purpose of evaluating, in detail, the
existence and severity of flood hazards, providing the city with the necessary information for adopting a floodplain management program and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 1% floodplain is the area
of land that, in any given year, has a one percent (1%) likelihood of flooding. The 0.2% floodplain is the area of land that, in any given year, has a twotenths
percent (0.2%) likelihood of flooding. In areas of shallow flooding, there is a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to a specified
elevation, but a clearly defined channel does not exist, and the path of flooding is unpredictable.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and for promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities,
which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters so that confinement of floodwaters to the floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood elevation.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood elevations.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building, including a basement, except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
14-5J-7E of this title; and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses, such as building access, parking or
storage; and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot (1')
above the flood hazard elevation; and
D. The floor is not below grade on all sides.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Any structure designed for residential use which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purposes of chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management
Standards", of this title, manufactured housing includes factory built homes, mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes
park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 567/715
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured housing lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION OF NEW BUILDINGS, MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS: Those structures or development that began construction after May
2, 1977.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SHALLOW FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Areas of special flood hazards having shallow water depths and/or unpredictable flow paths between one and three
feet (3'), and with water surface elevations determined.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or installed on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
manufactured housing, storage tanks and similar.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as established by an appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is greater.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure that satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as
established by an appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is greater, of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started
or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing
use.
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after May 2, 1977,
shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
(Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
ARTICLE G. SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (SWECS) DEFINITIONS
14-9G-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in subsection 14-4C-2Y, "Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems", of this title the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions
contained in article A of this chapter shall apply to all terms used in said subsection that are not defined below.
HUB HEIGHT: The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to utility distribution and transmission facilities or to any building or structure that is connected.
PRIVATE WIND GENERATOR: An electricity generating apparatus, whose primary purpose is to produce electricity for use on site, consisting of one wind
turbine per parcel, with a generating capacity no larger than ten (10) kilowatts.
SHADOW FLICKER: Changing light intensity caused by sunlight passing through the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SWECS): A wind energy conversion system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to ten (10)
kilowatts for residential uses and up to one hundred (100) kilowatts for nonresidential uses and which is accessory to a principal use on the same property.
A system is considered a SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for the use or uses on the subject property, except that when a property on
which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: A SWECS which is securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in
order to achieve desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the
principal building.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, FREESTANDING: A SWECS which is elevated by means of a monopole tower only and is not located
on another supporting structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other nonmonopole style
towers shall not meet this definition.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, HORIZONTAL AXIS: A small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through a
horizontal plane, as shown in the illustration below.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, VERTICAL AXIS: A small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 568/715
vertical plane, as shown in the illustration below.
TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT: The height above grade to a blade tip at its highest point of extension.
TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the foundation, base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy
wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into
mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
WIND TURBINE GENERATOR: The component of a wind energy conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical
energy. (Ord. 12-4497, 10-2-2012)
Title 15
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
15-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as the SUBDIVISION CODE. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is intended to encourage orderly community development and provide for the regulation and control of the extension of public improvements,
public services and utilities, the improvement of land and the design of subdivisions consistent with the approved comprehensive plan, as amended. (Ord.
08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
ALLEY: An open public way intended for use as a means of vehicular access to abutting property.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: The reconfiguration of the boundary line between abutting tracts, lots or parcels that results in conveyance of less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet of land.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 569/715
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city.
DEFICIENCY: An error on or omission from plat specifications and/or other supporting documents required as part of the subdivision approval process
including, but not limited to:
A. Missing or mislabeled easements;
B. Inaccurate measurements;
C. Missing or inaccurate stormwater calculations;
D. Mislabeled symbol markings in legends;
E. Inaccurate street cross sections;
F. Building lots that do not meet minimum zoning standards;
G. Or similar.
DIVISION: Dividing a tract, lot or parcel of land into two (2) portions by conveyance or for tax purposes. A boundary line adjustment or the conveyance of
an easement, other than a public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the purposes of this title.
LOT: A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter designation on an official plat.
OFF SITE COSTS: The costs incurred by a developer in constructing, improving, or otherwise extending public improvements from existing public
improvements through or along property not owned by said developer to the boundaries of property under development and which improvements are
capable of serving other properties.
OUTLOT: A portion of a platted subdivision or other parcel of land not intended by its owner for immediate development. An outlot may also be a tract or
parcel of land within the subdivision intended for shared use by the residents of the subdivision or by the public, e.g., public or private open spaces and/or
walkways.
PARCEL: A part of a tract of land.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: The principal structures, works, component parts and accessories of public infrastructure that become part of, are placed
upon, or affixed to real estate, including, but not limited to:
A. Sanitary sewers;
B. Storm sewers, tile lines or pipes and drainage swales;
C. Bridges and culverts;
D. Streets, trails, and sidewalks;
E. Water mains;
F. Stormwater management facilities;
G. Public open space improvements.
STREET: A public or private street as defined in this title.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, the principal function of which is to provide for through traffic and which is designed to carry large volumes of traffic.
"Arterial streets", as referenced in this title, are those streets shown on the Johnson County council of governments (JCCOG) arterial street plan, as
amended.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, the principal function of which, is carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street terminating in a turnaround.
STREET, LOCAL: A street used primarily for access to abutting property and for moving local traffic.
STREET, LOOP: A local street with two (2) intersections with another street in an alignment roughly in the shape of a "U".
STREET, PRIVATE: A privately owned way that is intended to afford a means of access to abutting property and for moving local traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 570/715
STREET, PUBLIC: A right of way dedicated to and accepted for public use, which affords a means of access to abutting property and a means of vehicular
travel. A public street is owned or controlled by a government entity.
SUBDIVISION: Division of a tract, lot or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The graphical representation of a subdivision of land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for the county where the land is located.
SUBDIVISION PLAT, MAJOR: A subdivision plat that involves the construction of one or more new streets, selective access drives or street extensions.
SUBDIVISION PLAT, MINOR: A subdivision plat that does not involve the construction or extension of streets. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROL:
A. Any plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the city under the code of Iowa, as amended, shall be certified as approved by the mayor and
city clerk and the certification affixed to the plat or replat only after approval by a resolution of the city council as set forth in this title.
B. Pursuant to section 354.9, code of Iowa, as amended, all subdivisions located within two (2) miles of the city's corporate boundaries shall be subject to
city review and approval, except for those areas exempt from such review pursuant to the Johnson County/Iowa City fringe area agreement.
C. Any division of a tract, lot or parcel shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the city manager or designee for compliance with the zoning and
subdivision codes. Prior to recording, a division shall be certified as approved by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-5: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS RESTRICTED:
A. Where a subdivision is required, the city shall not issue a building permit for construction on any lot, parcel or tract unless and until:
1. A final subdivision plat has been approved and recorded; and
2. The city approves subdivision erosion control measures in accordance with this title; and
3. The city accepts the public improvements as specified herein, with the exception of sidewalks and stormwater management facilities, said
exceptions being allowed after building construction has commenced as set forth herein.
B. If the subdivider desires a building permit prior to installing the improvements, the owner must deposit with the city finance department an escrow equal
to the cost of improvements plus ten percent (10%) thereof as specified in subsection 15-2-3C9 of this title.
C. No building permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any division unless such division has been approved as set forth in this title. (Ord.
08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-6: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY RESTRICTED:
A. No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas as described in title 17, chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code without
first obtaining a grading permit from the building official.
B. No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas as described in section 17-8-15, "Construction Site Erosion And Sediment
Control", of this code without first obtaining a construction site runoff (CSR) permit from the city.
C. Unless specifically exempted, an application for sensitive areas review must be submitted to and approved by the city prior to woodland clearing,
grading or any development activity on tracts of land or portions of tracts of land where any regulated sensitive features exist, as specified in title 14,
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this code. A sensitive areas review may occur concurrently with subdivision review as set forth
in this title.
D. No public improvements shall be installed without approval of construction plans by the city engineer or designee. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-7: CITY'S RIGHT TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS:
A. If the subdivider, its assigns or successors in interest, sell or convey lots in a subdivision without constructing or installing the public improvements, the
city shall have the right to install and construct such improvements. The costs of such improvements shall be a lien and charge against all the lots in
the subdivision under the provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended, except the cost of installing sidewalks which shall be a lien only against the lot or
lots abutting or in front of which sidewalks are installed. The cost of such improvements need not meet the requirements of notice, benefit or value as
provided by state law for assessing such improvements. The requirement to construct such improvements is and shall remain a lien from the date of
final plat approval until properly released by the city.
B. When required improvements have been installed to the satisfaction of the city, the city will, upon request, promptly issue to the subdivider, for recording
in the county recorder's office, a good and sufficient release to various lots in such subdivisions so that this section will not constitute a cloud upon the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 571/715
title of the lots in the subdivision. However, with regard to the subdivider's obligation to construct stormwater management facilities, the provisions of
subsections B1 and B2 of this section, apply.
1. With respect to a subdivider's obligation to construct stormwater management facilities, the city shall provide a partial release for the development
from any liens or clouds on title to the development by reason of such stormwater management obligations, provided the city engineer certifies that
the following conditions and/or events have occurred:
a. The facilities have been substantially completed;
b. An escrow amount has been established with the city in an amount approved by the city engineer, to which the city's lien should attach
immediately upon execution or recording of the partial release.
2. The city agrees to issue a total release for the facilities upon certification by the city engineer, in writing, that all of the following events and/or
conditions have been substantially completed:
a. Permanent ground cover is established and mowable;
b. Erosion and sedimentation are controlled in conformance with the approved plans and specifications;
c. The facilities are complete;
d. All land within the tributary area in the development, or a lesser amount of land as approved by the city engineer, has been developed. (Ord. 08-
4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-8: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Modifications Of Requirements:
1. Upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or on its own motion, the city council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of
chapter 3, "Design Standards And Required Improvements", of this title, provided one of the following qualifying circumstances are met:
a. If the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of chapter 3 of this title would result in extraordinary hardship
because of excessive costs due to nonself-inflicted conditions; and if the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements
of chapter 3 of this title would conflict with the objectives of these subdivision regulations; or
b. If a subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of chapter 3 of this title would result in subdivision design that would
compromise public health or safety, or could result in the substantial degradation of natural features even after application of appropriate
provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this code.
2. City council may act to vary, modify or waive a requirement only if it finds that the public safety and interest is protected and that such variance,
modification, or waiver will not hinder development of neighboring properties and that the variance, modification or waiver will not nullify the intent or
purposes of this title or of other titles of this code.
B. City Council Action: The city council must approve any variance, modification, or waiver of the general requirements set forth in this title and must note
this approval in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-9: SELLING BEFORE APPROVAL; PENALTIES:
A. Except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to agree to transfer
or sell or to transfer or sell any land which forms a part of a subdivision requiring city council approval under this title before city council grants final
subdivision approval. Each such agreement, transfer or sale shall be deemed a separate violation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to agree to or attempt to transfer or sell, or to transfer or sell any division which requires approval under
this title without first having obtained approval by the city. Each such attempt, agreement, transfer or sale shall be deemed a separate violation.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the city may institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any pending sale or
transfer or to prevent any further sale or transfer in violation of this title. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-10: PENALTIES GENERALLY:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code and shall be subject to the penalties specified in subsection 1-4-2D of this code, except for environmental infractions, which shall be subject to
the penalty for same as specified in subsection 1-4-2B2 of this code, as amended. Each day that a violation occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes
a separate offense, and civil and/or criminal penalties shall be computed accordingly. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
Chapter 2
PLATS AND PLATTING PROCEDURES
15-2-1: CONCEPT PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 572/715
A. Applicability: Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city or within two (2) miles thereof wishes to make a
subdivision of the same, the owner or the owner's representative shall submit a concept plan to the department of planning and community
development for review prior to submission of a preliminary plat.
B. Submission Requirements: The concept plan must include the following information:
1. The proposed layout of streets, lots, location of stormwater facilities, and open space.
2. General topography, based on existing topographic maps or other resources. The property is not required to be surveyed at the concept plan stage.
3. Approximate footprints of any existing aboveground manmade features located on the subject property, including buildings and other structures,
streets, sidewalks, etc.
4. Surrounding land uses and approximate location of building footprints on abutting properties.
5. Sensitive features, including streams, wooded areas, known wetlands or potential wetlands, known archeological sites, etc.
6. Other necessary information pertaining to the existing conditions of the property, as requested by the city.
C. Review Of Concept Plan:
1. Upon receipt of a concept plan the department of planning and community development shall review the concept plan in the context of the standards
of this title, other requirements of this code, and comprehensive plan policies, and will have the discretion to solicit comments from other city
departments.
2. The department of planning and community development will provide general written comments to the applicant within twenty (20) business days of
receipt of the concept plan based on the information submitted by the applicant. These comments are intended to provide guidance to the applicant
in preparing the preliminary plat and are not to be construed as comprehensive with regard to compliance with this code.
3. The preliminary plat shall not be filed until said written comments regarding the concept plan are provided to the applicant. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-
2008)
15-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Submission Required; Waiver:
1. After conferring with the department of planning and community development on the concept plan, the owner or owner's representative shall submit
to the city clerk twelve (12) copies of a preliminary plat for consideration. This submission must include accurate and complete information as set
forth in subsection B of this section.
2. The city manager or designee(s) will check the application for accuracy and completeness. A "complete application" shall mean the following:
a. A plat with accurate measurements and dimensions and easements identified; and
b. All information as specified in subsection B of this section, has been submitted.
3. The applicant will be notified of deficiencies and/or discrepancies or if an application is incomplete. If an application is found to be incomplete, the
city will inform the applicant and reserves the right to discontinue staff review until a complete and accurate application is filed. The start date for any
applicable time limitations for the application under review will be the date when a complete application is submitted.
4. The city may waive submission of the preliminary plat if the final plat includes all the requirements of the preliminary plat.
B. Plat Specifications And Accompanying Information:
1. The preliminary plat shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50'); however, if the resultant drawing would be larger than twenty four
inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), the plat shall be submitted at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'). In addition, a digital version of
the plat must be submitted as per city specifications. Each plat must include the following information:
a. Legal description, acreage and name of proposed subdivision.
b. Name(s) and address(es) of owner(s) and subdivider.
c. Names of the persons who prepared the plat, owner's attorney, representative or agent, if any, and date of preparation.
d. North point and graphic scale.
e. Contours at five foot (5') intervals or less.
f. Locations of existing lot lines, streets, public utilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainpipes, culverts, watercourses, bridges,
railroads, buildings, stormwater detention facilities and any other public improvements in the proposed subdivision.
g. The existing streets and city utilities on adjoining properties.
h. Layout of proposed blocks (if used) and lots, including the dimensions of each, and the lot and block number in numerical order. For lots where the
lot width is different from the lot frontage, the lot width must be indicated on the plat.
i. Location of any proposed outlot(s), identified with progressive letter designations, and the purpose of said outlot(s) clearly specified on the plat.
j. Proposed location of clustered mailboxes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 573/715
k. Location and widths, other dimensions and names of the proposed streets, alleys, roads, utility and other easements, parks and other open
spaces or reserved areas.
l. Grades of proposed streets and alleys.
m. A cross section of the proposed streets showing the roadway locations, the type of curb and gutter, the paving and sidewalks to be installed.
n. The proposed layout and size of water mains and sanitary sewers.
o. Proposal for drainage of the land, including proposed storm sewers, ditches, swales, bioswales, rain gardens, culverts, bridges, stormwater
management facilities and other structures.
p. A signature block for endorsement by the city clerk certifying the city council's approval of the plat.
2. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following information:
a. A location map with north point showing an outline of the area to be subdivided.
b. A grading plan, including proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil erosion, pursuant to the grading ordinance, title 17, chapter 8 of
this code.
c. If access to state routes is proposed, the plat must be submitted to the Iowa department of transportation for review. Comments from the Iowa
department of transportation must be submitted with the proposed plat.
d. For properties containing regulated sensitive features as specified in title 14, chapter 5, article I of this code, a sensitive areas development plan
must be submitted as set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I of this code.
C. Fees: A fee shall be paid at the time the preliminary plat or any combination of preliminary plats and/or plans is submitted to the city clerk, in the amount
established by resolution of the city council.
D. Review Of Plat; Approval Or Disapproval:
1. Upon filing the preliminary plats as required by this section, the city clerk shall forward eleven (11) copies of the preliminary plat to the department of
planning and community development.
2. The department of planning and community development shall distribute said copies to the appropriate city departments for review as designated by
the city manager.
3. Said designee(s) shall examine the plat and application to ensure compliance with the requirements of this title, other relevant provisions of this
code, comprehensive plan policies and with state law. Upon completion of examination, the department of planning and community development
shall forward a written report, including recommendations, to the planning and zoning commission. No plat shall be forwarded to the planning and
zoning commission with more than six (6) deficiencies.
4. Following staff evaluation, the owner or owner's representative must submit ten (10) revised copies of the plat for distribution to the planning and
zoning commission.
5. The commission shall study the revised preliminary plat, review the application of the owner and review the report from the department of planning
and community development.
6. The commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the plat within forty five (45) calendar days of the date the city receives a complete
application, or the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved by the commission. The owner or owner's representative may, however, agree to
an extension of time.
7. After receipt of the recommendation of the commission or after the time of any extension has passed, the city council shall, by resolution, approve or
disapprove the preliminary plat.
E. Effect Of Approval: Approval of a preliminary plat by the city council does not constitute approval of the subdivision but merely authorizes the subdivider
to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. In the event the city council approves the preliminary plat and the final plat submitted does not
materially and substantially deviate from the preliminary plat and if inspection by the city reveals that all plans and specifications for construction of
improvements, as required by the city, have been met, the final plat shall be approved by the city council. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be
effective for a period of twenty four (24) months unless, upon written request of the owner or subdivider, the city council, by resolution, grants an
extension of time. If the final plat is not filed with the city clerk within twenty four (24) months, all previous actions of the city council with respect to the
plat shall be deemed null and void. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-2-3: FINAL PLAT:
A. Submission Required:
1. After approval of a preliminary plat or if the requirement for preliminary plat has been waived by the city council, the owner or owner's representative
shall submit to the city clerk twelve (12) copies of a final plat for review. Said final plat must be submitted to the city clerk within twenty four (24)
months of approval of the preliminary plat, unless an extension has been approved by the city council. This submission must include accurate and
complete information as set forth in subsections B and C of this section.
2. The department of planning and community development will check the application for accuracy and completeness. A "complete application" shall
mean the following:
a. A final plat with accurate measurements and dimensions, and with easements correctly identified;
b. An accurate legal description;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 574/715
c. All required legal documents and accompanying instruments as specified in subsections B and C of this section;
d. Construction plans according to the specifications of the city engineer.
3. The applicant will be notified of deficiencies and/or discrepancies or if an application is incomplete. If an application is found to be incomplete, the
city will inform the applicant and reserves the right to discontinue staff review until a complete and accurate application is filed. The start date for any
applicable time limitations for the application under review will be the date when a complete application is submitted.
4. Upon approval by the city, a final plat may include only a portion of the development illustrated on the preliminary plat if that portion can function as a
separate development, including access and utilities, and if no essential public infrastructure extensions are delayed. Whether or not said
infrastructure is essential in nature shall be determined by the city.
5. The applicant shall note any variations from the approved preliminary plat. Requests for minor changes that do not constitute substantive changes
may be approved administratively without requiring an amendment to the preliminary plat. Substantive changes, including, but not limited to, the
layout and location of streets, lots, and outlots, changes to the proposed uses of the various lots and outlots, and other similar changes that would
result in a substantive change to the character of the subdivision may result in the necessity to file an amended preliminary plat.
B. Specifications: The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
1. The plat shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50'); provided, however, if the resultant drawing would be of larger dimension than
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), the plat shall be submitted at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
2. Twelve (12) prints of the final plat shall be submitted showing the following information:
a. Accurate property boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angular dimensions, which provide a land survey of the tract, closing with an
error of not more than one foot (1') in ten thousand feet (10,000').
b. Accurate references to known permanent monuments, giving the bearing and distance from some corner of a lot or block in the city to some
corner of the congressional division of which the city or the addition thereto is a part.
c. Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the property boundaries of the tract.
d. Accurate legal description of the property boundaries.
e. Street names and street right of way widths.
f. Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plat.
g. Street centerlines with accurate dimensions in feet and one-hundredths of feet with bearings or angular dimensions to street, alley and lot lines.
h. Lot numbers and lot line dimensions. For lots where the lot width is different from the lot frontage, the lot width must be indicated on the plat.
i. Block numbers, if used.
j. Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semipublic or community use.
k. Location, type, material and size of all markers.
l. Name and street address of the owner and subdivider.
m. Name and street address of owner's or subdivider's attorney, names of persons who prepared the plat and the date of preparation.
n. North point, scale and date.
o. Certification of the accuracy of the plat by a registered land surveyor of the state.
p. Location and width of easements for utilities.
q. Certification by the utility companies that utility easements are properly placed for the installation of utilities.
r. A signature block for endorsement by the city clerk certifying the city council's approval of the plat.
s. A note on the plat stating:
Notes on this plat are not intended to create any vested private interest in any stated use restriction or covenant or create any third party
beneficiaries to any noted use restriction or covenant.
3. The applicant shall submit a digital version of the final subdivision plat as part of the application process. Once the plat has been approved by the
city council, a final copy of the digital version of the plat shall be submitted to the city engineering department. Said final digital copy shall be
compatible with the Johnson County geographic information system and city of Iowa City mapping system. Specific formats, procedures, and
methods needed to meet this requirement will be updated as changes in technology occur.
C. Accompanying Documents: The final plat shall also be accompanied by the following documents:
1. Owner's Statement: An acknowledged statement from the owner and the owner's spouse, if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the plat is with
their free consent and is in accordance with the desires of the proprietor and the proprietor's spouse. This statement may include the dedication to
the public.
2. Dedications: Dedication of streets and other public property, including perpetual easements for the installation, operation and maintenance of city
utilities.
3. Mortgage Holder's Or Lien Holder's Statement: An acknowledged statement from mortgage holders or lien holders that the plat is prepared with their
free consent and in accordance with their desire, as well as a release of mortgage for any areas dedicated to the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 575/715
4. Encumbrance Certificates: If there is no consent from the mortgage holders or lien holders as specified in subsection C3 of this section, and if the
land being platted is encumbered in the manner set out in the code of Iowa, as amended, a certificate shall be filed with the county recorder showing
an encumbrance bond in an amount double the amount of the encumbrance and approved by the recorder and clerk of the district court. The bond
shall run to the county for the benefit of the purchasers of the land subdivided.
5. Attorney's Opinion: An opinion from an attorney at law showing that the fee title is in the owner and that the land platted is free from encumbrance or
if encumbered, listing the encumbrances and the bonds securing the encumbrances.
6. Construction Plans: A complete set of construction plans for all public improvements, meeting city specifications, must be submitted to the city
engineer's office.
7. County Treasurer's Certificate: A certified statement from the county treasurer that the land being platted is free from taxes.
8. County Auditor's Certificate: A certified statement from the county auditor approving of the name or title of the subdivision as succinct and unique to
Johnson County.
9. Subdivider's Agreement:
a. An agreement executed by the subdivider which agrees, as a covenant running with the land, that the city shall not issue a building permit for any
lot in the subdivision until the subdivider installs the public improvements, except sidewalks, according to plans and specifications approved by the
city engineer and until the city engineer approves subdivision erosion control measures. If the subdivider desires a building permit prior to installing
the improvements, the owner must deposit with the city finance department an escrow equal to the cost of improvements plus ten percent (10%)
thereof in cash or an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city in a form approved by the city attorney. At the city's discretion, this escrow may
be divided by the number of lots in the subdivision and collected on a per lot basis prior to the issuance of a building permit. Subdivider must
further agree, as a covenant running with the land, that subdivider will install sidewalks abutting each lot in the subdivision as set forth in this title,
that the obligation to install the sidewalks remains a lien on the lots abutting the sidewalk until released by the city and that, in the event subdivider
fails to install the sidewalks, the city may install the sidewalks and assess the total cost against the property without meeting the requirements of
notice, benefit or value required by state law for assessing improvements.
b. The subdivider's agreement shall state that the subdivider, including its grantees, assignees and successors in interest, agrees that public
services, including, but not limited to, street maintenance, snow and ice removal and solid waste collection, will not be extended to such
subdivision until the pavement is completed and accepted by the city council by resolution.
c. The subdivider's agreement shall state:
Plat notes and surveyor's notes on plats serve to provide notice of how a subdivision is expected to develop. Said notes are not intended to
create any vested private interest in any stated use restriction or covenant, or create any third party beneficiaries to any noted use restriction or
covenant. The City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, subject to any applicable public notice and approval process required by law, to alter or
amend any plat note, or to sell or vacate any right-of-way, street, alley, park, easement, open area or other land set apart and dedicated for public
use within the plat. The City further reserves the right, upon request of the owner or successor in interest, to vacate the plat and/or relocate any
easement, alter lot boundaries or allow said land to be replatted subject to any applicable public notice and approval process required by law.
d. The subdivider's agreement may include other conditions peculiar to the subdivision as allowed by law.
10. Iowa Department Of Transportation Permits: Approved IDOT permits must be submitted, if required.
D. Review; Approval Or Disapproval:
1. Upon the filing of the final plat as set forth above, the city clerk shall submit eleven (11) copies of the final plat and the application to the department
of planning and community development.
2. The department of planning and community development shall distribute said copies to the appropriate city departments for review as designated by
the city manager.
3. Said designee(s) shall examine the application, the plat, the construction plans, and the legal documents to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this code, state law, and the preliminary plat.
4. The costs of engineering examination of final plat and construction plans shall be paid by the subdivider and shall be the actual costs of the
engineering examination and review as incurred by the city.
5. Upon completion of said review staff shall recommend approval or disapproval of the plat within forty five (45) calendar days of the date the city
received a complete application, or the final plat shall be deemed to be approved by the staff. The owner or subdivider may, however, agree in
writing, to an extension of time.
6. Following staff evaluation, the owner or owner's representative shall submit a digital version, a transparent reproducible copy and eight (8) prints of
the revised final plat with the signatures of the surveyor and the respective utility companies to the city clerk.
7. After receipt of the recommendation of the staff or after the time of any extension, the city council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the final
plat. The city council must take action on the final plat within sixty (60) calendar days of submission of a complete application for a final plat to the
city clerk. If the city council does not approve or disapprove the plat within sixty (60) calendar days, the final plat shall be deemed approved. The
owner or subdivider may, however, agree in writing, to an extension of time. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
15-3-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 576/715
A. Design of the subdivision shall comply with the standards of this chapter, provide for the orderly growth and development of the city, demonstrate
consistency with the Iowa City comprehensive plan and any specific adopted district plans, and take into consideration the natural features of the site
and patterns of adjacent development.
B. The subdivider of property shall be responsible for constructing all public improvements associated with the proposed subdivision according to this
code, unless exempted from such requirements according to the provisions herein.
C. "Public improvements", as defined in this title, shall be constructed and installed according to the standards established by the city. Copies of said
standards are on file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-2: STREETS AND CIRCULATION:
A. Connectivity Of Streets, Sidewalks, And Trails: Subdivisions shall provide for continuation and extension of arterial, collector and local streets,
sidewalks and trails in accordance with the following standards:
1. Arterial streets must be located and extended in general accordance with the JCCOG arterial street plan and Iowa City comprehensive plan.
2. All streets, sidewalks, and trails should connect to other streets, sidewalks, and trails within the development, and to the property line to provide for
their extension to adjacent properties. Each subdivision must contribute to the larger interconnected street pattern of the city to ensure street
connectivity between neighborhoods, multiple travel routes resulting in the diffusion and distribution of traffic, efficient routes for public and
emergency services, and to provide direct and continuous vehicular and pedestrian travel routes to neighborhood destinations.
3. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to meet the needs of the
present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern and allow that pattern to continue through adjacent properties; and to
respect natural features and topography.
4. Use of cul-de-sacs and other roadways with a single point of access should be avoided. Cul-de-sacs will be considered where it can be clearly
demonstrated that environmental constraints, existing development, access limitations along arterial streets, or other unusual features prevent the
extension of the street to the property line or to interconnect with other streets within or abutting the subdivision.
B. Minimum Access Standards: Adequate street access to an area or neighborhood is required as part of subdivision approval or prior to the approval of
additional subdivision lots. The standards in this subsection are intended as minimum standards in areas where connectivity is limited by topography,
previous development patterns, or other unusual features and shall not be used as a means of circumventing the street connectivity standards set forth
in subsection A of this section. The following guidelines will be used by the city in determining whether additional street access is a prerequisite to
additional lots or developable parcels being approved by the city.
1. Additional access may be required if a proposed development will result in any portion of a street that provides a single means of access to an area
being overburdened with traffic. "Overburdened" shall be defined as a projected volume which exceeds the midpoint design volume as follows:
a. Local street: Five hundred (500) vehicles per day.
b. Collector street: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) vehicles per day.
2. Projected traffic volumes shall be determined by using the most recent average daily traffic count when available, and adding it to projected traffic
generation as determined by the city. In the absence of a recent traffic count, projected traffic volumes shall be calculated by using projected traffic
generation for both existing and proposed development.
3. Additional means of access may also be required if any of the following conditions exist or will exist if additional lots or developable parcels are
approved:
a. There are physical features that may increase the probability of blockages along the single means of access to the development. These physical
features include, but are not limited to: slopes eight percent (8%) or greater; floodplains as designated by the federal emergency management
agency; a bridged or culverted roadway; trees adjacent to the roadway with trunk diameter greater than four inches (4"); a grade separated
highway; or a railroad.
b. The existing access is insufficient to provide efficient, safe, and/or cost effective routes for the provision of public and emergency services for the
proposed development.
c. The street, which provides a single means of access to the area, is a local or collector street along which there are existing or proposed facilities
that may increase the probability of pedestrian-motor vehicle conflicts. These facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, daycare centers and
parks.
d. There are land uses located along the subject street that serve special populations, which may increase the volume of emergency vehicle trips.
These uses include, but are not limited to, adult daycares, facilities serving elderly persons, or persons with disabilities.
4. For a situation requiring additional means of access based on the above criteria, a single means of access may be permitted as a temporary
condition. A temporary condition is one in which there is secured, written assurance from the private subdivider that the road, which will provide the
necessary access, will be constructed within three (3) years of development or, alternatively, said access is scheduled for construction no later than
the third year of the then current capital improvements program of the city.
C. Street Types: Table 15-1, "Standards For Street Rights Of Way", of this section provides a summary of various street types. The information in this table
is intended to provide guidance for the design of the street network within a subdivision. When designing a subdivision, street types should be chosen
based on the intended function of the street and anticipated level of traffic. The city will review the proposed streets and determine the appropriate
street type based on the factors set forth in this section.
D. Dedication Of Right Of Way: Land shall be dedicated to the city for all public street rights of way within the development and for any public street right of
way that is needed for streets that abut or will abut the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 577/715
TABLE 15-1: STANDARDS FOR STREET RIGHTS OF WAY
Minimum Right Of Way
Width Pavement Width
Number
Travel
Lanes
Parking
Maximum Grade
Sidewalk
Width
Residential alley/rear
lane
20 feet 16 feet 2 No 12 percent n/a
Commercial
alley/rear lane
20 feet minimum/varies 20 feet/varies 2 No 10 percent n/a
Loop street1 100 feet minimum/varies 22 feet 1
shared
Yes, on
1 side
10 percent 4 feet
residential
side of
street only
Low volume cul-desac2
50 feet 22 feet 1
shared
Yes, on
1 side
10 percent 4 feet both
sides
Cul-de-sac 60 feet 26 or 28 feet 2 Yes3 10 percent 5 feet both
sides
Local residential
street
60 feet 26 or 28 feet 2 Yes3 12 percent 5 feet both
sides
Local
commercial/industrial
street
60 feet 28 feet 2 Yes 8 percent 5 feet both
sides
Collector street (all
land uses)
66 feet 31 feet 2 Yes 10 percent for
residential; 8 percent
for commercial or
industrial
5 feet both
sides
Collector street with
bike lanes
66 feet 34 feet 2 No 8 percent 5 feet both
sides
2 lane arterial street 100 feet minimum 31 feet 2 No 8 percent 8 feet one
side/5 feet
one side
Arterial street with
bike lanes
100 feet minimum 34 feet 2 No 8 percent 8 feet one
side/5 feet
one side
4 lane arterial street 100 feet minimum 54 feet/varies depending if
median is included
4 No 8 percent 8 feet one
side/5 feet
one side
Arterial street with
parking
100 feet minimum; more may
be required depending on
parking configuration
Varies, based on number of
lanes and whether parking is
parallel or angled
2 Yes 8 percent 8 feet one
side/5 feet
one side
3 lane arterial street 100 feet minimum 46 feet/varies depending if
median is included
3 No 8 percent 8 feet one
side/5 feet
one side
Notes:
1.Loop streets provide access for 12 or fewer dwellings.
2.Low volume cul-de-sacs provide access to 10 or fewer single-family dwellings.
3.For residential streets with less than 28 feet of pavement width, parking is restricted to one side.
E. Measurements And Construction Standards:
1. All right of way improvements must be designed and constructed according to the design and construction standards established by the city. Said
standards are on file in the office of the city engineer.
2. All street widths shall be measured back of curb to back of curb.
3. The minimum outside radius of the pavement of cul-de-sac bulbs and loop streets is thirty nine feet (39'). A center median is required at the center of
the cul-de-sac bulb with a minimum radius of eleven feet (11'). For loop streets a median is also required with a minimum width of thirty feet (30'). In
residential areas, center medians for cul-de-sacs and loop streets are required to be landscaped to at least the S1 standard as described in title 14,
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this code. The subdivider's agreement shall designate and set forth procedures for
property owners or a homeowners' association to maintain the landscaped area within the center median of loop streets and cul-de-sacs. Said
instrument shall provide that if said services are not provided as required therein, the city shall have the right to perform said services, and the cost
thereof shall be a lien and charge against all of the subject lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 578/715
F. Street Intersections:
1. A maximum of four (4) legs are allowed at any one intersection.
2. The distance between street intersections must be at least one hundred twenty five feet (125') centerline to centerline.
3. Intersections of street centerlines shall be between eighty degrees (80°) and one hundred degrees (100°).
4. Corner lots abutting on an arterial or collector street shall have a minimum radius of fifteen feet (15') at the intersection.
5. Dead end streets and alleys are not permitted except at subdivision boundaries abutting undeveloped areas. In such cases a temporary fire
apparatus accommodating turnaround may be required and, if required, must be constructed to city specifications.
G. Traffic Calming Features:
1. The street network, block length, and layout of lots should be designed in a manner that discourages speeding traffic and unsafe driving behavior.
2. In order to minimize the potential for speeding traffic and create a safer environment for pedestrians and bicycles, the city may also, in cases where
it is warranted, require traffic calming features to be designed into the subdivision. These features may include, but are not limited to, discontinuous
streets, curb extensions, raised crosswalks, medians, or traffic circles.
H. Street Names: The city reserves the right to deny the use of street names that are not in the public interest. Street names must be consistent with the
following standards, unless an exception is approved by the city:
1. In order to ensure safe and efficient provision of public and emergency services, each proposed street name shall be distinct from other street
names within the larger metropolitan area;
2. Street names that are overly lengthy, difficult to pronounce, or that may be considered inappropriate or unappealing shall be avoided;
3. For new streets, the following rules apply:
a. The term "street", should be used for a nondead end roadway aligned in a north-south direction;
b. The term "avenue" should be used for a nondead end roadway aligned in an east-west direction;
c. The term "boulevard", "road", or "drive" may be used for a roadway that is aligned neither in a north-south nor east-west direction, but which
changes direction or meanders;
d. The terms "lane", "court", "circle", "place" should be used for cul-de-sacs or low volume loop streets.
4. Cul-de-sacs or low volume loop streets may use the same name as the roadway with which it intersects. For example, a cul-de-sac that intersects
with Rose Avenue may be named "Rose Court". However, if more than one cul-de-sac or loop street intersects with Rose Avenue, an additional
"Rose" name may not be used.
5. Similar names may not be used for streets that are in different locations within the city. For example, the name "Rose Drive" may not be used in one
neighborhood if there is already a "Rose Avenue" in a different neighborhood.
I. Private Streets:
1. Private streets in single-family residential areas are not allowed.
2. Requests for private streets in multi-family, commercial, and industrial areas will be considered, provided that connectivity to adjacent properties is
not needed and the responsibilities for maintenance, snow removal, garbage service, and street sweeping is clearly established according to the
provisions of subsection I3 of this section.
3. If private streets are approved, the subdivider must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed for maintaining
private streets and providing garbage service, snow removal, street sweeping, and for financing these services. Such costs shall be shared by all
owners of property located within the subdivision, or designated portion thereof, through the use of an owners' association or other entity satisfactory
to the city. Said instrument shall provide that if said services are not provided as required therein, the city shall have the right to perform said
services, and the cost thereof shall be a lien and charge against all of the owners of lots so designated in the subdivision.
J. Cost Sharing For Pavement Overwidth: In the event arterial or collector streets are required in a subdivision, the city shall pay for the excess pavement
required over that required for a twenty eight foot (28') wide local street. The city engineer shall calculate the excess cost. Such cost sharing shall be
according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment for pavement overwidth by the city shall be pursuant to state law.
K. Cost Sharing For Street Upgrades:
1. At the discretion of the city, subdivisions may be approved that access existing public streets that do not meet city standards, provided the subdivider
contributes toward the future reconstruction cost of bringing the segment of the subject street that abuts the subject property to city standards. When
determining whether such an approval will be granted, the city will evaluate the street based on factors such as roadway surface, sight distance,
anticipated traffic levels, and pedestrian/bicycle facilities. If the city permits a development to access a street that does not meet city standards, the
subdivider shall contribute to the cost as follows:
a. Local Streets: Local streets are streets that serve as access to property and carry insignificant amounts of through traffic. Therefore, the subdivider
shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of upgrading a local street to city standards for that segment of the street that abuts the subject
property. If the subdivider controls land on only one side of a local street, they will be required to contribute fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
upgrading the subject street segment to city standards. The city will expect the subdivider of property on the other side of the street to contribute
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 579/715
the other fifty percent (50%) of the costs at such time as that land is subdivided/developed. Costs to reconstruct the street will be determined by
the city engineer.
b. Collector Streets: Collector streets are streets that collect traffic from a subdivision or neighborhood, and direct it to and from the arterial street.
The function of a collector street is fifty percent (50%) access to property, and fifty percent (50%) through traffic. Therefore, the subdivider will be
required to contribute fifty percent (50%) of the cost to upgrade a collector street to city standards for that segment of the street that abuts the
subject property, with the city contributing the other fifty percent (50%). If a subdivider controls land on only one side of the collector street, they will
be required to contribute twenty five percent (25%) of the total cost for the subject street segment. The city will expect the subdivider on the other
side of the collector street to contribute the other twenty five percent (25%) of the cost at such time as that land is subdivided/developed. Costs to
reconstruct the street to city standards will be determined by the city engineer.
c. Arterial Streets: Arterial streets have the primary function of carrying traffic through and between neighborhoods. The function of an arterial street
is twenty five percent (25%) access to property, and seventy five percent (75%) through traffic. Therefore, the subdivider will be required to
contribute twenty five percent (25%) of the cost to upgrade an arterial street to city standards for that segment of the street that abuts the subject
property, with the city contributing the other seventy five percent (75%). If a subdivider controls land on only one side of the arterial street, they will
be required to contribute 12.5 percent of the total cost of the subject street segment. The city will expect the subdivider on the other side of the
arterial street to contribute the other 12.5 percent of the cost at such time as that land is subdivided/developed. Costs to reconstruct the street to
city standards will be determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-3: SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, AND PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS:
Public sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed in the public right of way according to the following standards:
A. Sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed according to city standards. Said standards are on file in the office of the city
engineer.
B. Five foot (5') wide concrete sidewalks must be constructed along both sides of all local and collector streets, except for connections to existing
sidewalks as provided in subsection D of this section. For low volume and loop streets, as described in table 15-1 of section 15-3-2 of this chapter, the
required sidewalk width may be reduced to four feet (4').
C. Along arterial streets, a five foot (5') sidewalk is required on one side of the street and an eight foot (8') sidewalk on the other side, except as allowed in
subsection D of this section. The city will determine on which side of the street the eight foot (8') sidewalk will be placed. When an eight foot (8')
sidewalk is required, the city, at its discretion, will either pay for the excess pavement required for the developer to install an eight foot (8') sidewalk
rather than a five foot (5') sidewalk, or collect the estimated cost of the five foot (5') sidewalk from the developer and apply said cost to construction of
an eight foot (8') sidewalk by the city. Any payment of excess pavement costs by the city shall be pursuant to state law.
D. In cases where the proposed sidewalk provides a connection between existing sidewalks that are less than the required width, the proposed sidewalk
may be constructed to match the width of the adjacent sidewalks. However, this modification is not allowed in cases where one end of the proposed
sidewalk will provide a connection to future sidewalks for new development. In such a case, the sidewalk should be tapered to provide a transition
between differing sidewalk widths. The city will determine where along the street the transition should occur.
E. All sidewalks and trails must connect to other sidewalks and trails within the development and to the property line to provide for their extension to
adjacent properties.
F. The subdivider will be responsible for the construction of a public sidewalk along the frontage of private open space, public open space required to be
dedicated to the city according to title 14, chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this code and along the frontage of other
outlots as necessary for a continuous sidewalk system to be created.
G. In residential subdivisions, blocks longer than six hundred feet (600') must have midblock pedestrian connections between adjacent streets, unless said
connection is deemed to be unnecessary and is waived by the city. At the time of subdivision, these connections must be platted as minimum fifteen
foot (15') wide easements; if the connecting sidewalk is greater than five feet (5') in width, the easement must be at least twenty feet (20') wide. Within
this easement a sidewalk must be constructed to city standards that is equal in width to the sidewalks to which it provides a connection. If the midblock
sidewalk connects to sidewalks of two (2) different widths, the midblock sidewalk must be equal in width to the wider sidewalk. The area and sidewalk
within the pedestrian easement must be maintained by adjacent property owners according to the subdivider's agreement in a manner similar to
maintenance requirements for public sidewalks.
H. Where a trail extension, as identified in the comprehensive plan or an adopted trails plan, is located on the subject property, the city may require an
easement or alternatively, may require dedication of an outlot for the trail. Construction of the trail or portion of a trail may also be required in instances
where said trail or portion of a trail primarily serves the needs of the proposed subdivision/development. In this situation, the trail will be treated as a
public improvement. Dedication of land for a trail extension shall count toward the open space requirement for the development, provided said land is
consistent with the standards for open space as set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article K of this code and provided said land dedication is acceptable to
the city. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-4: LAYOUT OF BLOCKS AND LOTS:
A. Blocks:
1. Blocks should be limited in size and be laid out in a pattern that ensures the connectivity of streets, provides for efficient provision of public and
safety services, and establishes efficient and logical routes between residences and nonresidential destinations and public gathering places.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 580/715
2. To provide multiple travel routes within and between neighborhoods, block faces along local and collector streets should range between three
hundred (300) and six hundred feet (600') in length and for residential subdivisions have a width sufficient to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots.
Longer block faces may be allowed in cases of large lot commercial, industrial, or rural residential development, or where topography, water features,
or existing development prevents shorter block lengths, although midblock pedestrian connections may be required (see section 15-3-3 of this
chapter). Block faces are measured from centerline to centerline.
3. Block faces along arterial streets should be at least six hundred feet (600') in length. Intersecting collector streets should be spaced in a manner that
provides adequate connectivity between neighborhoods, but also maintains the capacity of the street for the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
Longer block faces may be required along high capacity or higher speed arterial streets where the interests in moving traffic outweigh the
connectivity between areas of development. The city may approve shorter block faces in high density commercial areas or other areas with high
pedestrian counts.
4. Cul-de-sacs may not exceed nine hundred feet (900') in length. The length of a cul-de-sac is measured from the centerline of the street from which it
commences to the center of the bulb.
B. Lots:
1. Lots must be platted in a manner that will allow development that meets all requirements of title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. Lots must be of
sufficient size to accommodate an adequate buildable area and area for required setbacks, off street parking, and service facilities required by the
type of use and development anticipated.
2. Lots with multiple frontages must be platted large enough to accommodate front setback requirements along street side lot lines.
3. If a property with frontage along an arterial street is proposed to be subdivided, developed or redeveloped for any multi-family, group living,
commercial, institutional or industrial use, a cross access easement must be provided by the property owner to all adjoining properties that front on
the same arterial street that are or may be developed as multi-family, group living, commercial, institutional use, or industrial uses according to the
cross access standards set forth in section 14-5C-7 of this code.
4. In residential areas, double and triple frontage lots shall be avoided. Where such lots are necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography, land features, or access restrictions, the following standards apply:
a. Lots with multiple frontages shall be one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the required lot area for the zone in which the lot is located. The
additional required lot area shall be used to increase the depth of the lot between street frontages. Corner lots with only two (2) frontages are
exempt from this requirement, however, said corner lots should be platted with enough land area to accommodate the required front setback area
along both frontages.
b. Double and triple frontage lots where dwellings will have side or rear building facades oriented toward an arterial street shall provide a minimum
twenty foot (20') wide landscaped buffer area along the arterial street frontage. The buffer area shall be planted with a mixture of coniferous and
deciduous vegetation approved by the city forester. The vegetation shall be required along with other public improvements for the property. Lots
where dwellings will have front building facades oriented toward an arterial street are exempt from this requirement. If a buffer area was required
during subdivision, no solid fences will be allowed within this buffer area. This restriction must be noted in the subdivider's agreement and on the
plat. On corner lots, the landscaping within the buffer must be planted and maintained to comply with intersection visibility standards.
5. Side lot lines shall approximate right angles to straight street lines or be approximately radial to curved street lines, except where a variation will
provide a better street and lot layout. For purposes of this subsection, "approximate right angles" means angles between eighty degrees (80°) and
one hundred degrees (100°).
6. Residential lots shall not be designed with irregular shapes such as a flag or panhandle shape where the structure on the lot may be hidden from the
street behind another structure.
7. In residential subdivisions, lots must be arranged to allow easy access to public open space. The subdivision layout should be designed so that the
location and access to public open space is readily apparent to the public. Subdivision layouts where public open space is surrounded by private lots
that back up to the public open space are discouraged. Techniques, such as single loaded streets along park edges or along segments of park edges
and well marked trail easements are to be utilized to satisfy this requirement.
C. Provisions To Minimize The Effect Of Highway Noise: Subdivisions adjacent to or within three hundred feet (300') of the Interstate 80 and/or the
Highway 218 rights of way shall comply with the following provisions, intended to reduce the effect of highway noise on residential areas:
1. Any portion of a residential lot that is within three hundred feet (300') of the Interstate 80 or Highway 218 right of way shall be identified as a noise
buffer, and no residential structure will be permitted within this three hundred foot (300') buffer area. The buffer area shall be planted with a mixture of
coniferous and deciduous vegetation approved by the city forester. The vegetation shall be required along with other public improvements for the
property. Existing trees and vegetation may be used to comply with this requirement as approved by the city forester. Accessory structures and yards
are permitted within the three hundred foot (300') buffer area provided the required vegetative buffer is maintained.
2. The three hundred foot (300') buffer for residential structures may be reduced with approval by the city if the subdivider constructs an earthen berm,
decorative wall, or other similar structure and demonstrates that the highway noise just outside the proposed residential structures will be no more
than sixty (60) dB.
3. The three hundred foot (300') buffer for residential structures may also be reduced with approval by the city if the subdivider demonstrates that
existing topography results in highway noise being no more than sixty (60) dB just outside the proposed residential structures. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-
2008)
15-3-5: NEIGHBORHOOD OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Intent And Purpose: The neighborhood open space requirements are intended to ensure provision of adequate usable neighborhood open space, parks
and recreation facilities in a manner that is consistent with the neighborhood open space plan, as amended, by using a fair and reasonably calculable
method to equitably apportion the costs of acquiring and/or developing land for those purposes. Active, usable neighborhood open space includes
pedestrian/bicycle trails preferably located within natural greenway systems, and also includes neighborhood parks that serve nearby residents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 581/715
Portions of community parks may be adapted for neighborhood use, but this chapter is not intended to fund the acquisition of community parks or large
playing fields for organized sports.
B. Dedication Of Land Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Of Land Required: As a condition of approval for residential subdivisions and commercial subdivisions
containing residential uses, the applicant shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu of land, or a combination thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and
open space purposes, as determined by the city and in accordance with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space
Requirements", of this code. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-6: ENERGY AND COMMUNICATIONS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS:
A. Extension of energy distribution lines and communication distribution systems necessary to furnish permanent electric service and communication
system service to new development within a new subdivision shall be made underground from existing systems according to the provisions set forth in
title 16, chapter 2, "Public Utilities And Use Of City Right Of Way", of this code.
B. The applicant shall provide all easements necessary for access to streetlights, to allow energy and communication system services for the subdivision,
and the easements shall be included as part of the plat of the subdivision.
C. In new subdivisions, the electric public utility company shall provide underground wiring to the pole sites for appropriate streetlights as determined by
the city manager or designee. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-7: SANITARY SEWERS:
A. The subdivider shall provide a complete sanitary sewer system, including stubs, for each lot which shall connect with a sanitary sewer outlet approved
by the city engineer as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, "City Utilities", of this code. The sanitary sewer in each defined drainage area shall extend to the
subdivision boundaries and beyond, as necessary to provide for the extension of the sanitary sewer to adjacent property, as determined by the city.
B. Project specific tap-on fees may apply as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, article B, "Project Specific Tap-On Fees", of this code.
C. If the city requires a sanitary sewer to be greater in size than that needed to service the subdivision itself, the city may share in the expense thereof on
a pro rata basis. Such cost sharing shall be according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment of excess costs by the city shall be
pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-8: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
The developer shall provide the subdivision with adequate drains, ditches, culverts, complete bridges, storm sewers, intakes and manholes to provide for
the collection, management, and removal of all surface waters as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, article G, "Stormwater Collection, Discharge And Runoff",
of this code. These improvements shall extend to the boundaries of the subdivision and beyond, as necessary to provide for extension by adjoining
properties, as determined by the city. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-9: WATER SYSTEMS:
A. The developer shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main supply system as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, "City Utilities", of this code,
including hydrants, valves and all other appurtenances, which shall be extended into and through the subdivision to the boundary lines and beyond as
may be necessary to provide for extension by adjoining properties, as determined by the city. The system shall provide for a water connection for lots
and shall be connected to the city water system.
B. If city requires a water main to be greater in size than that needed to service the subdivision itself, the city may share in the expense thereof on a pro
rata basis. Such cost sharing shall be according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment of excess costs by the city shall be
pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-10: CLUSTERED MAILBOXES:
A. All new residential or commercial developments platted after the effective date of these regulations that receive curbside delivery of mail shall have
clustered mailboxes, unless an exception is approved by the United States postal service. The location of mailbox clusters shall be noted on the plat.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
B. Mailbox clusters serving residential developments shall be conveniently located for residents. Unless otherwise approved by the city, mailbox clusters
shall be located in an outlot maintained by the homeowners' association. Mailboxes should be located in a manner that provides safe access for
residents, e.g., does not require residents to cross heavily trafficked streets. Driveways shall be allowed no closer than twelve feet (12') from the
location of a clustered mailbox as measured along the curb line of the fronting street. Mailboxes must be located in a manner that will not violate the
city's intersection visibility standards. Locations and design must be approved by the city and the United States postal service. Depending on the size
and location of the clustered mailbox, the city may require a vehicular pull over lane built to city specifications.
C. Mailbox clusters shall be located on a concrete pad built to city specifications. To provide for pedestrian access, a five foot (5') wide concrete sidewalk
shall be provided from the mailbox cluster to the adjacent public street and sidewalk. An accessible route shall be provided according to ADA standards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 582/715
for accessible design. In situations where there are a large number of mailboxes, the cluster site should be designed and located as an attractive and
integrated component of the neighborhood (e.g., covering or shade structure, landscaping, setbacks, parking or vehicle access) in order to ensure that
it does not detract from properties immediately adjacent to it. The cost of installation, including, but not limited to, box units and concrete pad and
sidewalk access shall be borne by the developer, and subsequent maintenance shall be the responsibility of the homeowners' association and/or the
United States postal service. (Ord. 14-4572, 3-4-2014)
15-3-11: MARKERS:
An iron rod meeting specifications of state code shall be placed as follows:
A. At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision.
B. At block and lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot boundaries.
C. At the beginning and ending points of curves and at lot lines intersecting the curves. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-12: SPECIFICATIONS:
A. The type of construction, the materials, the methods and standards of subdivision improvements shall be according to city standards. Said standards
are on file in the office of the city engineer.
B. Construction plans and specifications, including plans for subdivision erosion control measures, shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval prior
to construction. Construction shall not commence until the city engineer approves the plans and specifications.
C. If the infrastructure and/or grading cannot be designed to comply with city standards a new preliminary plat may be required at the discretion of the city.
D. Record of construction drawings must be submitted in hard copy and in digital form before public improvements will be accepted by the city. (Ord. 08-
4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-13: INSPECTIONS:
A. The city engineer or designee shall inspect the installation of all public improvements in new subdivisions to ensure compliance with the requirements.
B. The subdivider shall bear the cost of such inspection, which shall be the actual cost of the inspection by the city.
C. Grading shall be inspected and certified by the developer's engineer. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-14: OFF SITE COSTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. From time to time off site public improvements are necessary to enable the subdivision and development of a property. At such times, the subdivider
shall be responsible for the extension of infrastructure. If said infrastructure or certain aspects of said infrastructure is included in the city's capital
improvements program in a year coincident with the development proposal, the city may, at the city's discretion, assume responsibility for the extension
of the subject infrastructure.
B. Off site improvements shall be designed and constructed according to plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and shall be of sufficient
size and capacity to serve the full area capable of being served by the type of improvement so that the city will not be required to construct parallel or
duplicate facilities. If said infrastructure is greater in size than that needed to service the subdivision itself, the city, at its discretion, may share in the
expense thereof. Such cost sharing shall be according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment of excess costs by the city shall be
pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
Title 16
PUBLIC WORKS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 583/715
ARTICLE A. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY GENERALLY
16-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DEBRIS: Any dirt, erosion, mud, gravel or other materials.
DIRECTOR: Director, department of public works.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Property dedicated to public use and intended for the movement of the public, including public utilities as defined in this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, company or corporation utilizing or requesting to use the public right of way to deliver energy or communication services.
SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
STREET: The improved portion of public right of way primarily intended for vehicular travel and including alleys. (1994 Code)
16-1A-2: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY GENERALLY:
The director of public works shall be responsible for construction, management and maintenance of public right of way. (1994 Code)
16-1A-3: GRADES OF PUBLIC STREETS:
The grades of all streets and alleys along the centerlines thereof shall be called out in feet and decimals thereof in relation to certain reference datum,
namely SUIBM 1 - old stone capitol, on top of granite block at northwest corner of steps at west entrance; bronze tablet marked "University of Iowa B.M."
110.13, Iowa City datum or 698.40, national geodetic vertical datum. (1978 Code §31-8; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1A-4: PROHIBITED SURFACE MATERIALS IN CERTAIN AREAS:
A. Within the area of the city bordered by Church, Dodge, Bowery and Madison Streets, no person shall place or allow to be placed any loose rocks,
stones, gravel or similar loose substances as a surface material in the area between the traveled or paved area of the street right of way and the
abutting property line.
B. The director of public works shall adopt administrative regulations which describe acceptable surface materials and establish policies and procedures
for their placement and maintenance. (1978 Code §31-10)
16-1A-5: DEBRIS ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Debris Deposits Prohibited: Deposit of debris upon the public right of way in such a manner as to create a public nuisance shall be unlawful1.
B. Responsibility For Removal; Failure To Remove: In the event that debris is deposited upon the public right of way, the owner or person in possession or
control of the property from which the debris was carried shall promptly, without notice or demand, remove said debris the same day as when
deposited. If such debris is not promptly removed, the city may, after reasonable written notice to the owner or person in possession or control of the
property, remove the debris and assess the cost of such work against the property from which the debris was removed, for collection in the same
manner as a property tax, as provided by state law.
C. Summary Removal By City: In addition to the provisions of this section, whenever, in the judgment of the director of public works or the police chief, an
emergency exists creating a health or safety hazard which requires immediate removal of debris from the public right of way, the city may remove the
debris and assess the removal cost against the property from which the debris was removed, for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as
provided by state law. (1978 Code §31-11; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3800, 7-29-1997)
16-1A-6: MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
The abutting property owner shall maintain all public right of way located between the edge of the street or curb line and the property line, and shall keep
such area in a safe condition free from defects, debris, nuisances, obstructions or any other hazard. The abutting property owner may be liable for
damages caused by failure to maintain the public right of way located between the edge of the street or curb line and the property line. The abutting
property owner shall maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition, in a state of good repair, and free from defects. The abutting property owner may be liable
for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk. Notwithstanding the obligations imposed hereunder, the property owner shall in no event remove
diseased trees or dead wood or plant, trim, remove or treat any tree or plant material on public right of way without first obtaining a permit from the city
forester. (Ord. 04-4126, 5-4-2004)
16-1A-7: PERMISSION REQUIRED, PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 584/715
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any encroachment into or over the public right of way, except as specifically allowed by this code. For
any such encroachment into or over the public right of way that is specifically allowed by this code, including signs, buildings, and other structures, a use of
public right of way agreement must be signed by the property owner and approved by the city as a part of the approval process. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
16-1A-8: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL2:
A. Removal Required: No owner, tenant, responsible party or person in possession or control of property shall allow snow or ice accumulations to remain
upon abutting sidewalks for more than twenty four (24) hours. (1978 Code §31-120; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Removal By City: Snow or ice accumulations which have remained on any sidewalk for more than twenty four (24) hours may be removed by the city. If
the property owner fails to pay the costs of removal, after written billing, the city may assess the costs against the property in the same manner as a
property tax, as provided by state law.
C. Removal By Persons Other Than City:
1. It shall be unlawful for any private property owner or person in possession or control of private property to deposit snow and/or ice from private
property onto public right of way.
2. It shall be unlawful to remove snow or ice from public right of way in a manner which interferes with or unduly restricts vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic.
3. This subsection shall not apply to or limit the city's snowplowing operations.
D. Removal Policies: The director may establish snow and ice removal policies, as provided by state law, which policies shall be approved by resolution of
the city council. (1994 Code)
E. Violation: Violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-
4044, 10-8-2002)
16-1A-9: OPENINGS IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful to leave open or in an insecure condition any grating, vaults, vault doors, manholes and coverings to stairways or window wells or any
other opening in or on public right of way. (1994 Code)
16-1A-10: PIANO PERMITS:
The city engineer or designee is authorized to issue an annual piano permit for placement of a piano on the right of way subject to the following conditions:
A. Use is limited from March 1 to November 30;
B. Insurance coverage as required by the city's risk manager;
C. Execution of an agreement to indemnify the city;
D. No sale, transfer, or assignment of the piano permit without written consent of the city;
E. The location of the piano must be approved by the city and shall not interfere with access to public or city utilities located and/or operated within the
city's right of way;
F. No sign or advertisement is allowed on the piano except for a sign identifying the sponsor(s) of the piano;
G. The piano must be securely covered from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Sunday through Wednesday and from twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Thursday through Saturday. When uncovered the piano must be available for use by all members of the
public.
H. The piano shall be securely anchored to the right of way. The anchoring system must be approved by the city engineer or designee. Applicant shall be
responsible for all damage to the right of way caused by the anchoring or placement of the piano. A deposit in an amount determined by the city
engineer or designee shall be required prior to placement of the anchoring system and shall be returned when the sidewalk is restored to its prior
condition.
I. The applicant shall be solely responsible for the piano and any and all damage to the piano.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 585/715
The city engineer or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully completed the application which includes signing the indemnification
agreement, providing a certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section, and paying the deposit. If the permit is denied, the city engineer
or designee shall state the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of the application being filed. The process for appeals and revocation of the
permit shall be the same as for a temporary use of sidewalk permit. (Ord. 10-4406, 9-21-2010)
16-1A-11: PUBLISHERS' BOX MAINTENANCE CODE:
A. Permit Required: No person shall place or maintain any publishers' box on public right of way or on City Plaza without first obtaining a permit.
B. Definition: "Publishers' box" means any machine or other enclosed box used for distributing newspapers or other printed material while offering or
displaying the material for sale or free distribution and capable of operation by pedestrians without the assistance of an attendant.
C. Deadline: All publishers' boxes presently on public right of way and on City Plaza shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof,
unless a permit has been issued.
D. System: A permit system to enforce the publishers' box maintenance code shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 16-4673, 8-16-2016)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS
16-1B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTRICTION:
Before any person shall cut any curb on any street in the city, the person shall first obtain an access permit from the department of public works, which
permit shall be issued only on condition that the curb cutting be done in accordance with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access
Management Standards", of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE C. SIDEWALKS
16-1C-1: SIDEWALK GRADES:
All sidewalks shall conform to the established grade of that part of the street upon which the sidewalks are located and shall be elevated above such
established grade approximately one-third inch (1/3") for every one foot (1') of the distance from the curb unless such elevation is, under existing
conditions, impracticable, as determined by the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-97; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1C-2: LOCATION:
Sidewalks must be located within the public right of way so that the line of the inner edge of the sidewalk is one foot (1') from the property line. In cases
where there is practical difficulty meeting this location standard, the city engineer may modify the location of a sidewalk. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
16-1C-3: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR:
A. Sidewalks must be constructed, reconstructed and repaired in accordance with the Iowa City municipal design standards, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
B. No person, other than those employed by or under contract with the city, shall construct any sidewalk within the public right of way without first having
obtained a permit from the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-110; amd. 1994 Code)
C. The city engineer may order the repair, replacement, or reconstruction of a public sidewalk upon written notice and as provided by state law. Such order
and written notice shall constitute issuance of a permit as required in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. EXCAVATIONS
16-1D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: The city of Iowa City.
DIRECTOR: The city manager of the city or designee.
EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public right of way made by any means.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza and city owned right of way or any other public property owned or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 586/715
controlled by the city and dedicated to public use.
SPECIFICATIONS: The latest editions of "Standard Specifications For Highway And Bridge Construction", as amended, Iowa department of
transportation, Ames, Iowa.
SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or wire or any other similar structure located below the surface of any
public place.
UTILITY: Any public utility regulated by the Iowa commerce commission or its successor and/or persons holding a franchise or other agreement with the
city or other entities. (1978 Code §31-22; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Exceptions: All persons making or filling any excavation in any public place shall first obtain a permit from the director, except as
provided in section 16-1D-11 of this article. Permits shall be obtained at least the day prior to making an excavation. No excavation permit is required
for substructure installation in a new subdivision prior to acceptance of the public right of way improvements by the city. (1978 Code §31-45)
B. Application For Permit: No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application is submitted to the director on a form provided by the city. The
application, when approved, shall constitute a permit. (1978 Code §31-46)
C. Insurance Required: Before an excavation permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city a certificate of public liability insurance in such
amounts as may be determined by the city. The certificate of insurance shall list the city of Iowa City, Iowa, and its officers, employees and agents as
additional named insureds. (1978 Code §31-47; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Permit Fee: The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the excavation permit fee schedule as established by resolution of the city council and shall
be paid by all parties wishing to make excavations pursuant to this article, except for those parties with which the city has a franchise agreement and
from whom the city receives franchise fees. (Ord. 09-4373, 12-1-2009)
16-1D-3: PERFORMANCE DEPOSITS:
A. Deposits Required: Cash security performance deposits are required for any excavation in a public place. An application for an excavation permit shall
be accompanied by a deposit, made in accordance with a rate schedule adopted by city council resolution.
B. Refund Of Deposits: Upon request of the permittee and upon completion of the work, the deposit shall be refunded no later than one year from the
satisfactory completion of the work.
C. Use Of Deposits: Deposits shall be used to pay the cost of any work the city performs to restore or maintain the public places in the event the permittee
fails to perform the work as required by the city. The amount released to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount expended by the city. If the
deposit is not sufficient to cover the cost of work required by the city, the permittee shall be personally liable for the balance of such costs. (1978 Code
§31-23; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-4: EXCAVATION OPERATIONS:
Each excavation shall be done in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring
property. Specifically, the permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust and unsightly debris, and no work shall be done between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except with the express written permission of the city engineer or in case of an
emergency1. (1978 Code §31-32; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. If a street closing is required, the permit holder shall first request the approval of the director. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify and
coordinate all excavations with the police, fire and transit departments and ambulance services.
B. As a general guide for all maintenance and construction signing, part VI of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", as amended, shall be
used. The permittee shall illustrate on the excavation permit the warning and control devices proposed for use. At the request of the director, such
warning and control devices shall be increased, decreased or modified. (1978 Code §31-24; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-6: PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF PROPERTIES DURING EXCAVATIONS:
A. Protection Of Paved Surfaces From Equipment Damage: Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever outriggers are placed
on any paved surface. Tracked vehicles are not permitted on paved surfaces unless specific precautions are taken to protect the surface. The
permittee is responsible for any damage to existing pavement caused by operation of such equipment and, upon order of the director, shall repair
surfaces damaged by excavation equipment. (1978 Code §31-25; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Protection Of Adjoining Property: The permittee shall protect from injury any adjoining property by providing adequate support, including adequate
shoring. (1978 Code §31-26; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 587/715
C. Compliance With Iowa One Call Requirements: Prior to excavation, the permit holder shall first comply with state "Iowa One Call" requirements in
chapter 480, code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
D. Preservation Of Monuments: The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or survey markers found on the line of excavation work unless
approval is obtained from the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-37; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-7: BACKFILLING:
A. Backfilling Under Or Within Two Feet Of Paved Surfaces: The trenches for all substructures under paved surfaces and traveled ways or within two feet
(2') of paved surfaces shall be backfilled as required by design standards established by the city, as approved by resolution of the city council. (1978
Code §31-28; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Backfilling Of Unpaved Areas And Parkways: Excavated soil from unpaved and untraveled ways shall be carefully deposited and satisfactorily tamped
in uniform layers to minimize settlement. (1978 Code §31-29; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-8: REPAIRS OF SURFACES:
The director may specify the type of resurfacing required for any excavation. (1978 Code §31-30; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-9: CLEANUP:
As the excavation work progresses, all public right of way and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other
debris. If the permittee fails to clean up within twenty four (24) hours after notice, the director shall authorize the work to be done at the expense of the
permittee. (1978 Code §31-34; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-10: TIME OF COMPLETION:
All excavation work and backfilling shall be completed in a prompt manner, as determined by the director. (1978 Code §31-31; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-11: EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS:
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent excavations that may be necessary for the immediate preservation of life or property. The person making
such emergency excavation shall apply to the director for a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. (1978 Code §31-36; amd. 1994
Code)
16-1D-12: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
In performing a public function regarding the excavation of a public place, the city, its departments, divisions, employees and contractors shall be exempt
from these provisions. (1978 Code §31-38)
ARTICLE E. SIGNS IN PUBLIC PLACES
16-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza and city owned right of way or any other public property owned or
controlled by the city and dedicated for public use.
SIGN: As defined in title 14, chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
16-1E-2: RESTRICTIONS:
No privately owned signs shall be placed on or over a public place, except as provided for in section 14-5B-10 of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE F. ADDRESSING
16-1F-1: DIVISION LINES:
All buildings now or hereafter erected and fronting the public streets within the limits of the city shall be numbered according to the following plan:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 588/715
A. In general, in numbering buildings fronting on streets running north and south, the line of division shall be Iowa Avenue.
B. In general, in numbering buildings fronting on streets running east and west, the line of division shall be Capitol Street. (1978 Code §31-83; amd. 1994
Code)
16-1F-2: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS; RECORDS KEPT:
A. Buildings on the east side of streets running north and south shall bear even numbers, and buildings on the west side of such streets shall bear odd
numbers.
B. Buildings on the north side of streets running east and west shall bear even numbers, and those on the south side of such streets shall bear odd
numbers.
C. Each twenty feet (20') of frontage shall constitute a number beginning on either side of the division line or the line from which the numbers are
computed with numbers "one" and "two" for the first twenty feet (20') of either side of the street, and the numbers in the successive blocks in either
direction shall advance by one hundred (100).
D. The city engineer shall, when requested by any property owner, designate the number of any building within the city in accordance with the provisions
of this article and shall keep a record of the numbers so designated. (1978 Code §31-84)
ARTICLE G. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY USE PERMIT
16-1G-1: PROVISIONS:
No person may site a small wireless facility in the right-of-way or on a City structure except as provided herein. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICATION: A request to site a small wireless facility in the right-of-way.
CITY STRUCTURE: A structure owned by the City that exists at the time an application is submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or
installation of transmission equipment in compliance with applicable codes, including but not limited to water towers, buildings, and other structures,
whether within or outside the public right-of-way. It does not include a tower or existing base station or other structure owned by the City that exists at the
time an application is submitted.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY, SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, SITING, TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT, AND UTILITY POLE: As those terms are defined in
chapter 8C of the Code of Iowa.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY USE PERMIT: Written authorization to site a small wireless facility in the right-of-way. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-3: APPLICATION PROCESS:
A. The application shall be submitted to the Public Works Department on a form provided by the Public Works Department.
B. The application shall be deemed granted unless the Director of Public Works, or designee, denies or approves it within ninety (90) days of submission
of a completed application. The City and the applicant may agree in writing to extend the time for processing an application. If the City receives
applications for the approval of more than seventy five (75) small wireless facilities within a single seven-day period, whether from a single applicant or
from multiple applicants, the Director of Public Works, or designee, may notify an applicant submitting any additional siting applications during that
seven-day period that the City is invoking its right to an automatic thirty-day extension for any additional siting application submitted during that sevenday
period.
C. The Director of Public Works, or designee, may only deny an application if any of the following apply:
1. The application fails to include reasonable information required by the City and in accordance with this subsection.
2. The application does not comply with the Iowa Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, applicable Fire Safety Codes, or any
Building Code or similar Code of general applicability for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare that was adopted by the City prior to
the filing of the application.
3. The application would result in the City being noncompliant with the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act.
4. a. A licensed engineer selected by the applicant or the City certifies that siting the small wireless facility as proposed would compromise the
structural safety of, or preclude the essential purpose of, the utility pole or wireless support structure in the public right-of-way on which it is proposed
to be sited and any of the following conditions apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 589/715
(1) The applicant fails to redesign the small wireless facility in a manner determined necessary by the engineer to make the existing utility pole or
wireless support structure structurally sound for the siting of the small wireless facility.
(2) The applicant fails to modify the utility pole or wireless support structure to make the structure structurally sound for the siting of the small
wireless facility.
(3) The applicant fails to replace the utility pole or wireless support structure with a utility pole or wireless support structure that is structurally
sound for the siting of the small wireless facility.
(4) The applicant fails to propose an alternative location for the siting of the small wireless facility.
b. If an applicant chooses to modify or replace a utility pole or wireless support structure to make the structure structurally sound for the siting of a
small wireless facility, the applicant shall pay or advance to the City the costs of modifying or replacing the utility pole or wireless support structure
with a utility pole or wireless support structure that would safely support the small wireless facility and preserve the essential purpose of the utility
pole or wireless support structure.
5. The application seeks approval of a new small wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure that would impair, interfere with, or preclude
the safe and effective use of facilities already located in the public right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular, utility, or other City public right-of-way
purposes.
6. The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless facility outside the public right-of-way that would impair, interfere with, or preclude
the safe and effective use of a City structure or property for a public purpose.
7. The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless facility on a wireless support structure used exclusively for emergency
communications equipment.
8. The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless facility on a utility pole that is the vertical portion of a support structure for a traffic
control signal or device, and the City determines that the utility pole lacks sufficient space or load capacity for the proposed siting or the small
wireless facility cannot be sited on the utility pole without impairing the public health, safety, or welfare.
D. The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific Code provisions or standards on which the
denial is based, and provide the applicant with such documentation on or before the date the application is denied.
E. An applicant whose application is denied shall have an opportunity to cure any deficiencies identified by the Director of Public Works, or designee, as
the basis for the denial and to submit a revised application within thirty (30) days following the date of denial without paying an additional fee. The
Director of Public Works, or designee, shall approve or deny a revised application within thirty (30) days following submission. The Director of Public
Works, or designee, shall not identify any deficiencies in a second or subsequent denial that were not identified in the original denial. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-
15-2017)
16-1G-4: DURATION OF PERMIT:
A. The duration of a permit shall be ten (10) years, with one automatic five-year renewal.
B. The owner of the small wireless facility may terminate the permit upon providing ninety (90) days' notice to the City.
C. The construction of a small wireless facility permitted pursuant to this section shall commence no later than two (2) years following the date that the
permit is issued, or two (2) years after any appeals are exhausted. If construction is not commenced as provided herein, the permit expires.
D. Upon expiration of the permit or upon termination by the owner, the owner shall remove the small wireless facility from the right-of-way at its sole cost. If
the owner fails to do so within thirty (30) days, the City may remove it and discard it at the owner's expense. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-5: CONDITIONS:
The permit is subject to the following conditions:
A. Payment of the annual recurring rate.
B. Compliance with the Iowa Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, applicable Fire Safety Codes, and any Building Code or similar
Code of general applicability for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare that the City has adopted prior to the filing of the application.
C. The small wireless facility reasonably matches the aesthetics of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure that incorporates decorative
elements. Aesthetics includes but is not limited to color.
D. Compliance with section 306.46(1) and section 306.47 of the Iowa Code.
E. After the construction of a small wireless facility or new utility pole is completed in accordance with all conditions under which the permit is granted, the
owner of the small wireless facility or new utility pole, or the owner's successor in interest, shall maintain the small wireless facility or new utility pole at
the expense of the owner or successor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 590/715
F. If, after the construction of a small wireless facility or new utility pole is completed in accordance with all conditions under which the permit is granted,
the City subsequently undertakes any maintenance, public improvement project, or reconstruction of City-owned property or equipment which requires
the modification, relocation, or reconstruction of the small wireless facility or new utility pole, such work and the costs thereof shall be the responsibility
of the owner or successor. If the project necessitating the modification, relocation, or reconstruction of the small wireless facility or new utility pole is for
a private commercial purpose, the owner or successor shall modify, relocate, or reconstruct the small wireless facility or new utility pole upon
prepayment of the costs of such work by the private commercial entity whose project facilitates the need for such work. For purposes of this provision,
"new utility pole" means a new utility pole installed by a wireless service provider pursuant to this section solely for use as a wireless support structure
and that is owned by the wireless service provider.
G. The height shall not exceed the limitations in section 8C.7C(1) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-6: PERMIT TO WORK:
A wireless service provider shall obtain a permit to work in the right-of-way or on a City structure located outside of the right-of-way with the same terms
and conditions provided for other commercial projects or uses in the right-of-way or on a City structure, such as excavating permit. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-
2017)
16-1G-7: MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT:
In addition to obtaining a small wireless facility use permit, a person shall obtain a micro wireless facility single-use right-of-way permit for the installation,
placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of a micro wireless facility if any of the following conditions apply:
A. The work is contained within a highway lane or requires the closure of a highway lane.
B. The work disturbs the pavement, shoulder, ditch, or operation of a highway.
C. The work involves placement of a micro wireless facility on a limited access right-of-way.
D. The work requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the traveling public or the protection or operation of public infrastructure and such
work was not authorized in, or will not be conducted in, the same time, place, or manner that is consistent with the approved terms of the existing
permit for the facility or structure upon which the micro wireless facility is attached.
E. For purposes of this section, "highway" means the same as defined in section 325A.1 of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-8: FEES AND RATES:
Fees and rates shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC UTILITIES AND USE OF CITY RIGHT OF WAY
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of city right of way for the distribution of energy and communications by companies which have franchise
agreements with the city1 or are otherwise permitted to use public right of way to deliver services. The purpose of this chapter is also to regulate public
utilities and other companies requesting to use city right of way where no formal agreement previously existed concerning such use. Finally, this chapter is
intended to optimize the use of city right of way and to further protect the abutting property owner's enjoyment of the owner's property and to protect the
public interest. (1978 Code §33-172; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMMUNICATION SYSTEM: Any system used for the transmission of information.
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: All electrical system components designed or used for the distribution of electrical energy to individual properties
within the city.
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SYSTEM: Those electrical system components which directly serve or support an electrical distribution system, and also
electrical lines carrying thirty four and five-tenths (34.5) kilovolts or more of electric current.
ENERGY: Power supplied by a public utility to customers either in the form of gas or electricity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 591/715
MAJOR REPAIR WORK: The repair or reconstruction of a part of the utility system to the extent that part of the system under repair involves one or more
complete city blocks.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Property dedicated to public use and intended for the movement of the public, including public utilities as defined in this chapter.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR COMPANY: Any person, company or corporation utilizing or requesting to use the public right of way to deliver energy or
communications services.
PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEM, SYSTEM OR SYSTEM COMPONENTS: Includes poles, overhead wires, coaxial and/or fiberoptic cables and conduit,
underground wires, piping, manholes and other installations and appliances necessary for the generation, transmission or distribution of energy or
communications systems.
UNDERGROUND SERVICE DISTRICT: A defined area or tract of land within which all system components are required to be placed below the surface or
grade of the right of way, or private property upon which said components are located or through which they traverse. (1978 Code §33-173; amd. 1994
Code)
16-2A-3: MAPS AND PROJECTIONS:
Each public utility company, company or system requesting or using city public right of way shall furnish to the department of public works current maps
showing the location of all existing underground utility system or system components in city right of way and also on private property. Each company or
system shall thereafter provide the city with updated maps when same are updated by the company. In addition, each company or system shall furnish
information and projections concerning all planned or proposed system extensions, expansions and major repair work. Such information and projections
shall be prepared in advance of the company's actual work, thereby giving due consideration to the city's capital improvement plan, shall be provided in
comprehensive form and shall give sufficient advance prior notice to the city in order to provide the city an opportunity to review. (1978 Code §33-175;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-4: EXTENSION OR EXPANSION OF UTILITY SYSTEM; MAJOR REPAIR WORK AND INSTALLATION OF NEW
SYSTEMS:
Before any public utility company or system commences any installation, extension, expansion or major repair of its system, the company or system shall
first file with the department of public works a written statement specifying the public right of way, including streets, alleys, public places or private property
or parts thereof, in which the company or system proposes to extend, expand, install or repair its system. The director of public works may require that the
statement be accompanied by a map, plan and specifications to an acceptable scale showing the proposed location of the system components with
reference to the streets and alleys and lot lines, the size and dimensions of all system components and the distance above or beneath the surface of the
ground. If the proposed locations of any system components are found by the director of public works to interfere with the reasonable and proper use,
construction, reconstruction and maintenance of any public improvements or other existing system component or other structure upon or under public right
of way or public places of the city, the director of public works shall, within a reasonable time after the filing of such plan, map and specifications, note the
necessary and proper changes to eliminate all interference with public improvements or existing system and refer the same back to the company or
system for correction. Upon approval of the company's or system's proposed work by the director of public works, a permit shall be issued authorizing the
company or system to excavate in public right of way and to construct such system in accordance with the approved maps, plans and specifications. The
permit issued hereunder shall include any permit required pursuant to chapter 1 of this title. No such excavation or construction shall be commenced
before the issuance of the permit required herein, and all work shall be in strict accordance with the approved maps, plans and specifications. (1978 Code
§33-176; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-5: EXTENSION OR EXPANSION OF ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS:
A. Information Required: Before any public utility company or system, now or hereafter operating or maintaining an electrical system within Iowa City
commences any extension or expansion of its electrical transmission system within commonly developed areas of the city or the installation of any new
electrical transmission system, there shall be filed with the department of public works, in duplicate, a written statement specifying the streets, alleys
and public places or private property or parts thereof in which it proposes to extend, expand, install or repair its system. The director of public works
may require that the statement be accompanied by maps, plans and specifications, in duplicate, drawn to an acceptable scale, showing the proposed
location of the electrical system components with reference to the streets and alleys and lot lines, the size and dimensions of all electrical system
components and the distance above or beneath the surface of the ground it is proposed to repair or to lay the same. If the proposed locations of any
electrical system components shall interfere with the reasonable and proper use, construction, reconstruction and maintenance of any public
improvements or other existing system component or other structure upon or under the streets, alleys or public places of the city, the director of public
works shall, within a reasonable time after the filing of such plan, map and specifications, note the necessary and proper changes to eliminate all
interference with public improvements or existing system and refer the same back to the public utility company for correction. Such map, plan and
specifications, when properly changed and corrected, shall be filed in the office of the department of public works, and a copy thereof, together with the
written statement, shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission. If at all possible, when public right of way is used, transmission lines shall
be located along arterial and collector street right of way. (1978 Code §33-179; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Standards:
1. Review By Director Of Public Works: In reviewing the written statement and the maps, plans and specifications submitted by the electrical utility
company or system pursuant to subsection A above, the director of public works shall determine the degree to which the proposal complies with the
purpose of this chapter, as stated in section 16-2A-1 of this article, and shall forward findings and a recommendation to the city council.
2. Review By Planning And Zoning Commission: In reviewing the written report and the maps, plans and specifications submitted by the electrical utility
company or system pursuant to subsection A above, the planning and zoning commission shall review the proposal in light of the following planning
criteria and shall report its findings and recommendations to the city council:
a. The relationship of the proposed project to present and future economic development of the area.
b. The relationship of the proposed project to the existing electric utility system and parallel existing utility routes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 592/715
c. The relationship of the proposed project to the present and future land use and zoning ordinances.
d. The inconvenience or damage which may result to property owners as a result of the proposed project.
3. Recommendations: The director of public works shall submit a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission, and the commission shall
review the director's recommendation and shall submit a recommendation to the city council within sixty (60) calendar days of the director's report.
(1978 Code §33-180; amd. 1994 Code)
C. City Council Approval Required:
1. Within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, which shall include the director's
recommendation, the city council shall, by resolution, either approve or disapprove said proposal based on the standards and criteria stated in
subsection B of this section and on the recommendation received. In the event that the city council disapproves said proposal, the resolution shall
reflect the reasons for disapproval. If the city council fails to either approve or disapprove such proposal within the said sixty (60) calendar day
period, the proposal shall be considered to be approved.
2. Upon the approval of the company's or system's proposal, the director of public works shall issue a permit therefor, and the company or system may
proceed with the work. No person shall perform any such work until the required permit has been issued, which shall include any permit required
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title. All work shall be in strict accordance with the approved maps, plans and specifications. (1978 Code §33-181; amd.
1994 Code)
16-2A-6: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SYSTEM:
In the process of location, construction, reconstruction, replacement or repair of any system component, the excavation or obstruction made or placed in
any public right of way or public ground at any time or for any purpose shall be properly barricaded to protect the public and to assure the safe and efficient
movement of traffic. All pavement removed or displaced shall be properly and speedily replaced under the general supervision of the city. As a condition to
use of public right of way, every public utility company or system, except those public utility companies or systems having a franchise by city ordinance2,
shall pay all damages or injuries to persons or property, as well as to the city, resulting from the negligent or improper construction or repair of such system
and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the city from and against all claims of every nature for damages to person or property arising or resulting from
the company's or system's own negligence. If the company or system fails to repair or arrange for proper repair after five (5) days' written notice to do so,
then the city may make such repairs at the expense of such company or system. (1978 Code §33-177; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-7: EXCAVATIONS:
In addition to the requirements for obtaining a permit for making excavations in public right of way pursuant to chapter 1, article D of this title, the company
or system shall provide the department of public works with twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, shall not
unnecessarily obstruct the use of such public right of way, including streets, alleys or public places, and shall comply with all provisions of chapter 1 of this
title in performing such work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the company or system may proceed with the work without first
applying for or obtaining the permit; provided, however, that the company or system shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible
after commencing such emergency work. (1978 Code §33-178; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-8: TREE TRIMMING:
A public utility company or system authorized to cut and trim trees under the terms of its franchise must conduct such work in a careful and prudent
manner. The authority or obligation of the company in this regard shall not extend beyond trimming trees sufficiently to clear and prevent interference with
its aboveground transmission or distribution lines and facilities. Cutting or trimming shall be performed in residential street and alley areas in accordance
with standards established by the city forester. The company or system shall submit to the city forester on or before December 1 of each year a schedule
of tree trimming in the residential street and alley areas. Trimming or cutting trees on an emergency basis and not shown on the annual trimming and
cutting schedule shall be reported to the city forester by the company or system within seven (7) calendar days following such trimming or cutting. (1978
Code §33-178; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-9: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
A. Use: All utility system components installed by a company or system within the city shall be so located and/or relocated as to cause minimum
interference with other public utilities or public improvements located in the public right of way and so as to cause minimum interference with the rights
or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said public right of way.
B. Relocation: The company or system shall, upon reasonable written notice and at its cost and expense, remove, locate and relocate its system
components in, on, over or under any public right of way in such manner as the city may, at any time, require for purpose of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, repair or change in grade of any public improvement on, in or about any such public right of way for the purpose of
promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement or for the purpose of facilitating the vacation and redevelopment of public right of way by the
city. In the event the company or system fails to act within the allotted time, the city may cause the system components to be relocated, and the costs
thereof shall be assessed to the company or system.
C. Placement Of Components: The company or system shall not place its system components in the public right of way where the same will interfere with
the normal use or maintenance of any public improvement, including but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, traffic control devices, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, storm drains or water mains. (1978 Code §33-186; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-10: UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 593/715
In all new residential subdivisions platted or developed in Iowa City, public utility companies and systems shall be required to install utility distribution
systems underground in accordance with accepted engineering practices. Gas utility distribution mains and lines and supply lines, except for certain
control facilities, shall be placed underground throughout the city in accordance with accepted engineering practices. All aboveground gas facilities shall
be located with due regard for aesthetics. Underground electrical distribution systems and communication systems shall be installed pursuant to the
requirements of chapter 2, article B of this title. (1978 Code §33-182; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-11: UNDERGROUND SERVICE DISTRICTS FOR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS, ENERGY AND COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS:
A. Districts Established:
1. The city may, upon a showing of good and reasonable cause, require the company or system to place or bury its electrical distribution systems, other
energy distribution systems and communications systems underground in any underground service district hereafter established by the city pursuant
to this provision.
2. The following described area(s) shall constitute the underground service district(s):
Downtown District: Madison Street north from Court Street to Washington Street, Washington Street east to Gilbert Street, Gilbert Street south to
Burlington Street, Burlington Street west to Linn Street, Linn Street south to Court Street and Court Street west to Madison Street.
(1978 Code §33-183; amd. 1994 Code)
B. District Regulations:
1. Before commencing the work of placing such systems underground, the company or system shall file with the city a written statement specifying the
particular public right of way, including streets, alleys and public highway, in which underground systems are to be located, the approximate size of
the lines, cables and/or conduits proposed to be used and the distance from the surface of the street to the top of such lines, cables and/or conduits.
2. The statements required by subsection B1 of this section shall be accompanied by a map, plan or specifications which shall show the proposed
location of the lines, cables and/or conduits with reference to the public right of way and surface of the streets and the approximate dimensions of the
lines, cables, conduits or manholes to be used. The proposed locations may be changed by the department of public works if such locations shall, in
any way, interfere with other conduits, pipes or mains placed underground by the city or by any other company or system and, thereafter, approved
by the department.
3. The approved statement, map, plan or specifications, together with the original statement, shall remain on file in the office of the department of public
works. All underground systems shall be constructed in accordance with the approved statement, map, plan or specifications.
4. A permit to excavate in any public right of way shall be issued by the department of public works as provided in this title only after approval of the
department of public works. All such excavations shall be made in compliance with the requirements of this title3.
5. In planning underground conduits, the company or system shall include in the plans a conduit space in which the city may place its city alarm, city
control or city communication wires, free of charge. The company or system shall work with the city in the installation, repair and removal of alarm,
control and communication wires in the space allotted to the city.
6. The aboveground extension of a utility or system line from an underground conduit to a building or other location within the underground service
district must be approved by the department of public works prior to installation.
7. Any aboveground system or system components in an underground service district shall be located with due regard for aesthetics. (1978 Code §33-
184; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-12: PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR SYSTEM CONTRACTORS:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply fully to all persons performing work for a public utility company or system under a contract or other type of
work order. (1978 Code §33-185; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-13: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor, a municipal infraction, or an environmental infraction. Municipal infractions shall
be punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
ARTICLE B. UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
16-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
APARTMENT BUILDING: A building containing at least five (5) apartments and provided with electric and communication services through one service
extension.
APPLICANT: The developer, builder or other person, partnership, association, corporation or governmental agency applying for the construction of an
underground electric distribution system or a communications system in a subdivision or requesting service to a new apartment building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 594/715
COMMUNICATION SYSTEM COMPANY OR COMPANY: The communication system company or companies serving the city.
ELECTRIC PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR COMPANY: Electric company or companies serving the city.
SUBDIVISION: A tract of land divided into lots, pursuant to state and city law. (1978 Code §§33-77, 33-97; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-2: UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS:
Extension of electric distribution lines necessary to furnish permanent residential electric service or communication system service to new residences
within a new residential subdivision or to new apartment buildings shall be made underground from existing communications systems but does not include
electrical transformers, meter pedestal, switch gear and other appurtenances impractical to bury. This article does not apply to electrical transmission lines.
(1978 Code §§33-78, 33-98; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-3: EASEMENTS:
The applicant shall provide adequate easements, including easements necessary for access to street lights, to allow electric and communication system
services for the subdivision, and the easements shall be included as part of the plat of the subdivision. (1978 Code §§33-79, 33-99; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-4: STREETLIGHTS:
In new subdivisions, the electric public utility company shall provide underground wiring to the pole sites for appropriate streetlights as determined by the
city manager, or designee. The subdivider may pay an additional amount, as determined by the company, and obtain ornamental poles approved by the
city manager, or designee. The company can make the additional charge for ornamental poles only if it supports the additional charge by a current cost
analysis available to the general public showing the cost difference between the usual wooden pole and the ornamental pole. (1978 Code §33-85; amd.
1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
16-2B-5: SPECIAL CONDITIONS; WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
In unusual circumstances, when the application of the provisions of this article appears impracticable or unjust, the utility system or company, or the
subdivider, shall refer the matter to the city engineer for consideration. The city engineer may waive any provisions of this article if enforcement would be
hazardous, unusually costly, destructive of the property of another or contrary to the public interest. (1978 Code §§33-84, 33-103; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 3
CITY UTILITIES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-3A-1: PURPOSE:
This article governs the general provisions relating to the provision of water, wastewater and solid waste services by the city, referred to generally as "city
utilities". Where more specific provisions relate to a specific city utility contained in an article dealing with that service, the more specific shall control. (1994
Code)
16-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCOUNT: A record of debit and credit entries to cover transactions involving city utility services provided to a particular person.
ACCOUNT HOLDER: The person in whose name the city utility account is applied for and to whom the city utility is authorized to provide service.
BILL: A declaration, in writing, stating the amount due on the specific city utility account.
CITY UTILITIES, CITY UTILITY SERVICES: The providing of water, wastewater, storm water drainage, and/or solid waste services to persons who are
obligated to pay for said services.
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property, including legal and equitable property interests.
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or fiduciary thereof.
PROPERTY: The land and/or that which is constructed on the land owned by a private individual or entity. The term "premises" shall be included in this
definition.
SERVICE: The providing of a city utility to any user of that utility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 595/715
SOLID WASTE: Includes unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid or semisolid state, including, but not limited to, garbage, ashes, refuse, sludge,
yard waste, appliances, construction wastes, residential, commercial and industrial wastes and waste being recycled.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE: Storm water, ground water, and spent water discharged to the city's storm water infrastructure.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of the community. It may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions.
WATER: Potable water provided by the city utility. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
16-3A-3: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. Connections:
1. Before the permanent improvements of any street, highway, avenue, alley, public ground or place whereon city utilities are located, provision for
utility connection therefrom to the curb lines of adjacent property shall be made according to the specifications of the city engineer, including
inspections. All buildings and properties used for, or intended to be used for, human occupancy and/or employment are required, at their expense, to
install suitable connections with city utilities. Each separate building shall be provided with a separate connection to the city utility, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
2. In case the owners of the property shall fail to make the connections required in the manner and within the time fixed by the city council, the city
council may cause the same to be made and the cost and expense thereof assessed against the serviced property.
3. Construction materials for city utility connections shall be as set forth in the design standards established by the city engineer, as approved by
resolution of the city council.
B. Use Of Same Trench By Public Utility Companies: To the maximum extent practicable and in the exercise of due care, all public utility systems, such as
coaxial or fiberoptic cable, electric cable, communications cable and gas pipes, shall be installed in the same trench. (1994 Code)
16-3A-4: RATES AND CHARGES FOR CITY UTILITIES:
A. Rates And Charges:
1. Before any ordinance is enacted to fix rates to be charged under this section, a public hearing on the proposed change shall be held by the city
council at a time determined by motion of the city council. Notice of such hearing shall contain the date, time and place for the hearing and shall be
published as required by state law. (1994 Code)
2. All contributors or users owning or occupying property in the city of Iowa City shall be charged for the service used. In addition, a fee shall be
charged to all account holders for operation, maintenance, and improvements to the city's storm water infrastructure utility. The city shall review the
user charge system and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation
and maintenance, necessary expansion and debt service, and that the system continues to provide for the uniform distribution of operation and
maintenance among all users. The city will annually notify all users, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the storm water utility charges and that
portion of the user's bill attributable to storm water management services. Such rates and charges shall be in the amounts set forth in the schedule of
fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
3. The rates and charges set forth in the schedule of fees under title 3, chapter 4 of this code shall apply only to properties located within the service
areas of the respective city utility.
4. The rates and charges herein established shall go into effect with the first full billing sent after the effective date contained in the ordinance changing
the rates and/or charges.
B. Temporary Water Use During Construction:
1. As soon as a new water service line has been connected, a temporary water account may be established for temporary use of water for the
construction site. The owner or contractor shall pay a fee based on the type of structure under construction and the length of time temporary water
service is needed, as set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
2. The water used for a temporary water account may not be used to settle ditches or irrigate lawns or gardens, and the city may discontinue service to
the construction site if the temporary water account becomes delinquent as set forth in this article or if the water is being used in violation of the
provisions of this subsection.
C. Bulk Water: Bulk water may be purchased at a location designated by the city, at a charge provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this
code.
D. Connection Fee: Before connection by the abutting property owner to distribution water mains constructed at the expense of the city, the property owner
shall pay to the city a fee based upon the front footage of the property to be served and based upon the costs of an eight inch (8") distribution water
main. (1994 Code)
E. Billing Adjustments:
1. A billing adjustment will be made when it is discovered that an account holder has been incorrectly billed for water, wastewater (sewer) or solid
waste/recycling service of the period of adjustment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 596/715
2. "Period of adjustment" shall be defined as follows: the entire period of inaccuracy on the account, or five (5) years prior to the date the error was
discovered and corrected, whichever is the lesser period.
3. The calculation of any billing adjustment shall be based on the rate or rates in effect at the time of the incorrect billing or billings.
4. When an account holder has been overcharged for services rendered, one hundred percent (100%) of the overcharge for the applicable period of
adjustment, without interest, shall be refunded or credited to the account holder.
5. When an account holder has been undercharged for services rendered the account holder shall be billed fifty percent (50%) of the total amount
undercharged, without interest, for the applicable period of adjustment.
6. No interest shall run in favor of the City on undercharges and no interest will run in favor of the account holder on overcharges.
7. The City Manager or designee shall establish rules for determining the period of inaccuracy and the calculation of what the correct billing would have
been during that period.
8. Billings for solid waste/recycling services that were provided by the City to the account holder but not billed by the City shall be waived and shall not
be collected when the billing error is discovered by the City on or before July 1, 1997. (Ord. 97-3797, 7-29-1997)
16-3A-5: ESTABLISHING CITY UTILITY ACCOUNTS; DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
A. Upon establishing a water service account, a wastewater account and/or a residential solid waste collection account with the City, the person
establishing an account, with the exception of a residential owner account, shall be required to make a combined account deposit for City services. The
amount of this deposit shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. Persons who have previously been required to post a
delinquent deposit shall be required to make a combined and/or delinquent deposit before City services are provided.
B. Required deposits shall be held until service is terminated and the account closed. At such time, the amount of the deposit shall be credited to the
account or refunded to the account holder if the account is closed and paid in full.
C. Upon reestablishing one or more accounts as set forth in subsection A of this section, the person establishing the account(s) shall be required to make
an account deposit for City services. The amount of the deposit shall be as established in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. Persons
who have previously been required to post a delinquent deposit shall be required to make a combined and/or delinquent deposit before City services
are provided.
D. A delinquency deposit may be charged upon repeated delinquency of any water, wastewater or solid waste service account. Upon the occurrence of a
second delinquency charge within the last three hundred sixty five (365) day period, the account holder shall be required to make a combined deposit
equal to the average two (2) month billing for the account holder's account. The average two (2) month billing shall be based upon the actual billings
during the prior twelve (12) month billing periods. If the account holder already has a combined deposit on file with the City, that deposit amount will
proportionally reduce the delinquency deposit. The delinquency deposit can be waived if the account holder enrolls in SurePay.
E. Delinquency deposits shall be held either three hundred sixty five (365) days after the deposit was paid or three hundred sixty five (365) days after the
last occurrence of a delinquent account charge, whichever occurs last. At such time, the deposit shall be credited to the utility account. If service is
terminated within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the delinquent account charge, the deposit shall be credited to the account or refunded if the
account is paid in full.
F. Prior to establishing an industrial water service account, the person establishing the account shall first execute a written agreement with the Department
of Public Works. Such accounts shall be governed by chapter 3, article F, "Wastewater Treatment Works User Charges", of this title. (Ord. 18-4745, 4-
17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
16-3A-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES; DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Delinquency:
1. Billings for services provided to properties for any one service period, as defined by regulations established by the city and approved by resolution of
the city council, shall be submitted to account holders within thirty (30) calendar days after the end of the billing period and shall be due and payable
within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the billing. (1994 Code)
2. If payment in full is not received within twenty two (22) days of the billing date, the account(s) shall be deemed delinquent and a delinquency charge
will be assessed as provided in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. For locations which receive city water, wastewater and/or solid waste services, the
account holders shall be billed and collected as a single account, and in the event of a delinquency in payment as to either water, wastewater or solid
waste services, subsequent payments shall be credited first to the delinquent billings and then to the current billing. (Ord. 97-3820, 12-16-1997)
3. If any check or automatic bank debit for payment of utility services is returned, for any reason, to the city from the financial institution from which it is
written, a service fee shall be assessed as provided in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Automatic bank debit system, known as sure pay, is available to
pay for services billed for which a discount is provided in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
B. Imposition Of Lien For Unpaid Services:
1. Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, rates and charges for city utilities not paid as provided by city ordinance are a lien upon the
property or premises served, upon certification by the city finance director or designee to the county treasurer that the rates and charges are due.
Said lien shall be collected in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by state law. At least ten (10) days prior to such certification, the city
finance director, or designee, shall give written notice of intent to certify lien by ordinary mail to the account holder of the delinquent account and, if
the account holder is a tenant, to the property owner of record. (Ord. 01-3962, 4-3-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 597/715
2. For residential rental properties where the charges for service are separately metered and paid directly by the tenant and when the utility account is
in the current tenant's name, liens of the property shall be pursuant to state code. (Ord. 12-4505, 12-4-2012)
16-3A-7: DISCONTINUANCE AND RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
A. Notice:
1. In the event an account holder fails to pay the full amount of the billing for city utility services within twenty two (22) calendar days after the billing
date, service may be discontinued but only after giving the account holder written notice and an opportunity for a hearing before the director of
finance or designee(s). The written notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the affected account holder not less than twenty four (24) calendar
days ("cure period") in advance of discontinuance, and shall state: a) the reason for discontinuance of service; b) the specific account(s) and service
location(s) for which payment is delinquent; and c) the amount(s) delinquent, including fees and penalties. (Ord. 97-3769, 1-14-1997)
2. In addition to the written notice mailed to the affected account holder, the city shall post a written notice at the service location or locations, and such
notice shall be placed on the property not less than five (5) calendar days in advance of the date service is to be discontinued.
3. When an account holder's account for water, wastewater and/or solid waste service at a specific location is delinquent, the city may discontinue
water service at that location by shutting off the water service valve at the stop box if available or by removal of the account holder's water meter. The
city shall have unrestricted access to such valves and water meters for the purposes specified herein regardless of whether those water devices are
located in city right of way, city easement or on the property of the account holder, and consent shall be deemed given for such access when service
is requested and when an account holder receives city utility services.
4. Notwithstanding the above, when an individual account holder is billed under two (2) or more accounts for water, wastewater and/or solid waste
service at two (2) or more separate locations, a delinquency in payment for service provided at any one or more of the locations shall be cause for
the city to discontinue service at all service locations for that account holder regardless of whether the accounts for service at those other locations
are delinquent.
B. Restoration Of Service; Fees And Charges:
1. Upon payment of all due and payable water, wastewater and solid waste service charges, including fees and penalties, the city shall cause the
account holder's water service to be restored. An account holder whose water service is to be restored shall first pay the posting fee for shutoff, as
set forth in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Services to rental properties shall be resumed notwithstanding the failure of the persons formerly living there
or occupying the premises to have paid all fees and charges, provided all such persons previously occupying the premises have vacated the
premises as verified, in writing, by the rental property owner or manager.
2. All payments required to restore the account holder's service shall be in the form of cash, money order or a cashier's check.
3. It shall be prohibited for any person to restore or attempt to restore water, wastewater or solid waste service at a location where those services have
been discontinued unless and until the city authorizes such restoration.
4. The director of finance is authorized to adopt and promulgate billing and collection procedures for water, wastewater and solid waste service
accounts, including records. Such procedures shall be approved by the city manager and city attorney. (1994 Code)
16-3A-8: FEES AND BILLING PROCEDURE UPON CHANGE IN TENANT ACCOUNT:
A. When a tenant notifies the city that the tenant is moving from the property receiving city utility service, and the city has received no authorization for
service to a new tenant, the city shall automatically place the account into the name of the property owner. Billings generated during the first fifteen (15)
calendar days after a rental property account has been put into the owner's name shall include charges for actual water and wastewater use; no
minimum charges or solid waste charges will be included. In such instances, the meter(s) need not be removed, and no service fee shall be charged.
When an owner receives a bill for water, wastewater and/or solid waste service for the interim period between tenants, the owner may determine that
the bill should be paid by the tenant and inform the tenant of the tenant's responsibility to pay the bill. Upon written notification from the owner, the city
will transfer the billed amount to the new tenant's account.
B. If an owner determines that a tenant is responsible for city services to a property, and the owner has not authorized the city to provide services, the
owner may request, in writing, that the city provide a posting notice regarding incomplete service application and the city's intention to discontinue
service within five (5) calendar days of that notice. If the tenant fails to complete the service application, the city shall discontinue service as otherwise
provided in this chapter. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE B. PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEES
16-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish substantive and procedural rules for the adoption and implementation of project specific tap-on fee ordinances
which shall provide for the equitable apportionment of the costs associated with extension of city utility service to development in areas beyond the current
service area by charging a proportionate share of the total, actual construction cost of the city utility to each owner of benefited property at the time of such
owner's connection to the city utility. (1978 Code §33-10.3; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3B-2: FINDINGS:
It is the finding of the city council that the constitution of the state of Iowa and the code of Iowa, all as amended, provide authority for the establishment of
project specific tap-on fee ordinances. (1978 Code §33-10.3; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 598/715
16-3B-3: PROCEDURES FOR ORDINANCE ADOPTION:
The city council shall substantially comply with the following procedures in adopting a project specific tap-on fee ordinance:
A. Applicability: The code of Iowa, as amended, and local rules regarding the adoption of ordinances shall apply, except as augmented by these
procedures. (1978 Code §33-10.3)
B. Public Notice And Public Hearing: Twenty (20) days' notice published in accordance with state law shall be given and a public hearing held prior to
passage of the ordinance. (Ord. 99-3907, 10-19-1999)
C. Copy To Be Filed: Upon adoption of a project specific tap-on fee ordinance, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the county
recorder.
D. Contents Of Ordinance: A project specific tap-on fee ordinance shall contain the following:
1. A general description of the project, including a narrative of the reasons for its construction, a recital of actions taken in approving its construction, a
description of any interim financing used and disclosure of any agreements between the city and owners or developers of any benefited properties,
including, but not limited to, tap-on fee prepayment and development sequencing. (1978 Code §33-10.3)
2. A general boundary map of the project area showing location of the benefited properties and the location of the constructed city utility. (Ord. 96-3753,
10-8-1996)
3. A legal description of the utility constructed. A plat of the utility constructed shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and placed on file in
the office of the city engineer. Said plat shall be incorporated in the ordinance by reference. (Ord. 98-3841, 7-28-1998)
4. A legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the city utility, as well as a calculation of the total area, in acres, of the benefited
property. (Ord. 96-3753, 10-8-1996)
5. The city engineer's certification of the actual, total cost of the construction project, including, when applicable, interest costs.
6. A schedule of fees, on a per acre basis, to be paid by an owner or building permit applicant upon connection to the city utility constructed.
7. A finding of which properties, if any, within the benefited area which are exempt from the project specific tap-on fee ordinance by virtue of their
having been previously assessed for the service provided by the city utility constructed. (1978 Code §33-10.3; amd. Ord. 96-3753, 10-8-1996)
16-3B-4: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
1. The northwest sanitary sewer is a trunk sanitary sewer serving the northwest area of the city within the Clear Creek drainage basin. The northwest
sanitary sewer project ("project") includes the construction of one lift station, eighteen (18) manholes and six thousand seventy one (6,071) linear
feet of sewer pipe ranging in size from eight inches (8") in diameter to forty two inches (42") in diameter.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the area generally located north of Melrose Avenue and
west of property owned by the University of Iowa since this area was not expected to develop due to the lack of sanitary sewer on the university
property.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On October 2, 1990, the city council adopted resolution 90-183 authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the sanitary sewer. On
April 2, 1991, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract and cost estimates. Following the public hearing, the
city council passed resolution 91-53 approving the plans and specifications of the project and authorizing advertisement for bids. The city awarded
the northwest sanitary sewer project contract to Maxwell Construction Company on April 22, 1991, by resolution 91-83. In resolution 91-293 adopted
on December 10, 1991, the city council accepted the work for improvements covering the northwest sanitary sewer project.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution 90-
227.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is eight hundred seven thousand six hundred forty six dollars
ninety four cents ($807,646.94). This cost includes two hundred thirteen thousand two hundred twenty dollars seventy cents ($213,220.70) in interest
costs.
D. Total Area Benefited: The northwest sanitary sewer project benefits a total of eight hundred sixty five and seven-tenths (865.7) acres. The eight hundred
sixty five and seven-tenths (865.7) acres has been divided into eight (8) subareas labeled A through H for cost allocation purposes. See figure 1 of this
section.
E. Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or tract
of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap-on fee per acre for the eight (8) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs of
the benefits associated with each subarea. (Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 599/715
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
A 83.6 $1,137.04
B 75.4 2,017.44
C 75.8 2,017.44
D 68.3 1,243.30
E 296.9 362.90
F 36.2 2,017.44
G 194.1 362.90
H 35.4 2,017.44
(Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994; amd. Ord. 98-3841, 7-28-1998)
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees, the payment of tap-on fees on
a per lot basis and development sequencing. Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in
subsection E of this section.
H. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: Project area divided into eight (8) subareas.
2. Figure 2: Map illustrating the general location of the project area in relation to the Iowa City comprehensive plan, as amended.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the northwest sanitary sewer project.
4. Figures 4a And 4b: Plat of the northwest sanitary sewer project.
5. Figure 5: Map showing the property benefited by the northwest sanitary sewer.
6. Figure 6: Legal description of the properties benefited by the northwest sanitary sewer.
7. Figure 7: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 600/715
Figure 2
Figure 3
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE
NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER
Commencing at a concrete monument found at the Northeast Corner of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; thence
S00°03'27"E, along the East Line of said Section 7, 2603.16 feet, to a point on the centerline of the existing sanitary sewer; thence S88°59'39"W, along
said centerline, 5.72 feet, to the existing manhole, which is the Point of Beginning; thence N18°36'50"W, 82.98 feet; thence N67°15'43"W, 21.00 feet;
thence N67°15'43"W, 400.00 feet; thence N90°00'00"W, 400.00 feet; thence S80°32'38"W, 400.00 feet; thence S70°47'26"W, 400.13 feet; thence
S42°54'48"W, 400.00 feet; thence S49°26'49"W, 400.00 feet; thence S36°34'17"W, 400.45 feet; thence S55°05'12"W, 312.31 feet, to its intersection with
the West Line of the East 1/2 of said Section 7.
And also commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West, of the 5th Principal
Meridian, and for the purpose of this Legal Description the South Line of said Southwest Quarter is assumed to bear S89°07'30"W, in accordance with
existing Survey Plats of Record; thence N00°22'54"E, along the East Line of said Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, 1788.07 feet, to the
termination of the previously described Sanitary Sewer, which is the Point of Beginning; thence S55°22'54"W, 36.52 feet; thence S28°03'28"W, 219.92
feet; thence S60°32'42"W, 395.00 feet; thence S52°02'10"W, 365.00 feet; thence S57°59'21"W, 341.19 feet; thence S65°13'07"W, 258.49 feet; thence
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 601/715
S02°21'16"W, 400.00 feet; thence S24°52'09"E, 263.46 feet; thence S56°56'21"E, 318.12 feet; thence N89°00'23"E, 103.30 feet; thence S0°59'37"E,
142.20 feet. Figure 4a
Figure 4b
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 602/715
Figure 5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 603/715
Figure 6
NORTHWEST INTERCEPTOR SEWER
SERVICE AREA DESCRIPTION
TOTAL SERVICE AREA
A portion of the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of the fenced highway a distance of 787 feet N7°30'W of the Southwest Corner of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range
6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N82°30'E, 1835.2 feet; Thence S13°26'W, 919 feet; Thence S85°10'W, 1502.5 feet to the Southwest Corner
of said Section 6, Thence N7°30'W, 787 feet to the Point of Beginning, all in the SW 1/4 of said Section 6.
AND ALSO:
The West Half of the Fractional Northwest Quarter and the West Half of the Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian.
EXCEPTING THEREFROM 25.0 Acres, more or less acquired for road purposes by condemnation proceedings Recorded in Book 698, at Page 303 of the
Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
AND ALSO:
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
AND ALSO:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 604/715
All that Portion of Parcels A, B, and C of Clear Creek Subdivision as Recorded in Plat Book 25, Page 53, of the Records of the Johnson County
Recorder's Office, contained within Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, EXCEPTING THEREFROM 6.33 acres of
Right-of-way easements, Recorded in Book 597, at Pages 22 through 27 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
AND ALSO:
All that portion of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision, as Recorded in Plat Book 27, at Page 30 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's
Office, contained within the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
which is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N89°22'30"E, along the
North Line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 397.44 feet, to its intersection with the Northeasterly Right-of-way Line of the existing Secondary
Road, on the Southwesterly Line of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision as Recorded in Plat Book 27, at Page 30, of the Records of the Johnson
County Recorder's Office, which point is the Point of Beginning;
Then N89°22'30"E, along said North Line, 924.01 feet, to its intersection with the East Line of said Lot 1; Thence S00°23'47"E, along said East Line,
929.77 feet, to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1; Thence N47°12'00"W, along the Southwesterly Line of said Lot 1, 930.30 feet; Thence N40°45'00"W,
along said Southwesterly Line, 379.61 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land contains 10.32 acres, more or less, and is subject to easements
and restrictions of record.
AND ALSO:
A parcel of land located in the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, City of Iowa City, Johnson
County, Iowa,
described as follows:
Beginning at the SW Corner of the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of said Section 12; Thence N00°22'W, 988.0 feet along the West Line of said NW 1/4 SE 1/4; Thence
S52°43'E, 885.0 feet; Thence S47°38.5'E, 652.2 ft. to the South Line of said NW 1/4 SE 1/4; Thence S89°24'W, 1179.8 feet along said South Line, to the
Point of Beginning; containing 13.97 acres, more or less.
AND ALSO:
The South half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
EXCEPTING THEREFROM 24.1 acres of existing Road Right-of-way conveyed by Fee and Easements of Record and Recorded in Book 602, at Page 72,
of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
AND ALSO:
The East half of the Northwest Quarter and the East Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian.
AND ALSO:
The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter and the Northeast Quarter of the Fractional Northwest Quarter of Section 18, Township 79 North, Range 6
West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
EXCEPTING THEREFROM 5.4 Acres of Existing Road Right-of-way conveyed by Fee and Easements of Record, and Recorded in Book 698, at Page
328, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office. Figure 7
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project is $807,646.94. This cost includes $213,220.70 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994)
16-3B-5: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT, PHASE II:
A. General Project Description:
1. The northwest sanitary sewer, phase II, which is the north fork trunk sewer of the northwest sanitary sewer constructed in 1991, serves the northerly
area of the Clear Creek drainage basin. The northwest sanitary sewer project, phase II ("project") includes the construction of three (3) manholes
and one thousand one hundred nine (1,109) linear feet of twenty four inch (24") diameter concrete sanitary sewer pipe.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the area designated as "A", "E", and "G" in figure 1 of this
section, generally two thousand feet (2,000') north of Melrose Avenue and west of property owned by the University of Iowa since this area was not
expected to develop due to the lack of sanitary sewer on the university property.
3. An agreement regarding prepayment and collection of sanitary sewer tap on fees has been made between the city of Iowa City and the developers
of Walnut Ridge, parts 5-7.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 605/715
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On October 2, 1990, the city council adopted resolution 90-183 authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the sewer for the
northwest sanitary sewer project which included phase II, the north fork. On August 2, 1994, the city council held a public hearing on the plans,
specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public hearing, the city council passed resolution 94-269 approving the plans and
specifications of the project and authorizing advertisement for bids. The city council awarded the project construction contract to Maxwell
Construction Company on August 30, 1994, by resolution 94-290. The city council accepted the work for the project improvements on July 18, 1995,
by resolution 95-188.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution 95-
63.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is one hundred nineteen thousand five hundred sixty three
dollars sixty three cents ($119,563.63). This cost includes thirty one thousand nine hundred seventy nine dollars six cents ($31,979.06) in interest
costs.
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of five hundred seventy four and six-tenths (574.6) acres. The benefited area has been divided into
three (3) subareas labeled "A", "E", and "G" for cost allocation purposes (see figure no. 1 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or tract
of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap on fee per acre for the three (3) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs of
the benefits associated with each subarea and are in addition to project specific tap on fees established in section 16-3B-4 of this article.
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
A 83.6 $208.08
E 296.9 208.08
G 194.1 208.08
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of benefited properties divided into three (3) subareas and the location of the
constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the project.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in book 41,
page 22 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
4. Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification. Figure 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 606/715
Figure 2
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE
NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT, PHASE II
All of Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 which lie North of the following described line:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence N00°22'54"E, along the East Line of the East One-Half of the Fractional West One-Half of said Section 7, 2630.39 feet to the Northeast Corner of
Outlot "H", Walnut Ridge, Part Four, in accordance with the Plat thereof Recorded in Plat Book 34, Page 20, of the Records of the Johnson County
Recorder's Office and the POINT OF BEGINNING; Thence S73°32'25"W, along the North Line of said Walnut Ridge, Part Four, 239.51 feet; Thence
S16°27'35"E, along said North Line, 55.49 feet; Thence S73°32'25"W, along said North Line, 161.46 feet; Thence N78°15'03"W, along said North Line,
235.85 feet; Thence N04°57'17"E, along said North Line, 89.48 feet; Thence S67°17'52"W, along said North Line, 791.07 feet, to the Northwest Corner of
said Walnut Ridge, Part Four; Thence S47°00'W, 350 feet; Thence N63°00'W, 500 feet; Thence S58°00'W, 600 feet; Thence S67°00'W, 400 feet; Thence
N89°00'W, 550 feet; Thence S55°00'W, 600 feet, to the Easterly Right-of-Way Line of U.S. Highway 218.
Parcel Descriptions:
Parcel 1
All that portion of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision, as Recorded in Plat Book 27, at Page 30 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's
Office, contained within the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
which is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N89°22'30"E, along the
North Line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 397.44 feet, to its intersection with the Northeasterly Right-of-way Line of the existing Secondary
Road, on the Southwesterly Line of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision as Recorded in Plat Book 27, at Page 30, of the Records of the Johnson
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 607/715
County Recorder's Office, which point is the Point of Beginning;
Thence N89°22'30"E, along said North Line, 924.01 feet, to its intersection with the East Line of said Lot 1; Thence S00°23'47"E, along said East Line,
929.77 feet, to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1; Thence N47°12'00"W, along the Southwesterly Line of said Lot 1, 930.30 feet; Thence N40°45'00W,
along said Southwesterly Line, 379.61 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land contains 10.32 acres, more or less, and is subject to easements
and restrictions of record.
Parcel 2
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
Parcel 3
All that Portion of Parcels A, B, and C of Clear Creek Subdivision as Recorded in Plat Book 25, Page 53, of the Records of the Johnson County
Recorder's Office, contained within Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, EXCEPTING THEREFROM 6.33 acres of
Right-of-way easements, Recorded in Book 597, at Pages 22 through 27 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
Parcel 4
A portion of the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of the fenced highway a distance of 787 feet N7°30'W of the Southwest Corner of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range
6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N82°30'E, 1835.2 feet; Thence S13°26'W, 919 feet; Thence S85°10'W, 1502.5 feet to the Southwest Corner
of said Section 6, Thence N7°30'W, 787 feet to the Point of Beginning, all in the SW 1/4 of said Section 6.
Parcel 5
The West Half of the Fractional Northwest Quarter and the West Half of the Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian.
EXCEPTING THEREFROM 25.0 Acres, more or less acquired for road purposes by condemnation proceedings Recorded in Book 698, at Page 303 of the
Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
Parcel 6
The East half of the Northwest Quarter and the East Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian.
The total area of Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 which lie North of the above described line is 574.6 acres, more or less.
Figure 3
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE NORTHWEST
SANITARY SEWER PROJECT, PHASE II
Commencing at the Northeast corner of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Iowa City, Johnson County, Iowa;
Thence S00°03'27"E, along the East Line of said Section 7, a distance of 2557.47 feet; Thence S89°56'33"W, 1593.89 feet to the Point of Beginning of the
Centerline Alignment for an existing sanitary sewer; Thence N77°55'22"W, along said centerline, 399.48 feet; Thence N73°43'27"W, along said centerline,
393.53 feet; Thence N74°32'12"W, along centerline, 333.30 feet to the Point of Termination.
Figure 4
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project, Phase II, has
been completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project, Phase II is $119,563.63. This cost includes $31,979.06 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3915, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-6: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
1. The South Sycamore sanitary trunk sewer ("project") provides gravity sanitary sewer to areas immediately south of Grant Wood Elementary School.
This trunk sewer is the first major extension of sanitary sewer to areas that previously could not be served by gravity sewer and was made possible
by the construction of the south wastewater treatment plant and the southeast interceptor sewer. The project includes the construction of twenty six
(26) manholes and eight thousand four hundred thirty (8,430) linear feet of concrete sanitary sewer pipe ranging in size from twelve inches (12") to
twenty four inches (24") in diameter.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the southeast side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of
this section. The project was initiated by the city of Iowa City to encourage compact contiguous development in the area with sanitary sewer service
provided at a reasonable cost.
3. An agreement regarding prepayment and collection of sanitary sewer tap on fees has been made between the city of Iowa City and the developers
of Mount Prospect, parts 5-8, South Pointe Addition, parts 1-6 and Hollywood Manor, part 6.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 608/715
1. On November 12, 1991, the city council adopted resolution 91-281 authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the project. On May
26, 1992, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public hearing the city
council passed resolution 92-134 approving the project and fixing the date for bids. The city council awarded the project construction contract to
Weber Mid-State Construction on June 23, 1992, via resolution 92-186. The city council accepted the work for the project on January 18, 1994, via
resolution 94-16.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project via resolution
89-284.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is eight hundred fifty eight thousand five hundred forty eight
dollars thirty five cents ($858,548.35). This cost includes two hundred twenty seven thousand six hundred fifty eight dollars forty nine cents
($227,658.49) in interest costs.
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of four hundred seventy seven and nine-tenths (477.9) acres (see figure 1 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or tract
of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be one thousand seven hundred ninety six dollars fifty cents ($1,796.50) per acre. The fee
reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in addition to any other project-specific tap on fees established.
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance: This project serves twenty eight and six-tenths (28.6) acres of existing development in
order to divert flow from an existing, undersized sewer. No tap on fees will be charged to residents in this area, which includes the following
subdivisions: Mount Prospect, parts 1&1B, Hollywood Manor, parts 4&5 and Grant Wood Elementary School.
I. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of the benefited properties, exempt properties, and the location of the
constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the project.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder as denoted in book
2593, page 151 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
4. Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification. Figure 1
GENERAL BOUNDARY MAP
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 609/715
Figure 2
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY
THE SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER
Areas in Section 22, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.The East 750 feet of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 22.7 acres.
2.Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; Thence West 750 feet; Thence Southeasterly to a point which is
500 feet South of said Northeast Corner; Thence North 500 feet to the Point of Beginning. 4.3 acres.
Areas in Section 23, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
2.The Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
3.The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
4.All of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter except beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter;
Thence North 820 feet; Thence Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence West to the Point of
Beginning. 27.6 acres.
5.All of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter except the North 500 feet of the East 575 feet thereof. 33.4 acres.
6.Beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; Thence North 1100 feet; Thence East 550 feet; Thence
Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; Thence West to the Point of Beginning. 23.6 acres.
7.The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 acres.
Areas in Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 610/715
1.The West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 16.7 acres.
2.The West 550 feet of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 16.7 acres.
3.All of the West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter except beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Northwest Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter; Thence North 745 feet; Thence Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of said West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter; Thence West 550 feet to the Point of Beginning. 12.0 acres.
Areas in Section 26. Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; Thence South 975 feet; Thence Northwesterly to the Northwest
Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; Thence East to the Point of Beginning. 29.5 acres.
2.All of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter;
Thence North 345 feet; Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; Thence West to the Point of Beginning.
34.8 acres.
3.The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter. 40.0 acres.
4.All of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except beginning at the Northwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter;
Thence Southeasterly to a point which is 950 feet East of the Southwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; Thence West 950 feet
to said Southwest Corner; Thence North to the Point of Beginning. 25.6 acres.
5.Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; Thence South 575 feet; Thence Northwesterly to a point which is
370 feet West of said Northeast Corner; Thence East 370 feet to the Point of Beginning. 2.4 acres.
LOTS SERVED BY SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER.
Mount Prospect Addition, Part One
Lots 1 - 13 & 19 - 35
28.6 acres
Mount Prospect Addition, Part One "B"
Lots 96 - 105
Hollywood Manor Addition, Part Four
Lots 154 - 191
Hollywood Manor Addition, Part Five
Lots 192 - 201 & 205 - 213
Total Area of Properties Benefited = 477.9 acres.
Figure 3
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER
A 40.00 Foot Wide Permanent Easement for the South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk Sewer, located in the Southwest Quarter of Section 23, and in the
Southwest Quarter of Section 25, and in Section 26, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, which is more particularly described
as follows:
Beginning at a nail found in a concrete corner post at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of Section 26, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, and for the purpose of this legal description, the Centerline of Sycamore Street is assumed to bear N01°20'10"W, as recorded
in Plat Book 8, at Page 41, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office; Thence S01°28'13"E, 6.42 feet; Thence N87°26'48"E, 486.65 feet;
Thence S02°33'12"E, 40.00 feet; Thence S87°26'48"W, 527.41 feet; Thence N01°28'13"W, 403.17 feet; Thence N27°44'33"W, 843.64 feet; Thence
N03°45'15"E, 897.46 feet; Thence N37°10'25"W, 632.98 feet; Thence N85°23'53"W, 621.90 feet; Thence S88°11'49"W, 1326.14 feet, to the West Line of
the Northeast Quarter of said Section 26; Thence S87°45'11"W, 1089.43 feet; Thence N02°14'49"W, 40.00 feet; Thence N87°45'11"E, 1034.24 feet;
Thence N01°02'50"W, 1331.21 feet; Thence N01°20'10"W, 768.80 feet; Thence N88°43'02"E, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°20'10"E, 768.87 feet; Thence
S01°02'50"E, 1330.47 feet; Thence N87°45'11"E, 15.63 feet, to the West Line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 26; Thence N88°11'49"E, 1307.11
feet; Thence N01°48'11"W, 10.00 feet, to the North Line of said Northeast Quarter; Thence N88°11'49"E, along said North Line, 20.00 feet, to the
Northwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Northeast Quarter as recorded in Plat Book 7, at Page 63, of the Records of the Johnson County
Recorder's Office; Thence N88°17'12"E, along the North Line of said Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°42'48"E, 14.30
feet; Thence S85°23'53"E, 324.97 feet; Thence N01°42'48"W, 50.05 feet, to the North Line of said Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence
N88°17'12"E, along said North Line, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°42'48"E, 54.47 feet; Thence S85°23'53"E, 237.73 feet; Thence S37°10'25"E, 665.81 feet;
Thence S03°45'15"W, 901.11 feet; Thence S27°44'33"E, 841.70 feet, to the East Line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 26; Thence S01°28'13"E,
along said East Line, 365.31 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land contains 7.81 acres, more or less, and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.
Figure 4
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk Sewer Project has
been completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost for the South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk Sewer Project is $858,548.35 which includes $227,658.49 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3916, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-7: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE 1996 HIGHLANDER LIFT STATION, FORCE MAIN AND TRUNK SEWER
PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 611/715
1. The 1996 Highlander Lift Station, force main and trunk sewer project ("project") provides sanitary sewer service to the NCS/Northgate Corporate
Park area and the north slope of the area south of Interstate 80 in northeast Iowa City. The project includes the construction of a sewerage lift
station, twelve (12) manholes, two thousand seven hundred thirty (2,730) linear feet of gravity sanitary sewer pipe ranging in size from eight inches
(8") to thirty inches (30") in diameter and one thousand four hundred thirty four (1,434) linear feet of six inch (6") force main sewer pipe.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the northeast side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of
this section. The project was initiated by the city of Iowa City to fulfill the city's obligation under the conditions of a CEBA grant to National Computer
Systems, Inc., and to encourage compact contiguous development with sanitary sewer service provided at a reasonable cost.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On April 11, 1995, the city council adopted resolution 95-80 authorizing an agreement with Shoemaker & Haaland to design the project. On January
16, 1996, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public hearing the city
council passed resolution 96-8 approving the project and fixing the date for bids. The city council awarded the project construction contract to
Maxwell Construction, Inc., on February 13, 1996, via resolution 96-36. The city council accepted the work for the project on April 8, 1997, via
resolution 97-105.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project via resolution
95-63.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is six hundred twenty three thousand ninety three dollars
seventeen cents ($623,093.17). This cost includes one hundred sixty six thousand six hundred fifty five dollars forty four cents ($166,655.44) in interest
costs (see figure 5 of this section).
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of six hundred ninety six and seven-tenths (696.7) acres (see figures 1 and 2 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or tract
of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be eight hundred ninety four dollars thirty five cents ($894.35) per acre. The fee reflects
the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in addition to any other project specific tap on fees established.
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance: This project serves one hundred twenty four and one-tenth (124.1) acres of existing
development previously served by a lift station removed and replaced with this project. No tap on fees will be charged to residents in this area since
these properties were assessed for the original lift station and force main by special assessment proceedings (see figures 1 and 3 of this section).
I. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of the benefited properties, exempt properties and the location of the
constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the project.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the properties exempt from the costs associated with construction of the project.
4. Figure 4: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in book
2809, page 152 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
5. Figure 5: City engineer's cost certification. Figure 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 612/715
Figure 2
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE 1996
HIGHLANDER LIFT STATION, FORCE MAIN AND TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Areas in Section 36, Township 80 North Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.All of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter lying Southeasterly of Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way. 7.2 Acres
2.The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying Westerly of the Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way. 39.5 Acres
3.The Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, excepting the Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way. 36.0 Acres
4.The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying East of the Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way and North of the Interstate Highway 80 Right of
Way. 22.5 Acres
5.The Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying West of the Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way and North of the Interstate 80 Right of Way. 7.0
Acres
6.The Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
7.The Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
8.The Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
9.The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
10.The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying Southeasterly of Iowa State Highway 1 and South of Rapid Creek Road. 14.9 Acres
11.The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying South of the Rapid Creek Road. 21.2 Acres
12.The Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
13.The Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying Southeasterly of Iowa State Highway 1. 38.2 Acres
Areas in Section 31, Township 80 North Range 5 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying Southwest of Lynden Heights Road. 22.5 Acres
2.In the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter the following described land: Beginning at the Southeast Corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 thence
Northwesterly to a point on the West line of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 which point is 400 feet North of the Southwest corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4; thence Southerly
400 feet; thence Easterly 1320 feet to the Point of Beginning. 6.1 Acres
3.The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 613/715
4.The Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
5.The Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter lying Southwest of Lynden Heights Road. 0.5 Acres
Areas in Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.In the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a tract of land described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner; thence Easterly to the
Northeast corner; thence Southerly 400 feet; thence Southwesterly to a point on the West line of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4, which point is 790 feet South of
the Point of Beginning; thence Northerly to the Point of Beginning. 18.0 Acres
2.In the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a tract of land described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest Corner; thence Easterly to the
Northeast Corner; thence South 790 feet; thence Southwesterly to a point on the West line of the NW 1/4 NW 1/4, which point is 1060 feet South of the
Point of Beginning; thence North to the Point of Beginning. 28.0 Acres
Areas in Section 1, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian:
1.The Easterly 725 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter lying South of the Interstate Highway 80 Right of Way. 19.7 Acres
2.The Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
3.The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except the Southerly 260 feet of the Easterly 500 feet. 37.0 Acres
4.The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except the Southerly 260 feet. 32.1 Acres
5.In the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, the Northerly 400 feet of the Easterly 725 feet. 6.7 Acres
6.In the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, the Northerly 400 feet thereof. 12.1 Acres
7.In the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter the following described tract; the Northerly 400 feet excepting the Easterly 500 feet of the Northerly
400 feet. 7.5 Acres
TOTAL AREA OF BENEFITED PROPERTIES = 696.7 Acres Figure 3
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES EXEMPT FROM TAP ON ORDINANCE
1.The West half of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. lying Northerly of Interstate Highway 80 right-ofway
and Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way and the Northerly 281 feet of the Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36-80-6
lying Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way, containing 50.1 acres more or less. ("NATIONAL COMPUTER SYSTEMS" PROPERTY)
2.The Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 rightof-
way, except the Northerly 281 feet, containing 2.9 acres more or less. ("PLUM GROVE ACRES, INC." PROPERTY)
3.Commencing at the Southeast corner of the Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M.;
thence Westerly along the South line of said Northeast quarter 715.26 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 46°32' West 561.87 feet to the Easterly
right-of-way of Iowa State Highway 1; thence Southwesterly along said right-of-way to the South line of said Northeast quarter of Southwest quarter of
Section 36; thence Easterly along said line 582.94 feet to the point of beginning, containing 2.6 acres more or less. ("WILLIAM B. KRON, JR."
PROPERTY)
4.The Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. lying Northerly of Interstate Highway 80
right-of-way and Easterly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way, except the following: (1) Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Southeast quarter;
thence Westerly along the North line of said Southeast quarter 256.59 feet; thence Southwesterly 805.18 feet to the Northerly right-of-way of Interstate
Highway 80; thence Easterly along said right-of-way to the East line of said Southeast quarter; thence Northerly along the East line of said Southeast
quarter to the point of beginning; and (2) 1.20 acres platted as Highlander Development First Addition, said parcel contains 15.2 acres more or less.
("HIGHLANDER PARTNERSHIP" PROPERTY)
5.Commencing at the Northeast corner of the Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M.;
thence North 189.76 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 49°06'50" West 1,186.34 feet to the Easterly right-of-way of Iowa State Highway 1; thence
South 24°44'00" West along said right-of-way 267.5 feet; thence South 14°48'00" West 203.04 feet along said right-of-way; thence South 24°44'00" West
118.0 feet along said right-of-way; thence South 46°32'00" East 561.87 feet; thence Easterly along the North line of said Southeast quarter 458.67 feet;
thence Southwesterly 805.18 feet to the Northerly right-of-way of Interstate Highway 80; thence Easterly along said right-of-way to the East line of the
Southwest quarter of the Southeast quarter of said Section 36; thence North 0°12'00" East along the East line of said Southwest quarter 1,164.0 feet;
thence South 89°26'00" West 1,309.0 feet to the point of beginning, except for 50.00 acres platted as Highlander Development First Addition, said parcel
contains 2.14 acres more or less. ("M. DEAN JONES AND JOHN STEVENS, CONTRACT TO HIGHLANDER, INC., CONTRACT TO JOMAC
DEVELOPMENT COMPANY" PROPERTY)
6.HIGHLANDER DEVELOPMENT FIRST ADDITION NORTHGATE DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC. PROPERTY. Said subdivision contains 51.2 acres
more or less.
TOTAL AREA OF PROPERTIES EXEMPT = 124.1 Acres Figure 4
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF 1996 HIGHLANDER LIFT STATION,
FORCE MAIN AND TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Introduction
Following are legal descriptions of the location of the sanitary sewer and force main constructed with the 1996 Highlander Lift Station, Force Main and
Trunk Sewer Project. These descriptions have been prepared from the information contained in the IDNR approved construction plans, the property
acquisition plats and the As-Built Record Drawings of the constructed improvements.
Sanitary Sewer Description
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 614/715
Commencing at a found Concrete Monument at the NW Corner of the SW 1/4 of Section 36, T80N, R6W, of the 5th P.M.; Thence S89°16'46" E - 1324.85
feet along the North line of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 to a found pin set in concrete at the NW Corner of the NE 1/4 of said SW 1/4; thence S89°22'32" E -
398.27 feet along the North line of said NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and also being the North line of a Tract of Land described in Warranty Deed Book 370, Page
129, as recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder; thence S28°04'42" W - 132.79 feet to a point; thence S61°55'18" E - 30.59 feet to the
center of a new lift station wet well and the Point of Beginning of this sanitary sewer centerline description; thence S48°12'11" E - 26.25 feet along the
centerline of a 24" sanitary sewer line to manhole #1; thence continuing S48°12'11" E - 123.75 feet along the said centerline of a 24" sanitary sewer line to
manhole #2; thence S12°15'42" W - 130.00 feet along the centerline of a 18" sanitary sewer line to manhole #3; thence S48°54'49" E - 1140.00 feet along
the centerline of an 18" sanitary sewer line to manhole #5A and the end of this centerline description.
Also a description of the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer beginning at manhole #1; thence S25°21'49" W - 805.29 feet along the centerline of a 12"
sanitary sewer line to manhole #8; thence S79°05'44" W - 78.58 feet along the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer line to manhole #9; thence S25°06'01" W
- 395.12 feet along the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer line to manhole #10; thence S55°42'47" E - 41.89 feet along the centerline of a 12" sanitary
sewer line to an existing sewer manhole and the end of this centerline description.
Force Main Description
Commencing at a found Concrete Monument at the N.W. Corner of the SW 1/4 of Section 36, T80N, R6W, of the 5th P.M.; thence S89°16'46" E - 1324.85
feet along the North line of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 to a found pin set in concrete at the N.W. Corner of the NE 1/4 of said SW 1/4; thence S89°22'32" E -
398.27 feet along the North line of said NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and also being the North line of Tract of Land described in Warranty Deed Book 370, Page
129, as recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder; thence S28°04'42" W - 132.79 feet to a point; thence S61°55'18" E - 30.59 feet to the
center of a new lift station wet well and the Point of Beginning of this force main centerline description; thence S42°33'03" W - 50.63 feet along the
centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence S18°27'47" W - 134.31 feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence S25°21'49" W
- 573.49 feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence S70°06'01" W - 84.62 feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a
point; thence S25°06'01" W - 520.62 feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence S2°36'01" W - 80.70 feet along said centerline of a
6" force main to an existing 6" force main and the end of this description.
Figure 5
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the 1996 Highlander Lift Station, Force Main and Trunk
Sewer Project has been completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost for the 1996 Highlander Lift Station, Force Main and Trunk Sewer Project is $623,093.17 which includes
$166,655.44 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3917, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-8: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
1. The Scott Boulevard trunk sewer, completed in 1998, serves the southeasterly area of the city of Iowa City. The Scott Boulevard trunk sewer
includes sanitary sewer ranging in size from eight inch (8") to sixty six inch (66") and totaling approximately twelve thousand (12,000) linear feet. Also
included is the removal of the Heinz Lift Station and the Village Green Lift Station. Areas currently not within the city's boundary, when annexed, will
be served by this trunk sewer.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the southeast side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of
this section.
3. Certain agreements regarding the payment of tap on fees have been negotiated between the city of Iowa City as follows:
a. Subdivider's agreement recorded at book 1840, page 108, records of the Johnson County recorder between the city and village partners in
connection with the subdivision of Village Green part 13 and applying to Village Green part 13 and remaining portions of Village Green as
described therein.
b. Agreements recorded at book 2371, page 178, book 2391, page 199 and book 2708, page 248, records of the Johnson County, Iowa recorder
regarding the Scott Six Industrial Park.
c. Conditional zoning and subdivider's agreements applying to Windsor Ridge Addition, parts 1 through 14.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On November 8, 1994, the city council adopted resolution 94-339 authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the Scott Boulevard
trunk sewer project. On June 17, 1997, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate.
Following the public hearing the city council passed resolution 97-204 approving the plans and specifications of the project and authorizing
advertisement for bids. The city council awarded the project construction contract to Barbarossa and Sons, Inc., on July 15, 1997, by resolution 97-
244. The city council accepted the work for the project improvements on July 7, 1998, by resolution 98-223.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of sewer revenue bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project by resolution 97-
181.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 615/715
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is three million one hundred ninety two thousand five hundred
eighty two dollars twenty one cents ($3,192,582.21). This includes nine hundred four thousand three hundred ninety four dollars twenty four cents
($904,394.24) in interest costs.
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of one thousand eight hundred eighty (1,880) acres (see figure 1 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits, final subdivision plats or final approval
of planned area developments shall be issued for any parcel or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit
applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be one thousand six hundred ninety eight dollars eighteen cents ($1,698.18) per acre.
The fee reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in addition to any other project specific tap on fees established.
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance:
1. Existing platted subdivisions as of July 7, 1998, previously assessed for sanitary sewer service provided by the Heinz Lift Station and the Village
Green Lift Station as follows: all BDI Additions; Village Green Addition parts 9, 10, 11, 12; Village Green South Addition parts 1, 2, 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B.
2. Saddle Brook Addition part 1, an existing development already served by existing sanitary sewer.
I. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of the benefited properties and the location of the constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the Scott Boulevard trunk sewer project, listing the total area in acres.
3. Figure 3: General map of properties exempt from costs associated with this project specific tap on fee ordinance and properties subject to existing
agreements with the city for payment of tap on fees.
4. Figure 4: Legal description of the Scott Boulevard trunk sewer project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County
recorder as denoted in book 2818, page 9 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
5. Figure 5: City engineer's cost certification. Figure 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 616/715
Figure 2
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY BENEFITED BY THE
SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
ASSESSMENT LEGAL DESCRIPTION
Beginning at the center of Section 30, Township 79 North, Range 5 West; Thence West along the South line of the Northwest quarter of said Section 30, to
the West one-quarter corner of said Section 30; Thence West along the South line of the Southeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of Section
25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West; Thence North along the West line of said Southeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter to the Southwest
corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said Northeast one-quarter; Thence West along the South line of the Northwest one-quarter of said Northeast onequarter
to the Southwest corner of said Northwest one-quarter; Thence North along the West line of said Northwest one-quarter to the North one-quarter
corner of said Section 25; Thence East along the North line of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southwest corner of the Southeast one-quarter of the
Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of Section 24, Township 79 North, Range 6 West; Thence North along the West line of the East one
half of said Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter to the Northwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter of the
Southeast one-quarter of said Section 24; Thence West along the South line of the Northwest one-quarter of said Southeast one-quarter to the Southwest
corner of the Northwest one-quarter of said Southeast one-quarter; Thence North along the West line of the East one-half of said Section 24, to the North
one-quarter corner of said Section 24; Thence North along the West line of the Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of Section 13,
Township 79 North, Range 6 West to the Northwest corner of said Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter; Thence East along the North line
of the South one-half of the Southeast one-quarter of said Section 13, to the Southeast corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said Southeast one-quarter;
Thence North along the East line of said Southeast one-quarter, to the West one-quarter of Section 18, Township 79 North, Range 5 West; Thence East
along the North line of the Southwest one-quarter of said Section 18, to the Southwest corner of the Southeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of
the Northwest one-quarter of said Section 18; Thence North along the West line of the East one half of said Southeast one-quarter of the Northwest onequarter,
to the Northwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said Southeast one-quarter of the Northwest one-quarter; Thence East along the South
line of the North one half of the North one half of said Section 18, to the Southwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of
said Section 18; Thence North along the West line of said Northeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter, to the Northwest corner of said Northeast
one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter; Thence East along the North line of said Northeast one-quarter, to the Northeast corner of said Section 18;
Thence East along the North line of the Northwest one-quarter of Section 17, Township 79 North, Range 5 West, to the Northeast corner of the Northwest
one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 17; Thence South along the East line of the West one half of the West one half of said Section 17,
to the Southeast corner of the Northwest one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter of said Section 17; Thence West along the South line of said Northwest
one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter to the Southwest corner of said Northwest one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter; Thence South along the
West line of the Southwest one-quarter of said Section 17, to the Southwest corner of said Section 17; Thence South along the East line of Section 19,
Township 79 North, Range 5 West to the Southeast corner of the Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of said Section 19; Thence West
along the South line of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter, to the Southwest corner of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast
one-quarter; Thence South along the East line of the Southwest one-quarter of said Southeast one-quarter, to the Southeast corner of said Southwest
one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter; Thence South along the East line of the Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 30
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 617/715
to the Southeast corner of said Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter; Thence West along the South line of said Northwest one-quarter of
the Northeast one-quarter, to the Southwest corner of said Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter; Thence South along the West line of the
Northeast one-quarter of said Section 30, to said Point of Beginning, containing 1880 acres more or less. Figure 3
PROPERTIES EXEMPT FROM THIS PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE
ORDINANCE AND PROPERTY SUBJECT TO EXISTING AGREEMENT
WITH CITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAP ON FEES
Figure 4
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
The Centerline Alignments of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project located in the North one half of Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West, the
East one half of Section 24, Township 79 North, Range 6 West and the West one half of Section 19, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa, which is more particularly described as follows:
Alignment No. 1
Commencing at the West one quarter corner of Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa;
Thence N88°36'00"E along the South line of the Northwest one quarter of said Section 25, a distance of 1071.33 feet; Thence N00°00'00"E, 755.56 feet to
an existing manhole in a structure, and the Point of Beginning of Alignment No. 1 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project; Thence N77°12'13"E, along
said centerline, 355.02 feet; Thence N82°54'06"E, along said centerline, 496.69 feet; Thence S74°05'54"E, along said centerline, 631.22 feet; Thence
N79°54'04"E, along said centerline, 568.78 feet; Thence N64°54'06"E, along said centerline, 67.95 feet; Thence N38°54'06"E, along said centerline,
304.80 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 64.00 feet; Thence S81°05'56"E, along said centerline, 208.00 feet; Thence S51°05'56"E, 80.00
feet; Thence S21°05'56"E, along said centerline, 240.00 feet; Thence S43°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence S66°05'56"E, along said
centerline 48.00 feet; Thence S88°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 329.54 feet; Thence
N42°54'04"E, along said centerline, 802.66 feet; Thence N31°53'52"E, along said centerline, 550.93 feet; Thence N10°23'52"E, along said centerline,
32.00 feet; Thence N11°06'08"W, along said centerline, 456.00 feet; Thence N11°23'52"E, along said centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N33°53'52"E, along
said centerline, 397.83 feet; Thence N33°53'33"E, along said centerline and crossing under U.S. Highway No. 6, a distance of 354.88 feet; Thence
N03°14'22"E, along said centerline, 942.45 feet; Thence N51°09'51"E, along said centerline, 203.07 feet; Thence N00°13'57"E, along said centerline,
715.91 feet; Thence N28°52'10"E, along said centerline, 461.37 feet; Thence N01°33'45"W, along said centerline, 439.23 feet; Thence N24°58'18"E, along
said centerline and crossing under the Heartland Rail Corporation railroad tracks, 160.00 feet; Thence N31°15'52"E, along said centerline, 254.44 feet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 618/715
Thence N53°55'19"E, along said centerline, 181.25 feet to the Point of Termination of Alignment No. 1 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project.
Alignment No. 2
Commencing at the West one quarter corner of Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa;
Thence N88°36'00"E along the South line of the Northwest one quarter of said Section 25, a distance of 1071.33 feet; Thence N00°00'00"E, 755.56 feet to
an existing manhole in a structure; Thence N77°12'13"E, along said centerline, 355.02 feet; Thence N82°54'06"E, along said centerline, 496.69 feet;
Thence S74°05'54"E, along said centerline, 631.22 feet; Thence N79°54'04"E, along said centerline, 568.78 feet; Thence N64°54'06"E, along said
centerline, 67.95 feet; Thence N38°54'06"E, along said centerline, 304.80 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 64.00 feet; Thence
S81°05'56"E, along said centerline, 208.00 feet; Thence S51°05'56"E, 80.00 feet; Thence S21°05'56"E, along said centerline, 240.00 feet; Thence
S43°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence S66°05'56"E, along said centerline 48.00 feet; Thence S88°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00
feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 329.54 feet; Thence N42°54'04"E, along said centerline, 802.66 feet; Thence N31°53'52"E, along said
centerline, 550.93 feet; Thence N10°23'52"E, along said centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N11°06'08"W, along said centerline, 456.00 feet; Thence
N11°23'52"E, along said centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N33°53'52"E, along said centerline, 397.83 feet; Thence N33°53'33"E, along said centerline and
crossing under U.S. Highway No. 6, a distance of 354.88 feet; Thence N03°14'22"E, along said centerline, 942.45 feet; Thence N51°09'51"E, along said
centerline, 203.07 feet; Thence N00°13'57"E, along said centerline, 715.91 feet to the Point of Beginning of Alignment No. 2 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk
Sewer Project; Thence N78°15'17"W, along said centerline and under Scott Boulevard, 421.00 feet; Thence N73°014'06"W, along said centerline, 283.28
feet; Thence N01°02'49"E, along said centerline, 452.41 feet; Thence N16°32'49"W, along said centerline, 356.31 feet; Thence N05°28'57"W, along said
centerline, and under Heinz Road and the Heartland Rail Corporation railroad tracks, 601.00 feet; Thence N62°26'23"W, along said centerline, 274.41 feet
to the Point of Termination of Alignment No. 2 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project. Figure 5
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost for the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project is $3,192,582.21 which includes $904,394.24 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3918, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-9: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE DANE ROAD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
1. The Dane Road trunk sewer serves the area located west of the Iowa City airport and south of U.S. Highway 1. The Dane Road trunk sewer project
included the construction of thirty two (32) manholes and ten thousand eight hundred forty six feet (10,846') of sanitary sewer pipe with pipe diameter
ranging from eight inches (8") to thirty inches (30") and included the removal of the W.B. development lift station. Areas currently not within the city's
boundary, when annexed, will be served by this trunk sewer.
2. The city council determined that installation of the project would facilitate development of the southwest side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of
this section and encourage compact development with sanitary sewer service provided at reasonable cost.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On October 8, 2001, the city council adopted resolution 01-328 authorizing an agreement with Earth Tech Inc., to design the sewer for the Dane
Road trunk sewer project. On February 18, 2003, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost
estimate. Following the public hearing, the city council passed resolution 03-61 approving the plans and specifications of the project and authorizing
advertisement for bids. The city council awarded the project construction contract to Metro Pavers Inc., on June 10, 2003, by resolution 03-185. The
city council accepted the work for the project improvements on February 1, 2005, by resolution 05-53.
2. The city council authorized the issuance of sewer revenue bonds as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution 03-
302.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is one million five hundred forty nine thousand seven dollars
twenty four cents ($1,549,007.24). This cost includes two hundred twenty eight thousand three hundred forty six dollars seventy two cents
($228,346.72) in interest costs.
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of three hundred eighty eight and six-tenths (388.6) acres. The benefited area has been divided into
two (2) subareas labeled "A" and "B" since the area is bisected by U.S. Highway 218 right of way (see figure 1 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection to the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or tract
of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap-on fee per acre for the two (2) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs of the
benefits associated with each subarea and are in addition to any other project specific tap-on fees established.
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 619/715
A 168.5 $3,986.12
B 220.1 3,986.12
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of benefited properties divided into two (2) subareas and the location of the
constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the project.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in book 49,
page 34 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
4. Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
Figure 2
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 620/715
THE DANE ROAD TRUNK SEWER
Areas in the Northeast Quarter Section 29, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.That part of the Northeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter lying Southwesterly of Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218). 29.7 acres.
2.The North 870 feet of the Southeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter. 26.4 acres.
3.The North 870 feet of the West 625 feet of the Southwest Quarter, Northeast Quarter. 12.5 acres.
4.That part of the Northwest Quarter, Northeast Quarter except the South 825 feet of the West 690 feet. 26.9 acres.
5.That part of the Northeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter lying Northeasterly of Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 2.9 acres.
Areas in the Northwest Quarter Section 29, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.The North 495 feet of the East 355 feet of the Northwest Quarter. 4.0 acres.
Areas in the Southwest Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.That part of the Southeast Quarter, Southwest Quarter lying Southeasterly of State Highway 1. 27.0 acres
Areas in the Southeast Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.That part of the Southeast Quarter lying Southwesterly of State Highway 1 and Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 42.0 acres.
2.That part of the Southeast Quarter lying Northeasterly of State Highway 1 and Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 73.5 acres.
Areas in the Northeast Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.That part of the Northeast Quarter lying Southerly of the Iowa City Municipal Airport and State Highway 1 right of way. 8.7 acres.
Areas in the Southwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.That part of the Southwest Quarter 21 except the North 600 feet thereof. 123.6 acres.
Areas in the Southeast Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.The South 720 feet of the West 345 feet of the Northwest Quarter, Southeast Quarter. 5.7 acres.
Areas in the Northwest Quarter Section 28, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.The North 425 feet of the West 580 feet of the Northwest Quarter. 5.7 acres.
TOTAL AREA OF BENEFITED PROPERTIES = 388.6 ACRES
Figure 3
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE DANE ROAD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Alignment 1
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 1 is a part of the Southeast Quarter Section 20, and the South Half Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, further described as follows:
Commencing at the South Quarter Corner of Section 20; thence N00°13'50"E along the West line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 20, 588.85 feet;
thence S89°46'10"E 36.79 feet to a sanitary sewer manhole and the Point of Beginning; thence S89°39'50"E along the centerline of the sanitary sewer
199.23 feet; thence S88°51'34"E along said centerline 420.83 feet; thence N89°48'03"E along said centerline 265.01 feet; thence S89°43'53"E along said
centerline 255.85 feet; thence S68°33'03"E along said centerline 245.66 feet; thence S32°09'06"E along said centerline 152.41 feet; thence N53°48'50"E
along said centerline 415.85 feet; thence S71°19'13"E along said centerline 331.39 feet; thence S71°49'06"E along said centerline 315.05 feet; thence
N89°48'18"E along said centerline 268.48 feet to manhole which is 388.47 feet North and 54.43 feet East of the Southeast Corner Section 20; thence
N00°11'34"E along said centerline 162.68 feet; thence N11°55'02"E along said centerline 404.31 feet; thence N2°46'30"E along said centerline 242.62
feet; thence N82°51'46"E along said centerline 519.06 feet; thence N81°53'54"E along said centerline 329.19 feet; thence N3°46'40"W along said
centerline 61.36 feet; thence N84°04'32"E along said centerline 575.88 feet; thence N84°14'38"E along said centerline 545.87 feet; thence N83°49'54"E
along said centerline 595.54 feet to a manhole which is 1483.96 feet North and 62.98 East of the South Quarter Corner of Section 21; thence N84°59'57"E
along said centerline 587.04 feet; thence N0°45'15"W along said centerline 41.50 feet to the Point of Termination; For the purpose of this description the
West line of the Southeast Quarter Section 20 is assumed to bear N00°13'50"E.
Alignment 2
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 2 is a part of the Northeast Quarter Section 20, and the Northwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa further described as follows:
Commencing at the East Quarter Corner of said Section 20; thence N00°17'56"E along the East line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 20, 1420.85
feet; thence N90°00'00"E 39.22 feet to a Sanitary Sewer manhole and the Point of Beginning; thence S35°14'41"W along the centerline of the Sanitary
Sewer 398.05 feet; thence S59°08'38"W along said centerline 400.38 feet; thence S57°09'20"E along said centerline 399.83 feet; thence S43°16'20"W
along said centerline 399.46 feet; thence S30°54'20"E along said centerline 350.83 feet to the Point of Termination. For the purpose of this description the
East line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 20 is assumed to bear N00°17'56"E.
Alignment 3
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 3 is a part of the Southeast Quarter Section 20, and the Southwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa, further described as follows:
Commencing at the East Quarter Corner of said Section 20; thence S00°09'12"W along the East line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 20, 1043.61
feet; thence N90°00'00"W, 89.48 feet to a Sanitary Sewer Manhole and the Point of Beginning; thence S64°29'04"E along the centerline of the Sanitary
Sewer 228.29 feet; thence S71°33'48"E along said centerline 222.78 feet; thence S79°55'00"E along said centerline 289.94 feet; thence S88°52'53"E
along said centerline 258.99 feet; thence N84°50'44"E along said centerline 112.09 feet to the Point of Termination. For the purpose of this description the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 621/715
East line of the Southeast Quarter of Section 20 is assumed to bear S00°09'12"W.
Figure 4
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Ronald R. Knoche, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that the construction of the Dane Road Trunk Sewer has been completed
in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost of the Dane Road Trunk Sewer Project is $1,549,007.24. This cost includes $228,346 in interest costs.
/s/
Ronald R. Knoche, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 09-4333, 4-6-2009)
16-3B-10: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE SCOTT PARK TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
A. General Project Description:
1. The Scott park trunk sewer project ("project") provides gravity sanitary sewer to areas northeast of Court Street and Scott Boulevard to Rochester
Avenue. This trunk sewer is an extension of sanitary sewer to areas that previously could not be served by gravity sewer and was made possible by
the upgrade of the Court Hill trunk sewer. The project included the construction of fourteen (14) manholes and three thousand two hundred fifty
(3,250) linear feet of sanitary sewer pipe ranging from eight inches (8") to eighteen inches (18") in diameter.
2. The city council determined that the project would facilitate development of the northeast side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of this section
and encourage compact, contiguous development in the area with sanitary sewer service provided at a reasonable cost.
B. Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
1. On August 19, 2003, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public
hearing the city council passed resolution 03-213 approving the project and fixing the date for bids. The city council awarded the project construction
contract to Bockenstedt Excavating, Inc., on September 23, 2003, via resolution 03-297. The city council accepted the work for the project on May
18, 2004, via resolution 04-147.
C. Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified by the city engineer, is two hundred twenty two thousand seven hundred sixty nine
dollars sixty two cents ($222,769.62).
D. Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of 189.21 acres (see figure 1 of this section).
E. Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection with the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel or
tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
F. Schedule Of Fees: The tap-on fee for the benefited area shall be one thousand thirty eight dollars twenty six cents ($1,038.26) per acre. The fee reflects
the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in addition to any other project specific tap-on fees established.
G. Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees and development sequencing.
Such agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
H. Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap-On Fee Ordinance: This project serves 10.03 acres of existing development. No tap-on fees will be
charged to residents in this area, which includes the addresses on Hummingbird Lane south of Lower West Branch Road.
I. Maps And Illustrations:
1. Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location of the benefited properties, exempt properties, and the location of the
constructed project.
2. Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the construction of the project.
3. Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in book 49,
page 33 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
4. Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 622/715
Figure 1
GENERAL BOUNDARY MAP
Figure 2
Property Address Legal Description Area
(Acres)
3405 Rochester Ave. Com on S Line Hwy 1 34' E of W line 7-79-5 E 149.73' S 299.4' W 149.73' N 299.4' to beg 1.02
3500 Lower West
Branch Rd.
That part of W 300' SW NW desc as aud. par. #97040 in survey bk 37 pg 347 2.38
3661 Rochester Ave. Comm C/L of Old Hwy 1 807.3' NELY of intersection with W/L 7-79-5; S 296.77' to beg.; S 404'; E
432'; N 404'; W 432' to POB
4.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 623/715
4643 Herbert Hoover
Hwy. SE
Lot 1 except land conveyed to Johnson County in book 997 7.90
4640 Lower West
Branch Rd. SE
Tegler subdivision lot 2 13.92
4653 Herbert Hoover
Hwy. SE
Comm at pt of inter S ROW line of Hwy 1 & W line of W 1/2 NE NW; thence S 144'; E 145'; N
181.95'; thence SWLY along road to beg .54A
0.54
4665 Herbert Hoover
Hwy. SE
Tract "B" of boundary survey as described in book 29, page 67 10.95
4679 Herbert Hoover
Hwy. SE
E 1/2 NE NW except land conveyed in book 998 page 460 as easement to Johnson County 18.55
4641 Lower West
Branch Rd. SE
Com NE cor SW W 1639.8' to pt of beg; S 218' W 100' N 218' E 100' to beg 0.50
4659 Lower West
Branch Rd. SE
Com NE cor SW sec N 87 deg 45' W along N line SW 954.7' to beg S 2 deg 15' W 321.4' N 87 deg
45' W 249.1' N 2 deg 15' E 321.4' S 87
1.84
4667 Lower West
Branch Rd. SE
Com NE cor SW N 87 deg 45' W along N line SW 707.5' to beg S 2 deg 15' W 321.4' N 87 deg 45'
W 247.2' N 2 deg 15' E 321.4' S 87 deg
1.83
4694 Lower West
Branch Rd. SE
E 10A SE NW 9.60
290 Hummingbird Ln.1 1285--1 Hoyle's first subdivision lot 1 1.00
164 Hummingbird Ln.1 Com 2045.12' N of SW cor 7-79-5; E 769.70' to pt of beg; S 110'; E 303.59'; N 110'; W 303.59' to
beg 0.77 ac
0.77
140 Hummingbird Ln.1 Com at a pt on C/L rd 2045.12' N of SW cor 7-79-5; E 769.70'; S 0 deg 01' W 110' to pt of beg; E
303.59'; S 140'; S 140'; W 303.59';
0.98
110 Hummingbird Ln.1 Com 2045.12' N & 769.7' E of SW cor 7-79-5 S 240- to pt of beg; E 303.59'; S 140 thence W
303.59'; N 140' to beg 0.98 ac
0.98
66 Hummingbird Ln.1 1668--2 Lyman subdivision lot 2 1.30
32 Hummingbird Ln.1 1668--1 Lyman subdivision lot 1 1.00
Rochester Heights
subdivision
Lots 21 - 60 13.75
Olde Towne Village
subdivision
Lots 1 - 49 33.21
Lindeman subdivision
parts 3 & 4
Lots 63 - 166 63.19
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 624/715
Total 189.21
acres
Note:
1.Exempt - Hummingbird Lane total acres = 6.03.
Figure 3
Scott Park Trunk Sewer is a part of the Northwest Quarter and the Southwest Quarter Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, further described as follows:
Commencing at the West Quarter Corner of Section 7 a cut X in the road;
thence N01°06'32"W along the West line of Section 7 564.26 feet;
thence N90°00'00"E 52.98 feet to a sanitary sewer manhole the Point of Beginning;
thence N88°55'04"E along the centerline of the sanitary sewer 173.85 feet;
thence N88°28'47"E along said centerline 157.16 feet;
thence S50°42'24"E along said centerline 401.59 feet;
thence S50°41'43"E along said centerline 199.52 feet;
thence S75°55'31"E along said centerline 138.35 feet;
thence S45°10'49"E along said centerline 302.45 feet;
thence S19°21'15"E along said centerline 220.90 feet;
thence S32°15'06"E along said centerline 381.82 feet;
thence S10°37'09"E along said centerline 400.08 feet;
thence S11°13'53"E along said centerline 240.34 feet;
thence S78°19'33"E along said centerline 119.56 feet;
thence S11°29'17"E along said centerline 248.16 feet;
thence S10°59'19"E along said centerline 265.60 feet the Point of Termination;
For the purpose of this description the West line of the Northwest Quarter Section 7 is assumed to bear N01°06'32"W.
Figure 4
COST CERTIFICATION
I, Ronald R. Knoche, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby certify that construction of the Scott Park Trunk Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
I further certify that the total actual cost for the Scott Park Sanitary Trunk Sewer Project is $222,769.62.
/s/
Ronald R. Knoche, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 09-4334, 4-6-2009)
ARTICLE C. POTABLE WATER USE AND SERVICE
16-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN: Water pipe owned, operated or maintained by the city and used for the purpose of distribution of potable water.
DUAL PURPOSE WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to measure the volume of water passing through the service line which is
discharged into the city wastewater treatment facilities.
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: Connection from the distribution water mains to the building or point of service, including any and all of the
following: pipe(s), valve(s), fire hydrant(s) and pump(s).
SERVICE AREA: The areas served by city water.
SERVICE LINE: The pipe laid from the distribution water main to the point of service or building served. The service line shall include stop boxes, pipes
and valves between the distribution water main and the water meter.
SINGLE PURPOSE WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to measure the volume of water passing through the service line which
is not discharged into the wastewater treatment facilities.
STOP BOX: A shutoff valve on a service line that can be opened and closed from the surface of the ground.
WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to measure the volume of water passing through a service line. (1978 Code §33-115; amd.
1994 Code)
16-3C-2: DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR SERVICE LINE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 625/715
The director of public works may deny an application for a water service line when, in the judgment of the director, the extension of a distribution water
main rather than a service line is necessary to provide adequate service or to assure the future development of the city water utility. (1978 Code §33-116;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-3: CONNECTION TO DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN:
A. Application For Service: Application for water service line connections shall be made, in writing, to the department of public works by the owner of the
property to be served or by the owner's agent. Such application shall state the official address(es) of the property to be served, the size of the pipe
required and the approximate location. (1978 Code §33-133; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Service Lines:
1. Cost Of Installation To Property Owner: All service lines, including the connection to the distribution water main, shall be installed at the expense of
the owner of the property to be served.
2. New Lines: The size of all new service lines shall be as set forth in the standards on file in the department of public works.
3. Separate Connections: There shall be separate service lines from the distribution water main to each building service. Such service lines shall be
installed according to the standards established by the city engineer.
4. Extension: After a service line has been laid, no person shall make any attachment or connection to said service line in order to serve any other
property or buildings. (1978 Code §33-134; amd. 1994 Code)
5. Shutoff Required:
a. An outside stop box shall be provided for each individual building or property for each service line, shall be located between the curb and property
line, shall be visible from the sidewalk or public right of way and be accessible to the city. For a building or dwelling with more than one dual
purpose water meter, an individual shutoff valve shall be provided for each such meter. This can either be done by installing a separate outside
stop box for each meter or by installing the shutoff valves and meters in a common utility space. If the shutoff valves are located in a utility space,
outside access to this space must be provided to the city, including a key. This requirement shall also pertain to an existing building that is being
modified to provide for multiple meters. (Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996)
b. If an existing building is modified to provide two (2) or more dual purpose water meters and is served by only one service line and one outside stop
box, the account holder shall provide a common utility space with outside access.
c. For those buildings so modified between January 30, 1996 and July 1, 2011, where no common utility space with outside access is available, the
account(s) attributable to the stop box shall be placed in the property owner's name, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the public works
director. (Ord. 11-4438, 7-5-2011)
C. Maintenance Of Service: All service lines shall be maintained at the expense of the owner of the property. Any leak or other defect in the service line
shall be promptly repaired by the owner. If not repaired promptly, the water may, after written notice to the owner, be turned off by the city until such
repairs have been made. (1978 Code §33-136; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Abandoned Service Lines: All service lines which are no longer used must be permanently closed off at the distribution water main at the expense of
the property owner. This work shall be completed within one calendar year from the date of abandonment. If not completed in the required time, the city
or its agent, after written notice to the owner, shall complete the work and bill the property owner. (Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996)
16-3C-4: WATER METERS:
A. Metered Water Required:
1. Requirements For Installation Of Water Meters:
a. All water furnished by the city shall be metered unless otherwise provided in this article. The owner shall provide a suitable location and plumbing
system for the water meter. The owner shall be responsible for obtaining the meter from the city and also for the installation of each meter. On new
construction, the water meter(s) shall be installed prior to or coincident with installation of plumbing fixtures. The water meter(s) shall be installed in
accordance with the standards established by the city engineer.
b. Plumbing systems shall be so constructed and the meters so placed that the volume of water passing through the service line shall be measured
by the water meter(s). (1978 Code §33-149; amd. 1994 Code)
c. A meter charge in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code, will be required for each meter provided by the city.
d. All owners and occupants of property where water meters are located are deemed to have consented to the city's right to enter the owner's and/or
occupant's property to test water meters where the city has reasonable grounds to believe the water meter is not operating according to
performance standards of appropriately installed and operating water meters. If access to the meter is not permitted, the water service may, after
written notice to the property owner, be turned off by the city until access is allowed. (Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996)
2. Requirements For Single Purpose Water Meters:
a. A person may apply to the department of public works for a single purpose water meter. If the department determines that such property is eligible
for installation of a meter, it will be provided to the person or the person's plumbing contractor or authorized agency, upon payment of a
nonrefundable single purpose meter fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code, and upon payment of the meter deposit.
b. A single purpose water meter shall be installed according to standards. (1978 Code §33-149; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 626/715
B. Proof Prerequisite To Installation: In a new building or structure, all plumbing involving water meters shall be approved by the city plumbing inspector
after installation. (1994 Code)
C. Protection Of Meters:
1. The owner of the property where a water meter is located shall be responsible for the care and protection of the water meter. In case of damage to
the water meter or in case of its stoppage or improper operation, the property owner shall give immediate notice to the department of public works.
2. In all cases where water meters are broken or damaged, except for ordinary wear and tear, the necessary repairs to the water meter shall be made
by the city, and the cost of such repairs shall be paid by the property owner. If payment for damages is not received at the time of demand, the city
may, after written notice, shut off the water and not restore service until full payment has been made, as set forth in article A of this chapter.
3. No person shall, in any way, interfere with installed water meters, and no person except an authorized employee of the department of public works
shall break a seal on a water meter. (1978 Code §33-154; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Meter Tests: Whenever the city has reasonable grounds to believe a water meter is not operating according to performance standards of an
appropriately installed and operating meter, the owner of the property may request and the city may perform a test on the water meter. (1994 Code)
E. Inspections Permitted: All persons occupying and/or owning property where city water meters are located shall permit the city to inspect all water
meters on or within the property when the city has reasonable grounds to believe the water meter is not operating according to performance standards
of an appropriately installed and operating water meter. If city access is not permitted to the meter, the water may, after written notice to the property
owner, be turned off by the city until access is allowed. If city access is not permitted to the meter, the city may estimate water use for purposes of
wastewater treatment charges. (Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996)
F. Removal Of Meters: Whenever water service is to be discontinued, the owner of the property shall grant the city access to the property for the purpose
of removing the water meter. (1994 Code)
16-3C-5: EXTENSION OF DISTRIBUTION WATER MAINS:
A. No distribution water main shall be extended outside the limits of the city except to serve property within the city limits or under contract with the city.
(1978 Code §33-120; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Oversized diameter distribution water mains necessary to provide a uniform supply of water throughout the service area shall be paid by a water tap-on
fee for acres served as defined by the water service area map on file in the department of public works. (1994 Code)
16-3C-6: FIRE PROTECTION:
A. All fire hydrants external to a building shall be installed according to standards established by the city engineer and shall be maintained by the city
according to standards established by the director.
B. All existing fire hydrants external to a building shall be maintained by the city.
C. Fees for maintaining fire hydrants external to a building that are not city owned shall be charged as set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of
this code. (1994 Code)
16-3C-7: INFORMATION SUPPLIED TO PLUMBERS AND INTERESTED PARTIES:
Information which may be obtained from the records, maps and employees of the Department of Public Works relative to the location of distribution water
mains and service lines will be furnished to licensed plumbers and interested parties, but such information shall not be construed as a guarantee of the
accuracy of such records. (1978 Code §33-119; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-8: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES BY TURNING ON WATER:
In turning on water, the City shall not be responsible for any damage that may occur by reason of improperly installed or improperly functioning plumbing
fixtures or connections. (1978 Code §33-123; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-9: SHUT OFF OF SERVICE:
The City reserves the right to shut off the water in its distribution water mains at any time for maintenance and installations and as the City deems
necessary to protect the City water utility system. (1978 Code §33-124; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-10: PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED:
A. No person shall install a private water well within the City limits unless:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 627/715
1. A determination has been made by the Public Works Director that:
a. The point of water use is greater than three hundred feet (300') from an accessible distribution water main owned and controlled by the City;
b. The proposed private well is located outside the influence of an existing or proposed City owned well; and
c. The proposed private well is needed due to extraordinary circumstances of the location of the property within the City which, if private ground
water sources were not used, would work an extraordinary hardship on the property; or
2. The well is being installed by a governmental entity on property owned by that entity; the Public Works Director has determined that the installation
of the well will not adversely affect City water; and, the City Manager has determined that the installation of a well is in the public interest.
B. The City may require owners of existing private wells to connect to a City owned distribution water main in accordance with provisions of this article if
the above conditions are not satisfied. Such connection shall be completed within ninety (90) calendar days after official notice to do so, and the
existing private wells abandoned as required by State law.
C. A geothermal well is not a private water well for purposes of this section. (Ord. 17-4717, 8-1-2017)
ARTICLE D. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USERS
16-3D-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to control all
discharges to the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-20.1)
16-3D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, which begins five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house or building
connection".
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from normal domestic or sanitary
wastewater.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): Clear, unpolluted water which enters the collection system from the ground or uncontrollable sources.
INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes which are the cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC, 1345), as amended, or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the solid waste
disposal act (SWDA, 42 USC 6901 et seq.), the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, all as amended, or more stringent state criteria, including
those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title II of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
POTW.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) and a
suspended solids concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property, including legal and equitable property interests.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 628/715
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or fiduciary thereof.
PLUMBING OFFICIAL: The person designated by the city to administer and enforce the city codes relating to plumbing.
PREMISES: Includes any interest in real property, including, but not limited to, buildings and improvements, whether intended for or used for residential,
commercial or industrial use.
PROCESS WASTEWATER: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of
any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
PROPERLY SHREDDED REFUSE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer owned by the city.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), as amended, owned in this
instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plants but does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, a POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the potw from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. "Publicly owned treatment
works" is synonymous with "wastewater treatment works".
REFUSE: Animal and vegetable waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR: Any contributor to the city's wastewater treatment works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used only for
domestic dwelling purposes.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: Spent water of a facility other than the POTW.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any periods of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and will
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM SEWER: A drain or sewer for conveying surface water, ground water or unpolluted water from any source.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the wastewater treatment works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment works provided.
USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: See definition of Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. (1978 Code §33-20.2; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS1:
A. City Approval And County Permit Required:
1. No person shall construct a private sanitary sewer disposal system without first securing approval from the city.
2. No private sanitary sewer disposal system shall hereafter be constructed without first obtaining a permit from the county board of health.
B. Definition Of Private Sewage System; Prohibitions: Private sewage disposal systems include, but are not limited to, mechanical treatment systems,
septic tanks, lagoons and reservoirs. Manure pits, privy vaults and cesspools are prohibited.
C. Compliance With Provisions: Owners of private sewage disposal systems are not relieved from the responsibility of satisfying the requirements of this
article.
D. Design, Construction, Operation And Maintenance Of System: Design, construction, operation and maintenance of private sanitary sewer disposal
systems shall comply with all requirements of the city, the county board of health and the Iowa administrative code environmental protection division
567, chapter 69, as amended.
E. Location:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 629/715
1. No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed or installed in water bearing strata supplying water used for drinking or culinary purposes,
nor in any porous soil where seepage or percolating surface or ground water may carry the pollution or infection of the contents of such system into a
well, spring or any other source of water used as a public or domestic water supply.
2. No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed within fifty feet (50') of any spring, well or watercourse, within ten feet (10') of any property
line or within twenty five feet (25') of any building used for human occupancy.
F. Discharges From System: No private sewage disposal system shall discharge effluent onto any street, alley or watercourse. Aerobic systems shall
discharge effluent directly into the city's wastewater treatment works. Anaerobic systems shall discharge effluent to a subsurface absorption system.
(1978 Code §33-20.23)
16-3D-4: SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT:
The entire city is hereby organized into one sanitary sewer district. (1978 Code §33-20.12; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-5: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy and/or employment, situated within the jurisdiction of the city in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety
(90) calendar days after date of official notice to do so, provided said public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the property line and is
accessible without the need to acquire additional property rights. (1978 Code §33-20.13)
B. A nonresidential development consisting of one or more buildings on one or more lots may, at the discretion of the director, be served by a private
sanitary sewer collection system, provided:
1. In association with such development there is the need for a lift station and force main which is an integral part of the private sanitary sewer
collection system; and
2. The private sewer collection system is constructed in accordance with Iowa City design standards for public improvements on file in the office of the
department of public works; and
3. A single legal entity is established and responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the private sanitary sewer collection system. (1978 Code §33-
20.13; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. Nothing in this article shall be construed or intended to change or modify
requirements set forth in title 17, chapter 1 of this code.
B. Nonliability Of City: The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
C. Specifications:
1. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city.
2. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be in conformance with chapter 1, article D of this title and title 17, chapter 1 of this code. The
excavation showing the building sewer and connections shall be kept open until satisfactorily inspected by the city.
3. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by means approved by the plumbing official and shall be discharged to the building sewer for gravity flow into the public sewer. (1978 Code
§33-20.14)
D. Separate Building Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sanitary sewer shall be provided for every building except as herein
provided. (1978 Code §33-20.13)
E. Surface Water Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
surface water or groundwater directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (1978 Code §33-20.14)
F. Maintenance Of Building Sewers And Connection: All building sewers and connections shall be maintained at the expense of the owner of the property.
Any failure or defect of the service line on the owner's property prior to making connection and the connection to the city sewer main including surface
restoration, shall be promptly repaired by the owner. If not promptly repaired after written notice to the owner, the city may perform the repairs and
assess the cost to the owner. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
16-3D-7: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 630/715
Stormwater, groundwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged only to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on
approval of the director. (1978 Code §33-20.15)
16-3D-8: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner, any human or animal
excrement, refuse or other objectionable waste on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. (1978 Code §33-20.16)
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any petroleum derivative or flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas or any substances which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a flashpoint of less than sixty degrees centigrade (60°C) (140°F) using the test methods specified in
40 CFR (code of federal regulations) 261.21, as amended.
2. Any pollutants containing toxic materials and any other poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, which injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, which create a public
nuisance or which create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
3. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the wastewater treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
4. Any pollutants having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
5. Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts or of such size which will cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or in the POTW or cause any other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups
and milk containers, either whole or ground by refuse grinders.
6. Any pollutants having five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) or containing more than
three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) of suspended solids and having an average daily flow of process wastewater greater than twenty five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day shall be subject to the provisions of article E of this chapter. The user shall provide, at its own expense,
preliminary treatment as may be necessary, in the opinion of the director, to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred milligrams per
liter (300 mg/l) or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained from the city, in writing.
7. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the wastewater treatment works.
8. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
9. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-20.17)
16-3D-9: DISCHARGE OF MATERIALS UPON APPROVAL OF DIRECTOR:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes when the director determines that
such wastes can harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have any adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, construction materials of the
sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment works, degree of treatability of wastes at the wastewater
treatment works and other pertinent factors. The substances which are prohibited, unless approved in writing by the director, are:
1. Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil
origin.
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) (0°C) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
3. Any refuse that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any refuse grinder equipped with a motor of one horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. (1978 Code §33-
20.18)
5. Any waters or wastes containing objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established in subsection 16-3E-4B2 of
this chapter for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits established in subsection
16-3E-4B2 of this chapter or which, after treatment of the composite wastewater, fail to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 631/715
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
8. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause interference.
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended or dissolved solids.
b. Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
c. Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the wastewater treatment works.
d. Volumes of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a "slug", as defined herein.
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment works effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
B. All problem discharges, including accidental spills of substances listed herein, including slug discharges, shall be immediately reported by telephone to
the POTW. The caller shall notify the POTW of the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.
C. Persons discharging industrial wastewater must comply with this article and with article E of this chapter. (1978 Code §33-20.18)
16-3D-10: HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE:
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 16-3D-8 of this article and which, in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director
may:
1. Revoke or cancel the user's permit.
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
4. Require payment to cover the additional cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges.
B. If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the director and subject to the requirements of article E of this chapter and all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1978
Code §33-20.19)
16-3D-11: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (1978 Code §33-20.20)
16-3D-12: MAINTENANCE OF SPECIAL FACILITIES:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, the facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the user. (1978 Code §33-20.21)
16-3D-13: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
A. All measurements, samples, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be conducted
using the methods and procedures in 40 CFR part 136, as amended, and shall be determined at the control manholes provided or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manholes. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected.
B. Sampling shall be carried out to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater facilities and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb
and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all building sewers of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all building sewers of a premises, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples. (1978 Code §33-20.22)
16-3D-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 632/715
A. Penalties: Any violation of this article shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The remedies available to the city for correction of said violations shall be deemed cumulative, and the city's election of
one remedy shall not preclude the city from pursuing other available remedies. (1978 Code §§33-20.11, 33-20.25; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Notice Of Violation: Any person or user found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the director with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The person or user shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (1978 Code §33-20.24)
ARTICLE E. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS INDIRECT DISCHARGE
16-3E-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to control
indirect discharges to the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-30.1)
16-3E-2: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to this article. In addition, as used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended, 33 USC (United States code) 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The executive director of the Iowa department of natural resources or its successor.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: A. A responsible corporate officer if the industrial user is a corporation. For the purpose of
this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 1) a president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principle
business function or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; 2) the manager of one or more
manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditure
exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars) if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
B. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively.
C. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection A or B of this definition. If: 1) the authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in subsection A or B of this definition; and 2) the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and 3) the written authorization is submitted to the city.
D. If an authorization under subsection A, B or C of this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements
of subsections A, B and C of this definition must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL STANDARD: National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard.
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
CONSISTENT REMOVAL: Reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment works to a less
toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the wastewater treatment works in samples taken and measured according to the procedures
set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of title 40 of the code of federal regulations (CFR), part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations For Existing And New
Sources Of Pollution", as amended, promulgated pursuant to the act.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The director, defined hereinafter.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency or, where appropriate, the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 633/715
time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks, including, but not limited to, vessels, chemical toilets, septic tanks and tank trucks, and
specifically excluding agricultural waste.
HOLDING TANK WASTE TRANSPORTER (WASTE HAULER): A person or entity that engages in the business of commercial transportation and disposal
of holding tank waste (hauled waste) and who contributes transported holding tank waste to the POTW.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), as
amended, into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of "indirect discharge", as defined in this section.
INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes which are the cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC 1345), as amended, or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the solid waste
disposal act (SWDA, 42 USC 6901 et seq.), the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, all as amended, or more stringent state criteria (including
those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title II of SWDA, as amended) applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the POTW.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD: (As included in 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405 through 471, as amended): Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of
the act (33 USC 1317), as amended, which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES OR NPDES PERMIT): A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33
USC 1342), as amended.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD: Any regulation developed under the authority of
section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR, section 403.5, all as amended.
NEW SOURCE: A facility from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, construction of which began after the publication of the proposed
pretreatment standards pursuant to section 307(c) of the clean water act (CWA), as amended, which will apply to the facility if the standards are
promulgated, provided certain location and construction criteria are met.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT OR PLANTS: That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation.
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent representative or fiduciary thereof.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter, e.g., standard units (s.u.).
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, dirt or industrial, city or agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION: The human made or human induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except dilution.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
PROCESS WASTEWATER: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of
any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), as amended, owned in this
instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plants but does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, a POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. "Publicly owned
treatment works" is synonymous with "wastewater treatment works".
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage"
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the city's wastewater treatment works subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40
CFR, as amended, and any other industrial user that:
A. Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more of process wastewater per day; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 634/715
B. Has a flow of five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
C. Has in its wastes significant quantities of toxic pollutants; or
D. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW operation or violate a pretreatment
standard or requirement.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: A violation by an industrial user of one or more of the following criteria:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in this article or an enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance.
F. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
H. Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of its pretreatment program.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the "North American Industrial Classification System", office of
management and budget, 2012, as amended.
STATE: The state of Iowa.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", as amended, and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental
protection agency under the provisions of section 307(a) of the act, as amended, under other acts mentioned in this article or under Iowa statutes and
rules.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user.
USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid carried and water carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (1978 Code §33-30.2; amd. Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996; Ord. 96-3762, 12-17-1996; Ord. 17-4687, 1-
17-2017)
16-3E-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Wastewater Treatment By Industrial Users: Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and
shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 635/715
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the industrial user's initiation of
the changes. (1978 Code §33-30.11; amd. Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
B. Holding Tank Waste Transporter Permit Required:
1. Holding tank waste transporters, also known as waste haulers, may not contribute to the POTW unless a written permit has first been applied for and
approved by the director or designee. In addition, holding tank waste transporters contributing waste from industrial operations shall also first obtain
prior written approval from the director or designee for each load/contribution to the POTW. The director may adopt written procedures to govern the
issuance of said permits and load approvals, and may establish forms for application, load approval, manifest permit requirements, and other forms
as reasonably necessary.
2. Direct discharge of hazardous waste to the POTW by holding tank waste transporters, by dedicated pipe, or by rail is prohibited.
3. Any holding tank waste transporter who violates the provisions of this article or any director's procedures or directives applicable to said permit and
approval requirements shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained in section 16-3E-16 of this article, and shall also be subject to other
POTW remedial actions including temporary or permanent suspension or rescission of the transporter's or contributor's permit. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-
1996)
16-3E-4: PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. General Standards:
1. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, if the federal standard is more
stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, said federal categorical standards shall immediately supersede
the limitations imposed under this article. This also applies to those federal categorical standards promulgated by EPA after the effective date hereof.
2. Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may
apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. The city may then modify pollutant discharge
limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.7, as amended, are fulfilled and prior
approval from the approval authority is obtained. (1978 Code §33-30.12)
B. Specific Standards:
1. An industrial user may not contribute to the POTW any substance which may cause pass-through of any substance or any other product, such as
residues, sludges or scums, which may cause the POTW effluent to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act, as amended, with any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, all as amended, or with state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
2. No industrial user shall discharge wastewater causing the following limitations to be exceeded at the POTW treatment plant influent when measured
in a twenty four (24) hour composite sample:
Pollutant Pounds Per Day
CBOD 32,658.0
Cadmium 0.331
Chromium 7.65
Copper 16.95
Cyanide 3.229
Lead 5.62
Mercury 0.07236
Molybdenum 8.63
Nickel 13.4
pH 6.0 to 9.5
Phenols 96.59
Selenium 1.93
Silver 1.32
TKN 6,311.0
TSS 34,386.0
Toluene 96.59
Zinc 91.88
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 636/715
3. If the potable water supply exceeds the established pollutant limitations of subsection B2 of this section, industrial user discharge limitations shall be
based on POTW performance and sludge disposal criteria.
4. No individual user shall discharge wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 12.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to POTW structures, equipment or personnel.
a. Where a permittee continuously measures the pH of wastewater pursuant to a permit requirement, the permittee shall maintain the pH of such
wastewater within the range set forth in the applicable permit, except excursions from the listed range are allowed subject to the following
limitations:
(1) The total time during which the pH values are outside the required range of pH values shall not exceed seven (7) hours and twenty six (26)
minutes in any calendar month; and
(2) No individual excursion from the range of pH values shall exceed sixty (60) minutes.
b. The director may adjust the requirements set forth in subsection B4a of this section with respect to the length of individual excursions from the
range of pH values if a different period of time is appropriate, based upon the treatment system, the plant configuration or other technical factors.
c. For purposes of this subsection B4, an "excursion" is an unintentional and temporary incident in which the pH value of discharge wastewater
exceeds the range set forth in the applicable effluent limitations guidelines.
5. No industrial user shall discharge any wastewater causing the POTW treatment plant influent wastewater temperature to exceed forty degrees
Celsius (40°C) or one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F).
6. No industrial user shall discharge substances which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a
flashpoint of less than sixty degrees Celsius (60°C) or one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21, as amended.
7. An industrial user shall notify, in writing, the POTW, the state and EPA of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed
of, would be considered hazardous waste. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
16-3E-5: APPLICABILITY OF MORE STRINGENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or more
stringent than those in this article.
B. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this article.
C. Federal requirements and limitations promulgated after the effective date hereof shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than this article.
(1978 Code §33-30.14)
16-3E-6: APPLICATION BY SPECIFIC INDUSTRIAL USERS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION:
A. No significant industrial user shall connect to or contribute to the POTW after one hundred eighty (180) calendar days following the effective date hereof
unless the industrial user's discharge has been specifically accepted and a permit issued by the director.
B. Industrial users seeking acceptance of their discharges shall complete and file with the city an application for acceptance in the form prescribed by the
city. Proposed new significant industrial users shall request acceptance at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
POTW. In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
1. Name, address and location (if different from the address). (1978 Code §33-30.15)
2. SIC number according to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", a classification pursuant to the "North American Industrial Classification
System", office of management and budget, 2012, as amended. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
3. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, BOD, suspended solids, those mentioned in sections 16-3E-4 and 16-3E-5
of this article and any other pollutant which would inhibit plant performance, affect low rate sludge quality or affect water quality standards as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, together with any pollutant or discharge which would be considered a hazardous waste if disposed of
differently. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act
and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended.
4. Time and duration of contribution.
5. Average daily, maximum daily and peak hourly wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances in sufficient detail and as
requested by the director.
7. Description of activities, facilities, laboratories and plant processes on the premises, including all significant materials which are or could be
discharged.
8. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards
and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 637/715
9. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established.
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction). No increment of progress shall exceed nine (9) months. Not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the established schedule. In no event shall more
than nine (9) months elapse between progress reports to the director.
10. Data furnished by the industrial user must be certified in accordance with federally required certification and signatory provisions contained in 40
CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and 40 CFR 403.12(l), as amended. The city will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a permit, not to exceed three (3) years, accepting and
limiting the industrial wastewater discharge. Industrial users shall report, in advance of significant changes in operations, wastewater constituents
and characteristics to the city. (1978 Code §33-30.15)
11. All SIUs shall notify the POTW immediately of changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby allowing the
POTW to reevaluate the need for a slug control plan or actions to prevent such discharges. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
C. All provisions of this article shall be expressly subject to all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
D. The terms and conditions of discharge limitations in the permits may be subject to modification by the city when limitations or requirements identified in
sections 16-3E-4 and 16-3E-5 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. The industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its
specific limitations at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the specific limitations shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
E. Industrial user discharge limitations shall be assigned to a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A specific limitation shall not be reassigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner, new industrial user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the written approval of the city. Any
succeeding owner or industrial user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing specific limitations.
F. Permits to industrial users shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions:
1. A statement of duration.
2. A statement of nontransferability.
3. Applicable federal, state and local effluent limitations.
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements.
5. A statement of the applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of the permit. (1978 Code §33-30.15)
G. Prior to disposal of any holding tank wastes to the POTW and prior to the city's issuance of a permit, the transporter shall first provide the POTW with
an application on a form supplied by the director, which shall include the following information and be subject to approval by the POTW:
1. Type And Yearly Quantity: An estimated annual breakdown, in gallons, of type of holding tank waste to be contributed to the POTW for the following
categories: a) domestic; b) commercial; c) industrial; d) total.
2. Communities Served: A list of the communities that the holding tank waste transporter will be serving.
3. Estimated Quantity: Estimate of the number of loads of holding tank waste to be contributed to the POTW per day, per week or per month. The
POTW may impose a maximum limit on a transporter's disposal/contribution over a twenty four (24) hour period.
4. Fees: A flat annual fee shall be charged for each transporter permit, plus a fee per load contributed to the POTW, as set forth in title 3, chapter 4,
"Schedule Of Fees, Rates, Charges, Bonds, Fines And Penalties", of this code. The permit shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months, and be
subject to renewal for an additional one year period, but only upon payment of the annual fee and continued eligibility under this article.
5. Sources: Location and name of source of the holding tank waste or site of removal, which site must be located within Johnson County unless
director determines extraordinary circumstances exist.
6. Manifest: At the time of or prior to disposal, each transporter must provide the POTW with a manifest on a form supplied by the POTW. Said
manifest shall include the following information and be accurately completed by the holding tank waste transporter:
a. Source of the holding tank waste (hauled waste).
b. The approximate volume in gallons of the holding tank waste.
c. The type of holding tank waste to be transported and contributed to the POTW, namely whether residential, commercial, industrial or other.
d. Known or suspected pollutants.
e. Driver's name, driver's license number and driver's signature.
7. Prior Load Approval: Prior to any disposal or contribution to POTW of holding tank waste from industrial operations not requiring either a categorical
pretreatment agreement or a pretreatment agreement, transporter shall first receive written approval for each load from the director or designee.
Written approval for industrial waste may be in the form of an approved manifest or otherwise as established by the director.
8. Pretreatment Standards And Fees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 638/715
a. All holding tank waste transporters who are transporting industrial waste subject to either categorical pretreatment limits or to pretreatment limits
are further subject to the applicable federal, state and local pretreatment requirements, including the prohibited discharge standards specified in 40
CFR section 403.5(a) and (b) and local limits adopted in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.5(c), all as amended, as set forth in this article. All
such holding tank waste transporters shall meet the pretreatment standards and shall first receive written approval from the director or designee
for each load prior to contribution to the POTW, which approval may be in the form of an approved manifest.
b. Fees for pretreatment permit holders acting as their own transporter or who contract with a holding tank waste transporter shall be the same as
those set out for extra strength users required by section 16-3A-4 of this chapter and as established in section 3-4-4, "Wastewater Treatment
Works User Charges", under "Monthly Surcharge", of this code. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
9. Times And Location: Time and location limitations for disposal/contribution of holding tank waste to POTW will be: seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to three
o'clock (3:00) P.M. Monday through Friday at the POTW treatment plant by appointment only. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
10. Samples: POTW at all times retains the right to sample and analyze any holding tank waste being transported to or contributed to the POTW, which
right includes the authority to hold, sample and analyze said waste prior to, during and after contribution to the POTW. The holding tank waste shall
not be contributed to the POTW until the director or designee completes all analyses and has determined, to the POTW's complete satisfaction, that
said waste is not incompatible with the POTW.
11. Inspection: If the POTW has reasonable cause to believe that the information on the manifest for any holding tank waste brought to or contributed
to the POTW is inaccurate, incomplete and/or falsified, after written notice to transporter the POTW retains the right to inspect and copy the
transporter's business records concerning the sources and volumes of the holding tank waste either contributed to or in anticipation of contribution to
the POTW.
12. Refusal: The POTW retains the right, at all times, to refuse any holding tank waste if the POTW deems said waste to be incompatible with the
indirect discharge requirements of this article or other applicable regulations, rules, procedures or permit.
13. Nontransferability: The permit issued herein is personal to the permit holder, and is not assignable or transferable.
14. Renewable: Permits may be renewed after one calendar year (12 months), but such renewal may become effective only if the permit holder
remains in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations governing their permit, and upon payment of the annual fee.
15. Penalties: Any holding tank waste transporter and any contributor of industrial waste to the POTW subject to either categorical pretreatment or
pretreatment limits who violates the requirements of this article or any director's procedures or directives shall be subject to the penalty provisions
contained in section 16-3E-16 of this article, and shall also be subject to other remedial actions including temporary or permanent suspension or
rescission of the transporter permit. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
16-3E-7: STANDARDS DECLARED; INFORMATION AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
A. Within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, industrial users
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the director the information required by subsections 16-3E-6B1 through B11 of
this article, together with a list of all environmental control permits held by the industrial user's facility. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
B. Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, any industrial user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements, together with the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the industrial user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial users into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall
be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, as required by subsection 16-3E-6B10 of
this article. (1978 Code §33-30.16)
C. After the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or in the case of a new source or after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, each
significant noncategorical industrial user or any industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall submit to the director during the months of June
and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment permit or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall include all parameters for which the POTW has not
sampled and analyzed pollutants directly. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured daily flows during the reporting period, and shall be
signed and certified by a qualified professional and an authorized representative of the user, as required by subsection 16-3E-6B10 of this article. At
the discretion of the director and in consideration of factors such as local high or low flow rates, holidays or budget cycles, the director may agree to
alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. (Ord. 96-3762, 12-17-1996)
D. Information required by this section and section 16-3E-6 of this article and records of monitoring activities and results must be retained by the industrial
user for a minimum of three (3) years, or longer in the case of unresolved litigation or when requested by the approval authority. (1978 Code §33-
30.16)
16-3E-8: DILUTION INSTEAD OF TREATMENT:
A. Dilutions Restricted: No industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this article, with the federal categorical pretreatment standards
or with any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the city or state, except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable standard or
limitation. (1978 Code §33-30.17)
B. Mass Limitations:
1. The director may revise a permit to impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection 16-3E-7B
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 639/715
of this article shall indicate the mass of pollutants in the effluent of the industrial user regulated by pretreatment standards. These reports shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration or the production and mass, where
requested by the director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. Monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and recordkeeping shall be as prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard.
2. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act, as amended, and
contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. (1978 Code §33-30.18)
16-3E-9: MANHOLES AND SAMPLING EQUIPMENT:
When required by the director, an industrial user shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters, samplers and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the flows. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the user at its expense
and shall be maintained by the user in such a manner as to be safe and accessible at all times. Costs incurred by the city for sampling, data recovery and
analysis shall be assessed to the industrial user. (1978 Code §33-30.19)
16-3E-10: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
A. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of hazardous quantities of pollutants, prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's and/or
industrial user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing appropriate disposal facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall
be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete such a
plan within three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days following the effective date hereof. No industrial user who commences contribution to the
POTW after the effective date hereof shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the POTW system until accidental discharge procedures have been
approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify
the industrial user's facility, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this article.
B. In the case of an accidental discharge, including slug discharges, the industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident.
The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. A written notice shall be
permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the person or office and phone number to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur
are advised of the emergency notification procedure. Within five (5) calendar days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to
the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. (1978 Code §33-30.20)
C. Each industrial user shall notify the POTW immediately of changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby allowing
the POTW to reevaluate the need for a slug control plan or actions to prevent such discharges. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
16-3E-11: UPSET PROVISION:
A. Interpretation: An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
B. Effect Of An Upset: An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of subsection C of this section are met.
C. Conditions Necessary For A Demonstration Of Upset: An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
1. An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset. (1978 Code §33-30.21)
2. The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and professional manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
3. The industrial user has submitted the following information to the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information
is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance.
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue.
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Reviewability Of EPA Consideration Of Claims Of Upset: In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, EPA enforcement personnel should review
any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review constitute final EPA action subject to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 640/715
judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. User Responsibility In Case Of Upset: The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies to the situation when, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is
reduced, lost or fails. (1978 Code §33-30.21)
16-3E-12: BYPASS:
A. Bypass Not Violating Applicable Pretreatment Standards Or Requirements: An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections B and C of this section.
B. Notice:
1. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the industrial user shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible, at least ten (10)
calendar days before the date of the bypass.
2. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within twenty four
(24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) calendar days of
the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case by case basis if
the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
C. Prohibition Of Bypass:
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage.
b. There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative
maintenance.
c. The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection B of this section.
2. The city may approve an anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effects if the city determines that the bypass will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection C1 of this section. (1978 Code §33-30.22)
16-3E-13: RECORDS; CONFIDENTIALITY:
A. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available for inspection and copying by the POTW or officials of the EPA
or approval authority, upon request.
B. Information and data concerning an industrial user obtained from inspections, reports, questionnaires, applications for permits, permits and monitoring
programs shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled
to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. When requested by the person or user furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes ("protected portions") shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to
governmental agencies for uses related to this article and to the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, state disposal system permit
and/or pretreatment programs. Protected portions of a report shall also be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person or user furnishing the report. Furthermore, the EPA shall have immediate and unlimited access to all
information collected by the city under its pretreatment program. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general public by the city until and unless a ten (10) day
written notice is given to the industrial user. (1978 Code §33-30.23)
16-3E-14: INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
A. The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties:
1. For the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, repair and maintenance in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
2. To carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by industrial users,
compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. Representatives of the POTW shall be
authorized to enter any premises of any industrial user in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are required to
be kept under 40 CFR 403.12(m), as amended, to assure compliance with pretreatment standards. Such authority shall be at least as extensive as
the authority provided under section 308 of the act, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 641/715
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of the
city shall comply with all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the city employees. The city shall also indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner as a result of the city's gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. (1978 Code §33-30.24)
16-3E-15: ENFORCEMENT:
A. After written notification to an offending owner or industrial user, the city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or repeal a permit when
such suspension or repeal is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, to the POTW, cause interference to the POTW or cause
the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Said notification shall be in writing and delivered in person to the industrial user, shall include an
order to cease and desist and shall briefly describe the noncomplying discharge or threatened discharge. Any person notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
city's suspension order, the city shall take such steps as it deems necessary to protect the citizenry, including immediate severance of the building
sewer connection, in order to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to the public. The city shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service only upon proof, satisfactory to the city, of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the industrial user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the
city within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of occurrence.
B. In addition to the provisions in subsection A of this section, any industrial user who, after written notice and failure or refusal to cure the defect or
offending activities within the cure period, continues to violate the following conditions of this article or of any applicable state and federal regulations, is
subject to having its wastewater treatment service revoked by the city for the following:
1. Failure of an industrial user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
2. Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
4. Failure of an industrial user to provide prior notification of any new or increased discharge; or
5. Violation of conditions of this article. (1978 Code §33-30-25)
16-3E-16: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 16-3E-15B of this article may, upon conviction of an
environmental infraction, be fined an amount of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation, when appropriate.
B. In addition to subsection A of this section and section 16-3E-15 of this article, the city shall have the authority, as granted by the state, to obtain
remedies for noncompliance by any industrial user with any pretreatment standard and requirement. The city may seek injunctive relief for
noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements. Industrial users who violate pretreatment standards and
requirements may be assessed civil or criminal penalties in the amount of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation upon
conviction of an environmental infraction.
C. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this article or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or thirty (30) days in jail for each violation. (1978 Code §33-30.25)
16-3E-17: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATORS:
The city shall provide annual public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city in which the POTW is located, of industrial users which,
during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements.
(1978 Code §33-30.26)
ARTICLE F. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES
16-3F-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the city's wastewater treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used only for
the purposes of operation, maintenance, replacement, expansion and debt service for such wastewater treatment works. This article shall take precedence
over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and users of the wastewater treatment works which are inconsistent with section
204(b)(1)(A) of the clean water act, as amended, and the corresponding regulations. (1978 Code §33-40.1)
16-3F-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 642/715
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): Clear, unpolluted water which enters the collection system from the ground or uncontrollable sources.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) and a
suspended solids concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: All expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor and utilities, together with other items
which are necessary for managing and maintaining the treatment works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR: Any contributor to the city's treatment works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used only for domestic dwelling
purposes.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, as amended, and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
TREATMENT WORKS: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of city sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial
wastes. These include intercepting wastewater treatment, outfall wastewater treatments, sewage collection system, individual systems, pumping, power
and other equipment and their appurtenances; extension improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a
reliable supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any land or work, including site acquisitions of the land that will be an integral
part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment, such as land used for composting sludge,
temporary storage of such compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application, or any other
method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of wastewater, including waste in combined storm water and
sanitary wastewater treatment systems.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.
USER CHARGE: That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is charged in a uniform and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance, debt service and replacement of the treatment works.
WATER METER: Any water volume measuring and recording device approved by or furnished and installed by or under the supervision of the city of Iowa
city. (1978 Code §33-40.2)
16-3F-3: FUNDING TO GENERATE ADEQUATE REVENUE:
The user charge system shall generate adequate revenues to pay:
A. Costs of billing, collection and administration expenses in keeping with a long term city policy, including a minimum water usage fee.
B. Costs of annual operation and maintenance of treatment works, including replacement.
C. Costs associated with wastewater treatment bond retirement for bonds now outstanding, including payments to all sinking, revenue, depreciation,
extension and improvement funds established in the ordinances or resolutions authorizing such bonds.
D. When required, costs associated with retirement of wastewater treatment bonds to be issued in the future.
E. Costs associated with the city's wastewater pretreatment program. (1978 Code §33-40.11)
16-3F-4: CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. User Charges: Charges shall be as provided in schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the city
based on the user's use of the treatment works as determined by water meter(s) which are acceptable to the city. User charges shall be based on
actual water used during the billing period. If actual water use is not available, the user charge will be based on prior water usage. New customers shall
have a first billing based on an estimate determined by the city finance department. Users shall pay for wastewater treatment services provided, as
follows:
1. Basic Service:
a. A minimum monthly charge, which includes:
(1) A fixed fee for billing, collection, administration and sixty percent (60%) of infiltration/inflow expense.
(2) A user charge for two hundred cubic feet (200 cu ft) of water usage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 643/715
b. A user charge for all water used in excess of two hundred cubic feet (200 cu ft) per month. The user charge is for operation and maintenance of
the treatment works, including replacement, necessary expansion and debt service, plus forty percent (40%) of infiltration/inflow expense.
2. Extra Strength Wastes: A monthly surcharge for those users who contribute wastewater having a strength greater than "normal domestic
wastewater", as defined in section 16-3F-2 of this article.
3. Toxic Wastes: A monthly surcharge for those users who discharge any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the
treatment works or which cause increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works or which must be regulated or
limited to protect effluent or sludge quality.
B. Applicability Of Charges: The user charge rates established in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code, apply to all users of the city's
treatment works, regardless of the location of such services and users.
C. Water Not Discharged Into System: If any user of water consumes water for any purpose which does not cause discharge into the sanitary wastewater
treatment system, and if, as established by a separate water meter installed and maintained by such user, the consumption of such water can be
determined, and if approved by the city, then, in that event, no charge shall be made on the basis of water so supplied. Residential contributors shall
not be allowed this option unless approved by the city finance department.
D. Water Discharged Into System From Private Source: If any person shall discharge water into the city sanitary wastewater treatment system from private
wells or sources other than the city water system, the city shall have the right to install a meter at the owner's and/or user's expense to measure such
flow, or the city may elect to use whatever means satisfactory to the city for determining sewage treatment charges. (1978 Code §33-40.12)
16-3F-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Location Served By City Water: As provided in section 16-3A-7 of this title. (1994 Code)
B. Location Not Served By City Water: When a user's account for wastewater treatment service is at a location not served by city water service and said
wastewater account is delinquent as provided in subsection A of this section, wastewater treatment service may, at the city's option, be discontinued
either by disconnection of the user's wastewater treatment service line from the city's wastewater main or by plugging said service line. The city shall
have unrestricted access to all wastewater treatment service connections for the purposes specified herein, regardless of whether those connections
are located in city street right of way, city easement or in or on the property of the user. (1978 Code §33-40.13; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3F-6: REVIEW OF RATES AND CHARGES; ANNUAL NOTICE TO USERS:
The city shall review the user charge system and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay
the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, necessary expansion and debt service, and that the system continues to provide for the
uniform distribution of operation and maintenance among all users, including replacement costs. The city will annually notify all users, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the wastewater treatment charges and that portion of the user's bill attributable to wastewater treatment services. (1978 Code §33-40.15)
16-3F-7: APPLICATION OF REVENUES:
The entire income and revenues of the wastewater treatment works shall be deposited, as collected, in a fund to be known as the wastewater treatment
revenue fund and shall be disbursed only as follows:
A. Operation And Maintenance Fund: Money in the revenue fund shall first be disbursed to make deposits into a separate and special fund to pay current
expenses. The fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment operation and maintenance fund (the "operation and maintenance fund"). There shall
be deposited in the operation and maintenance fund each month an amount sufficient to meet the current expenses of the month plus an amount equal
to one-twelfth (1/12) of expenses payable on an annual basis, such as insurance. After the first day of the month, further deposits may be made from
the revenue fund to this account, to the extent necessary to pay current expenses accrued and payable and to the extent that funds are not available in
the surplus fund.
B. Sinking Fund: Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to make deposits into a separate and special fund to pay principal of and interest on
the bonds and parity bonds. The fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment revenue bond and interest sinking fund ("sinking fund"). The
minimum amount to be deposited in the sinking fund in any month shall be an amount equal to one-sixth (1/6) of the installment of interest coming due
on the next interest payment date on the then outstanding bonds and parity bonds, plus one-twelfth (1/12) of the installment of principal coming due on
such bonds on the next succeeding principal payment date until the full amount of such installment for both interest and principal is on hand. Money in
the sinking fund shall be used solely for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on the bonds and parity bonds, as the same shall become due
and payable.
C. Reserve Fund:
1. Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to maintain a debt service reserve in an amount equal to at least the lesser of:
a. The maximum amount of principal and interest coming due on the bonds and parity bonds in any succeeding fiscal year; or
b. Fifteen percent (15%) of the original principal amount of bonds outstanding at any time.
2. Such fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment revenue debt service reserve fund ("reserve fund"). The reserve fund shall be fully funded in
the required amount from proceeds of the bonds. If it is necessary to replenish the reserve fund, in each month there shall be deposited in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 644/715
reserve fund an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the monthly amount required by this article to be deposited in the sinking fund;
provided however, that when the amount on deposit in the reserve fund shall be not less than the minimum required above, no further deposits need
be made into the reserve fund except to maintain said reserve fund at such level. Money in the reserve fund shall be used solely for the purpose of
paying principal at maturity of or interest on the bonds and parity bonds when insufficient money is available in the sinking fund. Whenever it
becomes necessary to use money in the reserve fund, the payments into the reserve fund required above shall be continued or resumed until the
reserve fund is restored to the required minimum amount.
D. Improvement Fund:
1. Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to maintain a fund to be known as the wastewater treatment improvement fund ("improvement
fund"), to the extent of all remaining monies in the revenue fund.
2. The minimum amount to be deposited in the improvement fund each month shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); provided however, that
when the amount of said deposits in said improvement fund shall equal or exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), no further monthly deposits
need be made into the improvement fund except to maintain it at such level. Money in the improvement fund not otherwise specially limited by other
provisions of this article shall be used solely for the purpose of paying principal of or interest on the bonds or parity bonds when there is insufficient
money in both the sinking fund and the reserve fund and, to the extent not required for the foregoing, to pay the cost of extraordinary maintenance
expenses or repairs, renewals and replacements not included in the annual budget of revenues and current expenses, payment of rentals on any
part of the wastewater treatment works, payments due for any property purchased as a part of the treatment works and for capital improvements to
the treatment works. Whenever it shall become necessary to use money in the improvement fund, the payments required above shall be continued
or resumed until the improvement fund is restored to the required minimum amount.
E. Subordinate Obligations: Money in the revenue fund may next be used to pay principal of and interest on, including reasonable reserves therefor, any
other obligations which, by their terms, shall be payable from the revenues of the wastewater treatment works but subordinate to the bonds and parity
bonds and which have been issued for the purposes of extensions and improvements to the treatment works or to retire the bonds or parity bonds in
advance of maturity or to pay for extraordinary repairs or replacements to the treatment works.
F. Surplus Revenue:
1. All money thereafter remaining in the revenue fund at the close of each month may be deposited in any of the funds created by this article, may be
used to pay for extraordinary repairs or replacements to the wastewater treatment works or may be used to pay or redeem the bonds or parity bonds
or any of them or for any lawful purpose.
2. Any monies transferred from the above accounts to meet revenue shortages must be returned to their respective accounts during the next fiscal
year. (1978 Code §33-40.26)
ARTICLE G. STORM WATER COLLECTION, DISCHARGE AND RUNOFF1
16-3G-1: PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this article to establish maximum rates for the discharge of storm waters into the various watercourses of the city for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the population by minimizing dangers of flooding to life and property.
B. It is further the intent of this article that runoff control devices be provided as areas of land are developed or redeveloped for urban use. It is not the
intent of this article to utilize areas for the sole purpose of storing or detaining excess storm water but to permit such areas to be used for other
compatible urban uses as well. (1978 Code §33-50.2; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPENSATING STORAGE: Storage of excess storm water from development which existed prior to the effective date hereof, or as otherwise exempt
from storage requirements.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of the department of public works or designee.
DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that is designed to be normally dry and which accumulates excess storm water only
during periods when the restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water inflow rate.
EXCESS STORM WATER: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainageways serving
a specific watershed.
EXCESS STORM WATER PASSAGE: An overland route on the ground to carry excess storm water runoff through a specific area.
LOW FLOW: The carrying capacity of storm sewers and/or natural drainageways.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY: Water which flows by gravity over a route formed on the earth's surface prior to development.
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property, including legal and equitable property interests.
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or fiduciary thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 645/715
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area in a manner that will ensure complete removal of all surface water by
means of natural gravity.
SAFE STORM WATER DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The rate of storm water runoff that can be transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct or
combination thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to
cause damage to structures or facilities located thereon.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY; FACILITY; FACILITIES: A facility constructed to regulate the volume of storm water runoff that is conveyed
during a specific length of time.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation not absorbed by soil or plant material.
STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which storm water runoff is released from dominant to servient land.
STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: An area designated to temporarily accumulate excess storm water.
WATERSHED: The entire catchment area that contributes storm water runoff to a given point.
WET BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that contains a body of water and which accumulates excess storm water during
periods when the restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water inflow rate. (1978 Code §33-50.1; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-3: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
Excluding the central business district and the area designated as the new south side neighborhood, this article shall apply to development which results in
an aggregate gross area of three (3) acres or more of drainage from or to a single drainage area. The gross aggregate drainage area shall include streets
and other dedicated lands. (1978 Code §33-50.3; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-4: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED:
Written policies, procedures, criteria and regulations concerning the inspection, determination and approval of the standards for the construction and/or
development of storm water management facilities have been established by the director and shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (1978
Code §33-50.11; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY:
A. Immediately after approval of a preliminary plat, preliminary OPDH plan, site review plan or building permit, whichever comes first, and in all cases
before site work begins, the owner shall submit the following documents to the director of public works for approval:
1. Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil erosion for the entire development.
2. Plans, specifications and all calculations for the control of storm water runoff as required by this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by
the director.
B. Owner shall maintain the area surrounding the storm water management facilities free from weeds and debris. In no event shall the owner fill or permit
the storm water management facilities to be filled in, and owner also shall maintain the owner's land so as to minimize erosion in and around said
facility. (1978 Code §33-50.12; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
A. Storm Water Release Rate: The controlled release rate of storm water runoff shall not exceed the existing safe storm water drainage capacity of the
downstream system and shall be as established in the design standards approved by resolution of the city council. Where a proposed development
contains only a portion of a watershed, the storage requirements shall be based upon the proportion of the watershed being developed.
B. Excess Storm Water Passage:
1. An excess storm water passage shall be provided for all storm water management facilities through the proposed facility and also through the
proposed development from the upland watershed as established in the design standards approved by resolution of the city council.
2. No buildings or structures shall be constructed within such excess storm water passage; however, streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas,
pedestrian walkways, utility easements and other open space uses shall be considered compatible uses. In the event such excess storm water
passage is reshaped or its capacity to transport excess storm water otherwise restricted, the director shall notify the agency or person causing such
restriction to remove the same and set a reasonable time for its removal. If such person refuses or is unable to comply with such order, the director
shall cause such restrictions to be removed at the expense of such person.
3. Where a proposed development contains existing natural drainageways, appropriate land planning shall be undertaken to preserve such natural
drainageways as part of the excess storm water passage.
C. Determination Of Storage Capacity: The volume of required storm water storage shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year flood
event. Such calculation shall be made in accordance with methods approved by the director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 646/715
D. Compensating Storage: In the event compensating storage is available, said storage may be provided at an alternative location as approved by the
director.
E. Easements: Easements for storm water management facilities shall be granted to the city for the purpose of repair, alteration or to ensure their proper
operation. Excepting pipes, culverts and inlet and outlet structures, the responsibility for maintenance and repair of the facilities shall remain the
obligation of the subdivider and owner and their successors. (1978 Code §33-50.15; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-7: DRY AND WET BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES:
All storm water management facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained, including dry and wet bottom storage areas, according to the
standards approved by resolution of the city council. (1994 Code)
16-3G-8: CONTROL IN EXCESS OF REQUIREMENTS:
In the event storm water runoff control can be provided in excess of the requirements of this article and the benefit of such additional control would accrue
to the city at large, the city may provide public participation in the increased cost of the control of storm water runoff in proportion to the additional benefits
received. (1978 Code §33-50.19)
16-3G-9: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, whenever, in the judgment of the director of public works, a condition occurs in a storm water facility
that creates a dangerous and imminent health and safety hazard, the director shall order such hazards to be corrected, with written notice. (1978 Code
§33-50.14; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-10: STORM WATER UTILITY:
A. Purpose: It is determined and declared to be necessary and to lead or contribute to a result conducive to the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare, and compliance with federal regulation, that a storm water management utility district be established within the city. It is further determined and
declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, welfare, and safety of the city and its residents that charges be levied
upon and collected from the owners or occupants of all developed lots, parcels or real estate, and buildings that discharge storm water or surface or
subsurface waters, directly or indirectly, to the city storm water drainage system, and that the proceeds of such charges so derived be used for the
purposes of management of storm water runoff quantity and quality, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and debt service for
construction of the storm water drainage, flood protection and storm water quality improvements comprising the storm water utility.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: City of Iowa City.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY: Property upon which a structure or impervious surface has been placed or constructed, thus increasing the amount of
rainwater or surface water runoff.
DIRECTOR: The public works director or designee.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A shallow narrow grassed or paved overland route, either natural or constructed, over which water passes.
DWELLING UNIT: A singular unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ERU RATE: The dollar value periodically determined and assigned to each ERU as a charge for storm water management services, and expressed
as $x.xx per ERU.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average impervious area of a single-family residential property located within the city as periodically
determined and established as provided in this section.
EXEMPT PROPERTY: Public streets, alleys and sidewalks; all University of Iowa properties; all undeveloped properties.
GROUND WATER: Water beneath the surface of the earth which is not bound to soil particles.
IMPERVIOUS AREA: The number of square feet of hard surfaced areas which either prevent or resist the entry of water into soil mantle, as it
entered under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of
flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property, including, but not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches,
driveways, sidewalks, pavement, athletic courts, and semi-impervious surfaces such as gravel which are used as driveways or parking lots.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures designed with two (2) or more dwelling units to accommodate two (2) or more
families or groups of individuals living separately and not sharing the same living space.
NONPOINT SOURCE DISCHARGE: Water discharged from the earth's surface to a drainage course or watercourse.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any developed lot not exclusively residential, including, but not limited to, transient rentals, commercial,
institutional, churches, hospitals, governmental properties and parking lots, and multiuse properties incorporating residential uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 647/715
POINT SOURCE DISCHARGE: Water discharged to the earth's surface through a pipe, conduit, tube, duct, channel or pumping facility.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A detached residential structure designed as a single dwelling unit to accommodate one family or
group of individuals living together and sharing the same living space, but excluding multiuse properties which include single-family residential uses.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT: The area served by the storm water utility.
STORM WATER INFRASTRUCTURE: The entire constructed and natural storm water and ground water drainage system within the city limits of
Iowa City.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT: The tasks required to control storm water runoff to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and comply
with state and federal regulations. It includes, but is not limited to, street sweeping, erosion control, storm water basin improvements and
maintenance, culvert and storm sewer maintenance, storm water management planning and related public education.
STORM WATER UTILITY: The utility established under this section for the purpose of managing storm water and imposing charges for the recovery
of costs connected with such storm water management.
SURFACE WATER: Storm water, ground water, and spent water received by the earth's surface.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: A parcel that has no impervious area.
USER: The owner and/or occupant of any developed property within the limits of Iowa City.
WATERCOURSE: A natural overland route through which water passes, including drainage courses, streams, creeks, and rivers.
C. District: The entire city is hereby organized into one storm water utility district.
D. Powers And Duties: The city shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities with respect to the storm water utility:
1. Prepare ordinances as needed to implement this division and forward the ordinances to the city council for consideration and adoption, and adopt
such regulations and procedures as are required to implement this division and carry out its duties and responsibilities.
2. Administer the design, construction, maintenance and operation of the utility system, including capital improvements designated in the
comprehensive drainage plan.
3. Acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such facilities,
operations, and activities, as are deemed by the city to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management.
These facilities may include, but are not limited to, surface and underground drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, and
such other facilities relating to collection, runoff, and retention as will support a storm water management system, whether such facilities are owned
and operated directly by the city or are provided under statutory or contractual provisions and furnishings of which facilities create or impose a cost or
charge upon the city for the service afforded by such facilities.
4. The city shall separately account for the storm water utility finances. The storm water utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all
operation and maintenance costs, costs of borrowing, and other costs related to the operation of the storm water utility. The budget is subject to
approval by the city council. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year shall be retained in a segregated fund, which shall be used for
storm water utility expenses in subsequent years. Storm water utility fees collected shall be deposited in the storm water enterprise fund and shall be
used for no other purpose.
E. Establishment Of Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) Rate And Storm Water Utility Charge:
1. For purposes of this article, an ERU shall be equivalent to three thousand one hundred twenty nine (3,129) square feet of impervious area.
2. Except as provided in this article, every user owning or occupying property that is not exempt property in the city of Iowa City shall pay to the city a
stormwater utility charge as determined in this article. In the event the owner and the occupant of a particular property are not the same the liability
for payment of the stormwater management charge attributable to that property shall be joint and several as to the owner and occupant.
3. The ERU rate to be applied to properties shall be as defined in section 3-4-6 of this code.
4. The monies derived from the stormwater utility charge shall be used solely for the operation and maintenance of the city wide stormwater
infrastructure and related water quality programs.
F. Determination Of Stormwater Utility Charge:
1. The stormwater utility charge for single-family residential properties shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the ERU rate per month. As to these
properties, the stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier of the following:
a. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
b. Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
c. Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence.
2. For multi-family residential properties the stormwater utility charge shall be fifty percent (50%) of the ERU rate multiplied by the number of individual
dwelling units existing on the property. As to these properties, the stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier of the following:
a. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
b. Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 648/715
c. Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence. (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-
2004)
3. For nonresidential property, the stormwater utility charge shall be a base rate of one ERU rate, plus two dollars ($2.00) multiplied by the numerical
factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the particular property by the number of square feet in one ERU. As to these properties, the
stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier of the following: (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004; amd. Ord. 11-4431, 6-7-2011; Ord. 12-4475, 4-
17-2012; Ord. 13-4566, 12-17-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; Ord. 16-4660, 3-23-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
a. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
b. Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
c. Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence.
G. Appeals:
1. An owner or occupant of a multi-family residential property aggrieved by the initial or any subsequent calculation of the number of dwelling units
upon or in such property, calculation of the stormwater utility charge, or allocation of such charge among occupants, may appeal such calculations
and allocation to the director. Upon such appeal, the stormwater utility charge for such property may be recalculated utilizing information supplied by
the appealing owner or occupant, provided such information is verified as correct by the director.
2. An owner or occupant of nonresidential property aggrieved by the initial or any subsequent determination of the total impervious area of such
property, calculation of the stormwater utility charge for such property, or allocation of such charge among occupants, may appeal such calculations
and allocation to the director. Upon such appeal, the stormwater utility charge for such property may be recalculated utilizing information supplied by
the appealing owner or occupant, provided such information is verified as correct by the director.
3. Any adjustment of the stormwater utility charge resulting from such appeal shall be retroactive to the date the appeal was filed.
4. Appeals by the owners or occupants of property subject to stormwater utility charges shall include a statement of the number of dwelling units, total
property area, and/or total impervious area, as appropriate for the particular grounds for appeal. Such information may be shown on the stormwater
utility reporting forms or on appeal forms, and may be accompanied by plats, county assessor's records, or survey data. The director may request
additional information from the appealing party. Based upon the information provided by the utility and appealing party, the director shall make a final
calculation of the stormwater utility charge. The director shall notify the parties, in writing, of the director's decision within ninety (90) days after
receipt of the appeal. If still aggrieved, a party may request, in writing, a review by the city manager of the director's decision. Such request must be
filed with the city manager within thirty (30) days after the director's decision, shall cite the specific error by the director, and shall include the
calculation of stormwater utility charge which the appealing party believes to be correct. The city manager shall review the record presented and
render a written decision within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for review. The city manager may request additional information from the
director or the appealing party. If still aggrieved, a party may request review of the city manager's decision by the city council in the same manner as
above provided for review by the city manager. The filing of an appeal shall not excuse the payment of the stormwater utility charge when due.
However, the city shall refund any portion of the charge paid subsequent to the filing of the appeal which is adjudged to be excessive, with interest at
the rate provided by law.
H. Credits:
1. Nonresidential properties that obtain a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) industrial stormwater permit from the Iowa
department of natural resources (IDNR) are eligible for a fifty percent (50%) reduction in their monthly stormwater utility bill.
2. Proof of the NPDES permit must be submitted to the director and approved prior to the establishment of the credit.
3. The city or director reserve the right to verify the permit compliance and to inspect the facilities at any time.
I. Billing Procedures, Delinquent Accounts And Collection Procedures:
1. The charges established hereunder will be billed monthly to customers in the Iowa City stormwater utility district.
2. Collection and delinquent account procedures shall be as in section 16-3A-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
16-3G-11: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Iowa City and the
state of Iowa through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by
federal and state law. This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
section are:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
2. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of the Iowa City public works department.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 649/715
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
equal to or greater than the threshold established by NPDES permit. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
DISCHARGE: The release of water and any elements, compounds and particles contained within or upon, from property owned or controlled by a
person.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in this section.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter
the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks that are located under roof with walls
and not subject to stormwater runoff, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency; or
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency or NPDES permit.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26[b](14), as amended.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a
state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater or groundwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. "Pollutants" may include, but are not limited to: sediment; paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned or maintained facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to,
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPP): A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE: A natural overland route through which water passes, including drainage courses, streams, creeks, and rivers. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-
22-2005; amd. Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
C. Applicability: This section shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement agency.
D. Responsibility And Administration: The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement
agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
E. Severability: The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 650/715
F. Ultimate Responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore this section does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
G. Discharge Prohibitions:
1. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses
any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is
prohibited except as described as follows: (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically
less than one ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, exterior building wash waters when no detergent or other surfactants are used, pavement wash
waters where no spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have occurred and when no detergents or other surfactants are used, and any other
water source not containing pollutants. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4279, 9-4-2007)
b. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
d. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental protection agency or Iowa department of natural resources, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system.
e. Discharges from University of Iowa property or facilities covered by the University of Iowa's NPDES permit.
2. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
a. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
b. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
c. A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
H. Suspension Of MS4 Access:
1. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
2. Suspension Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this subsection,
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
I. Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges: Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES Iowa department of natural resources
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable
to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
1. Notice Of Intent (NOI) Submittal: The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with such activity, shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the authorized enforcement agency at the same time the operator
submits the original (NOI) to the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) and EPA as applicable. The copy of the notice of intent may be
delivered to the authorized enforcement agency either in person or by mailing to:
NOI To Discharge Storm Water
City Hall - Engineering Division
410 E. Washington St.
Iowa City, IA 52240
2. Notice Of Intent (NOI) Offense: A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater with industrial or
construction activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the authorized enforcement agency.
J. Compliance Monitoring:
1. Applicability: This subsection applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial or construction activity.
2. Access To Facilities:
a. The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 651/715
b. Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
c. The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
d. The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
e. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
f. Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of this section. A person who is the
operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
section.
g. If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and it is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
K. Use Of Best Management Practices: Authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity,
operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the U.S. The
owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural
BMPs. Further, any owner, operator, tenant, or person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm
water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this subsection. These BMPs shall
be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
L. Watercourse Protection: Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part
of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly
retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
M. Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said
person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three (3) business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three (3) years.
N. Enforcement:
1. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without
limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
e. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
2. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed.
O. Injunctive Relief: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 652/715
P. Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may
be summarily abated or restored in accordance with applicable law, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such
nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
Q. Violations And Penalties: Violation of this section, "Illicit Discharge And Connection", shall be punishable as a municipal infraction or environmental
infraction as provided for in subsection 1-4-2C of this code. A municipal infraction shall be punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D
of this code. (Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
R. Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or
local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
ARTICLE H. SOLID WASTE
16-3H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing for the collection and disposal of solid
waste; by regulating the storage, collection, transportation, processing, disposal, recycling, reuse and littering of solid waste; and by providing for the
collection and disposal of solid waste. (1978 Code §15-1)
16-3H-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLIANCES: Machines common to residential household use and shall include refrigerators, stoves, microwave ovens, dishwashers, clothes washers,
clothes dryers, water heaters, furnaces, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, lawn mowers and any device containing a gasoline engine, an electric motor or an
electric capacitor.
BUILDING DEMOLITION MATERIALS: Waste material from the construction, destruction or demolition of residential, commercial or industrial buildings,
except brick, foundation materials and untreated wood waste.
BULKY SOLID WASTE: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible waste materials which are either too large or too
heavy to be placed in a thirty five (35) gallon container and/or safely and conveniently loaded into solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste
collectors. Bulky solid waste shall also include televisions, computer monitors, tires, and appliances.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural use, residential premises
that do not abut a public street, and residential premises with more than four (4) dwellings.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD: Fiber material consisting of a fluted corrugated sheet and one or two (2) flat linerboards, commonly used to manufacture
cardboard boxes.
DEMOLITION: Substantial destruction of a building or structure and a substantial removal of the interior of a building or structure.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
DWELLING: A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for residential occupancy.
FOOD WASTE: Food scraps and biodegradable, compostable food related discards, as further defined by landfill solid waste rules and regulations.
HAZARDOUS WASTES: Includes, but is not limited to, pathological wastes, explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic radioactive materials
and those wastes defined as hazardous in the code of Iowa and rules of the Iowa department of natural resources or its successor, all as amended.
LANDFILL: The Iowa City Landfill And Recycling Center located in Johnson County, Iowa.
LANDFILL SERVICE AREA: Johnson County, Iowa, including both incorporated and unincorporated cities located therein, together with the cities of
Riverside and Kalona, for which the city of Iowa City provides landfill services.
LITTER: Garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or debris.
OCCUPANT: Any person who, individually, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling or any other improved or
unimproved real property.
OPERATOR: Any person who occupies, possesses, uses or owns property within the Iowa City landfill service area and/or who stores or generates solid
waste within the Iowa City landfill service area.
OWNER: Any person with a legal or an equitable ownership interest in real or personal property.
PERMIT: The official document or certificate issued by the city clerk or designee authorizing a person to place or maintain a solid waste container in the
downtown public right of way.
PERSON: Includes an individual, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture or any combination thereof or any agent,
representative or fiduciary thereof.
PREMISES: A plot, separate tract, or parcel of land with fixed boundaries suitable for occupancy by a use described in the Iowa City zoning code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 653/715
PROCESSING: Bailing, compacting, composting, incinerating, recycling, separating and shredding, together with all other processes whereby solid waste
characteristics are either modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, together with any and all public parks, waterways, squares,
spaces, grounds and buildings.
RECYCLING: Any process by which certain solid waste is collected, separated, and processed or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products
including the composting of untreated wood waste and yard waste.
RECYCLING MATERIALS: Solid waste designated by the city as appropriate for recycling, such as newsprint, magazines and catalogs, metal cans and
plastic containers and cardboard, as set forth in the rules and regulations established by the director in accordance with section 16-3H-5 of this article.
RECYCLING MATERIALS CONTAINER: A receptacle used by any person or operator to store recycling materials during the interval between recycling
materials collections.
REFUSE: Solid waste not suitable for recycling or reuse.
REFUSE, RESIDENTIAL: Refuse generated from the maintenance and operation of single-family, duplex, triplex and fourplex dwellings and home
occupations operating in compliance with title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code.
RESIDENCE: Any dwelling either intended for or being used for residential use.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING MATERIALS, LARGE SCALE: Recycling materials generated from any residence that does not abut a public street or from
residential premises with more than four (4) dwellings.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING MATERIALS, SMALL SCALE: Recycling materials generated from residences with four (4) or fewer dwelling units that abut a
public street.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any applicant or holder of an account for sewer, water and/or solid waste service and includes any person who pays an individual
account for any one or a combination of the following services: water, sewer and solid waste collection. If more than one person is listed on an account,
both persons shall be deemed a responsible party for purposes of collection, storage and disposal of solid waste and compliance with this article.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including, but not limited to, food waste, ashes, refuse, sludge, yard
waste, appliances, special waste, building demolition materials generated by residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial activities.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL: The process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted solid waste; in particular, the final disposition of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: The entire solid waste system of planning and administering storage, collection, removal, transportation, processing and
disposal of solid waste.
SPECIAL WASTE: Solid waste that must be handled or processed in a special manner, including building demolition materials (except untreated wood
waste) and asbestos containing material (ACM), friable and nonfriable, as defined in the code of Iowa and rules of the Iowa department of natural
resources or its successor, all as amended.
STORAGE: Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection and removal.
TRANSPORTATION: The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or processing to the Iowa City landfill.
UNTREATED WOOD WASTE: Includes tree limbs, brush, Christmas trees, and untreated lumber.
YARD WASTE: Grass, leaves, trees, brush and garden residue. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-2017; Ord. 17-4701, 4-4-2017)
16-3H-3: APPLICATION OF CITY AND COUNTY REGULATIONS:
Provisions of this article, together with any provision of any ordinance administered by the county board of health which is not in conflict with this article,
shall govern the city's management of solid waste. (1978 Code §15-3)
16-3H-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Inspections And Remedies:
1. In order to ensure compliance with this article and the rules promulgated pursuant hereto, together with all applicable county, state and federal laws
and regulations, the director is authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the jurisdiction of Iowa City. In all cases where
such inspections reveal that the storage, collection, transportation, processing, disposal, recycling or reuse of solid waste are in violation of this
article or rules promulgated pursuant hereto and/or are in violation of state or federal law, such violation shall constitute a nuisance and/or an
environmental infraction under both state and local law. In such event, the city may, at its option, elect to carry out any one or all of the following
remedies:
a. Prosecute environmental infractions under subsection 1-4-2A of this code, definition of "environmental infraction";
b. Withhold solid waste management services from that person, dwelling, commercial or industrial, business, institution or government entity;
c. Deny or revoke any permit under this article;
d. Terminate a service account;
e. Dispose of any nonconforming solid waste container; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 654/715
f. Abate the nuisance in accordance with title 6, chapter 1 of this code; or
g. Abate the nuisance under the code of Iowa, as amended.
2. Election of any one of these remedies by the city shall not preclude the city from pursuing any other remedy, and such remedies are deemed
cumulative and not exclusive. (1978 Code §15-4)
16-3H-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The director may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules and regulations governing, but not limited to:
1. Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type, composition, equipment, size, weight and shape thereof.
2. Weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for solid waste containers.
3. Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers.
4. Schedules and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste by city personnel.
5. Collection points of solid waste containers.
6. Special identification requirements for use of solid waste containers. (1978 Code §15-5)
7. Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste, including the right to determine that certain waste poses a health or safety risk and
declare it unacceptable for disposal at the landfill. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
8. Storage of solid waste.
9. Records of quantity and types of solid waste received at disposal facilities.
10. Handling of hazardous wastes, special wastes, toxic wastes, sludges, ashes, agricultural waste, construction waste, bulky items, tires, automobiles,
oils, greases, yard waste, batteries, appliances and recyclables. (1978 Code §15-5)
11. Special carryout service for the elderly and disabled. (1978 Code §15-5; amd. 1994 Code)
12. Collection of residential solid waste resulting from the operation and maintenance of more than four (4) dwelling units.
13. Billing and collection of disposal service charges at the landfill.
14. Hours of operation for the landfill.
B. A copy of any and all rules and regulations issued under the provisions of this section shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be available
for public inspection during normal business hours. (1978 Code §15-5)
16-3H-6: PROHIBITED PRACTICES1:
It shall be prohibited for any person or operator or any agent or representative thereof to:
A. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than in a solid waste container either owned by the depositor or properly and lawfully leased by
the depositor.
B. Interfere in any manner with the collection, storage or transportation of solid waste, interfere with the equipment for the use of such collection, storage
or transportation or interfere with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties.
C. Throw, cast, place, lay or permit placement of any refuse into or on any receptacle specifically designated by the City or private entity as a receptacle to
be used only for deposit of recyclable or reusable waste.
D. Deposit recyclables or reusable waste in containers or at locations not specifically designated for such waste.
E. Litter. (1978 Code §15-6)
F. Place the following items in the trash to be landfilled: tires; yard waste; corrugated cardboard; computer monitors; televisions; appliances; lead acid
batteries; and oil and oil filters. (Ord. 17-4715, 7-18-2017)
16-3H-7: STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE:
A. Containers Required: It shall be the obligation of any owner to provide and maintain containers for the proper storage of all refuse and residential
recycling materials for each dwelling and/or premises in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Director in accordance with
section 16-3H-5 of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 655/715
B. Required Use And Maintenance Of Containers And Surrounding Areas: It shall be the obligation of the occupant of every dwelling, or institutional,
commercial, industrial, or agricultural establishment to place all refuse and recycling materials to be collected in the appropriate containers according to
the provisions of this article, to maintain said containers and surrounding areas in a reasonably clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times, and to
deliver said containers to the designated collection point.
C. Location Of Solid Waste Containers:
1. Residential solid waste containers, including those for refuse and recycling materials, shall be stored upon private property.
2. Commercial refuse containers and large scale residential recycling material containers shall be stored upon private property, except as allowed by
subsection D of this section or where the owner of the container and the owner of the premises have been granted written permission from the
Director, by way of written agreement, to use public property for such purposes.
3. The storage site for all solid waste containers shall be well drained and shall be fully accessible to collection equipment, to public health personnel,
and to fire inspection personnel.
4. Commercial solid waste containers shall not be placed in the area between any building and the street, including areas commonly referred to as
"parking" between the curb and the private property line. In cases where a container cannot physically be located anywhere except between the
building and street, the Director may approve storage in such location if properly screened. Containers located within fifty feet (50') of a street rightof-
way must be screened from view from the right-of-way.
5. In the event a solid waste container becomes a nuisance, the City may require the entire container storage area to be enclosed by a fence or
structure sufficient to prevent litter. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
D. Downtown Solid Waste Container:
1. Permit Required: No person shall place or maintain any solid waste container on the public right-of-way in the downtown without first obtaining a
permit. "Downtown" means the area in central Iowa City as defined in the resolution adopting the solid waste container permit system. (Ord. 16-4683,
11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-2017)
2. Permit: A permit system shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
3. Administrative Rules: The City Manager or designee is authorized to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out
the provisions of this subsection. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the City Clerk and available on the City's website. (Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-
2017)
16-3H-8: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
A. Collection By The City Of Iowa City:
1. Collection Of Residential Refuse:
a. The City shall collect all residential refuse, as defined herein. The City shall make such collections once per week whenever reasonably possible.
Private collection of residential refuse is prohibited. The responsible party will be billed for collection and disposal in the amount provided in the
schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
b. The Director may exempt certain dwellings from the City's mandatory collection herein if the Director determines that the dwelling and an adjacent
establishment which generates commercial solid waste is part of one (1) complex of buildings, which together serve a unified purpose.
2. Collection Of Residential Yard Waste And Food Waste:
a. Residential yard waste and food waste may be collected by the City in the same manner as residential refuse and in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A1 of this section.
b. The City shall not collect residential yard waste not properly stored and separated in accordance with this article.
c. The City shall not collect untreated wood waste generated by commercial tree service operations.
3. Collection Of Residential Recycling Materials, Small Scale:
a. Residential recycling materials, small scale may be collected by the City in the same manner as residential refuse and in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A1 of this section. The City shall not collect such waste not properly stored and separated in accordance with this article.
4. Collection Of Bulky Solid Waste:
a. Bulky solid waste may only be collected by the City upon prior request made to the City, and approval of said request. The City reserves the right
to refuse to collect bulky solid waste that exceeds reasonable limitations of weight and bulk, as determined by the Director.
5. Certain Wastes Not Subject To Collection:
a. The City will not collect special waste; lead acid batteries; waste oil; or any waste material designated in the rules and regulations established by
the Director in accordance with section 16-3H-5 of this article.
b. The City shall not collect any commercial solid waste, excepting collection from the City's own property, nor shall the City collect any residential
solid waste from any dwelling units within a structure which contain the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural or other
establishment and which generates commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural waste or any combination thereof or which operation
generates other than residential solid waste.
c. No person or operator shall obtain or attempt to obtain City collection of solid waste or other substances or materials herein declared not subject to
collection. Any such separate attempt and/or action by such person shall constitute a separate offense of this provision and section 16-3H-4 of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 656/715
article. The City's costs for retrieving such substances or materials from the collection vehicle or from the City's disposal site and/or for cleaning up
the collection vehicle or disposal site shall be chargeable to the person for the solid waste collection account for the residence where such
substances or materials were placed for collection or where actually collected.
6. Times Of Collection And Location Of Containers:
a. Containers for residential refuse, recycling, yard waste, food waste, untreated wood waste bundles, and any other solid waste permitted to be
collected by the City shall be placed for collection at the curb on the street upon which the residence fronts. Placement of solid waste at the curb
for collection shall occur prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the regularly scheduled collection day but shall not occur before three o'clock (3:00)
P.M. on the day before the regularly scheduled collection day. Containers shall be removed from the curb on the same day collection is made and
returned to their storage location.
b. Each type of waste listed above must be physically separated in order to enable the solid waste collector to easily identify differing contents, as
well as differing containers. Yard waste, food waste and recycling materials containers must be clearly marked as such.
B. Private Solid Waste Collection And Transport:
1. Collection Of Residential Recycling Materials, Large Scale:
a. The owner(s) of any residence that does not front a public street or any residential premises with more than four (4) dwellings shall provide
recycling material collection, which shall be collected at least once per week by a private solid waste collector.
2. Collection Of Commercial Refuse:
a. Private solid waste collectors shall be responsible for the collection of commercial refuse from the point of collection to the transportation vehicles,
but only if the waste was stored in compliance with section 16-3H-7 of this article.
3. Transport:
a. Any spillage or litter caused by or resulting from the collection activities of the private solid waste collector shall forthwith be retrieved by and
properly disposed of by the collector.
b. All loads must be fully secured, enclosed or covered, in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Director in accordance with
section 16-3H-5 of this article, so loose materials cannot fall or be blown from the vehicle.
c. Any vehicle arriving at the Iowa City Landfill and Recycling Center with unsecured loads will be charged a fee provided in the schedule of fees, title
3, chapter 4 of this Code, in addition to the regular disposal and recycling rates.
4. Storage And Maintenance Of Vehicles:
a. All solid waste transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition and shall be constructed, maintained and
operated to prevent spillage of solid waste with watertight bodies and covers. Said covers shall either be an integral part of the vehicle with only
loading hoppers exposed or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle. If
the cover is separate, it shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading
hoppers.
b. Storage of solid waste transportation vehicles is prohibited in all residential zones.
C. Residential Collection Fees: The fees for the City's collection of residential solid waste shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of
this Code. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
16-3H-9: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Disposal Facilities: Solid waste shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area consistent with all requirements of local, State and Federal
law.
B. Hazardous Or Special Waste: Disposal of hazardous or "special waste" defined herein or as set forth in the rules and regulations established by the
Director in accordance with section 16-3H-5 of this article, shall be disposed of in accordance with said rules and regulations.
C. Disposal Of Waste Oil: Waste oil may be disposed by delivering same to locations approved by the Director. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
D. Disposal Restrictions At The Landfill:
1. Only persons or operators residing or operating within the landfill service area may dispose of solid waste at the landfill, and only provided that such
solid waste was generated by activities or operations occurring within the landfill service area.
2. The following materials may not be disposed of at the landfill, but may be recycled at the landfill: tires; yard waste; corrugated cardboard; computer
monitors; televisions; and appliances. The person disposing of such items shall be responsible for separating these items from other solid waste
materials and shall be responsible for delivering and unloading the items at the recycling sites designated by the City. (Ord. 17-4715, 7-18-2017)
E. Improper Disposal Or Disposal Of Prohibited Or Hazardous Waste:
1. It is prohibited for any person or operator to dispose or attempt to dispose of any waste at the landfill in a manner or location other than that provided
for herein, by the Director, or as directed by landfill personnel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 657/715
2. Violations of any solid waste disposal requirement shall constitute either a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, and each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
3. The City's costs for retrieving such substances or materials from the landfill disposal site and/or for any costs incurred by the City for cleaning up the
disposal site shall be chargeable to the responsible party. Repeated violations of this provision or of regulations adopted by the Director pursuant to
subsection B of this section shall be sufficient cause for the City's revocation of the landfill disposal privileges of the responsible party.
F. Disposal Fees: The fees for disposal of solid waste shall be as provided in schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
16-3H-10: LITTERING:
A. Restricted And Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. Littering Generally: No person shall throw, sweep or deposit litter on or upon any public place within the City, except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection and disposal.
2. Operation Of Trucks Causing Litter:
a. No vehicle carrying a load of materials shall be driven or moved on any State highway, County road or City street unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except sand or other materials
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, and water or other substance may be sprinkled on a street or roadway in order to clean or
maintain such street or roadway.
b. It shall be prohibited for vehicles to deposit substantial and unreasonable quantities of mud, gravel or other materials from their wheels or track
onto paved public streets or roadways.
3. Depositing Litter On Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the City, whether owned by such person
or not, except the owner, operator or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner
that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the natural elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private
property.
B. Placement Of Solid Waste In Public Receptacles: Persons placing solid waste in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in
such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the natural elements upon any public place or upon private property. No person shall
place residential refuse in solid waste containers owned by the City of Iowa City. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
Chapter 4
STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
16-4-1: STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR IOWA CITY:
The "Design Standards For Public Works Improvements In Iowa City" is hereby adopted, by reference, as the standard for all designing, planning and
construction of any and all public improvements in the city. (Res. 75-120; amd. 1994 Code)
16-4-2: STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL AREAS:
An addition to "Design Standards For Public Works Improvements", "Section XI - Design Standards For New Developments Located Outside The City
Limits Of Iowa City, But Within The Two Mile Extraterritorial Limit" is hereby adopted, by reference. (Res. 78-66, 2-28-1978; amd. 1994 Code)
16-4-3: COPIES ON FILE:
Copies of the design standards, additions and revisions thereto, as adopted in this chapter, are on file in the office of the city engineer. (Res. 75-120; amd.
Res. 78-66, 2-28-1978; Res. 81-252, 9-22-1981; 1994 Code)
Chapter 5
PENALTIES
16-5-1: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (1994 Code)
Title 17
BUILDING AND HOUSING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 658/715
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4793 - RENTAL PERMITS . Go to new ordinance.
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
17-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
Subject to the following amendments, the 2018 edition of the International Building Code (IBC) including appendix K, Electrical Administrative Process,
and 2018 edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) including appendix F, Radon Control Methods, appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures,
are adopted. Additionally, the City further adopts, section 103.6(1)(a) of the Iowa Code (the Iowa State Electrical Code), section 105.4(1)(a) of the Iowa
Code (the Iowa State Mechanical Code), and section 105.4(1)(a) of the Iowa Code (the Iowa State Plumbing Code). Collectively, they shall be known as
the Iowa City Building Code or the Building Code. Interpretations of the building official may be guided by publications of the International Code Council,
Inc., or the International Existing Building Code.
Any reference to the "Plumbing Code", the "Electrical Code", or the "Mechanical Code" shall mean the "Building Code". (Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019)
17-1-2: INTERPRETATION OF BUILDING CODE PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this code shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
Iowa City. (Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019)
17-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the 2018 edition of the International Building Code and 2018 edition of the International Residential Code are amended as
follows:
Section 101.1 of both the IBC and IRC. Delete Section 101.1 of both the IBC and IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Iowa City, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 105.2 of both the IBC and IRC. Delete Section 105.2 of both the IBC and IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. A permit shall not be required for the following:
Building
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed
144 square feet provided the structure is not located in a flood hazard area.
2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
3. Oil derricks.
4. Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to 1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of
an accessible route.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools which are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems.
11. Swings and other playground equipment.
12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 659/715
13. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
14. For structures regulated by the IRC the reapplication of shingles and roof sheathing provided:
a. Less than 50% of the structural sheathing is replaced and other structural alterations are not required.
b. The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or is not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
Note: Applying solid sheathing over space sheathing is not considered structural sheathing.
15. For structures regulated by the IRC reapplication of siding provided: The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, or a
Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
16. For structures regulated by the IRC replacing windows provided:
a. Replacement window(s) is in compliance with Appendix J.
b. The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, or a Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is not an Iowa City Historic
Landmark.
17. For structures regulated by the IRC replacing exterior doors, including garage doors, provided:
a. Replacement door(s) is in compliance with Appendix J.
b. They are not street facing doors in a structure located in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or are not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
Note: screen and storm doors do not require a permit regardless of the location.
Electrical:
1. Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an
approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by this code.
2. Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.
3. Temporary decorative lighting.
4. Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor, control device or contact device of the same type and/or rating.
5. Replacement of non-emergency over-current device of the required ampacity and interrupt rating in the same location.
6. Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
7. Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories.
8. The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.
Gas:
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliances.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
4. Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative coolers.
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 660/715
(746 W) or less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
9. The replacement of fixed appliances provided however that the replacement appliance is in the same location and has a rating equal to or
less than the appliance being replaced, and it is not necessary to remove, replace, alter, or install any additional ductwork or piping.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as
new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
3. The replacement or removal and reinstallation of any fixture or appliance, provided, however, that the fixture or appliance is installed at the
same location and it is not necessary to remove, replace, alter, or install any piping. Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the Code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in a manner in violation
of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Section 105.5 of both the IBC and IRC. Modify Section 105.5 of both the IBC and IRC by adding a sentence to the end as follows:
In no case shall the permit be effective unless the work covered by the permit has a documented inspection every 6 months minimum and is
completed within 24 months of the date on which the original permit was issued.
Section 105.8 of the IBC and R105.10 of the IRC. Add two new Sections 105.8 and 105.8.1 to the IBC and R105.10 and R105.10.1 to the IRC as
follows:
105.8 (IBC) R105.10 (IRC) Demolition permits required. A demolition permit shall be required as follows:
1. For the removal of any building or structure.
2. For the removal of any portion of a building (i.e. porch, porch railing, decorative brackets and trim, dormers, chimneys, etc.) that is located within
a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or a Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
105.8.1 (IBC) And R105.10.1 (IRC) Requirements. The applicant for any demolition permit shall state on the application the proposed disposal plans
for all demolition materials. No demolition permit shall be issued until seven (7) working days after the date an application has been properly filed and
said demolition permit shall not be effective until applicant has posted the premises to be demolished with a notice to be provided by the City and as
directed by the City; provided, however, that accessory buildings as defined in the Iowa City Zoning Ordinance and dangerous buildings shall be
exempt from said notice and waiting requirement.
Section 105.9 of the IBC and R105.11 of the IRC. Add two new Sections 105.9 to the IBC and R105.11 to the IRC as follows:
105.9 (IBC) and R105.11 (IRC) Permittee:
1. An electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit may be issued to any person holding a valid master license for the respective trade as described in
Section 17-11-1 of the Iowa City Code, or to any company who employs a duly licensed master in the respective trade on a full-time basis who
supervises the work of the apprentice and or journeymen during the company's normal business hours.
2. An electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit may be issued to the owner of an existing owner-occupied single-family dwelling, pursuant to a
valid certificate of occupancy and used exclusively for residential purposes, to do any electrical work in connection with said dwelling and
accessory buildings. The owner must personally purchase all material and perform all labor in connection with the permit. Applicants for a
homeowner's electrical permit shall pass the designated exam before a permit may be issued.
3. The homeowner's test required in subsection 2 of this section may be waived if the applicant is a duly licensed electrician with a minimum of a
journeyman status.
Section 105.10 of the IBC and R105.12 of the IRC. Add two new Sections 105.10 to the IBC and R105.12 to the IRC as follows:
105.10 (IBC) and R105.12 (IRC) Insurance:
Before any permit to perform electrical or plumbing work may be issued, the applicant shall have on file with the building official a copy of a
certificate of insurance stating the liability amounts of no less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) property damage and five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily injury. The city shall be named as additional insured. The policy shall also provide for at least ten
(10) days' notice by the insurer to the city of termination of the policy by the insured or insurer. Electrical permits issued under sections 105.9 (IBC)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 661/715
and R105.11 (IRC) 2 and 3 shall be exempted from this insurance requirement.
Section R107.3 of the IRC and Section 108.3 of the IBC. Amend Section R107.3 of the IRC and Section 108.3 of the IBC as follows:
R107.3 (IRC) 108.3 (IBC) Temporary Power: Replace the "NFPA 70" with "Iowa State Electrical Code.".
Section R108.2 of the IRC and Section 109.2 of the IBC. Delete Section R108.2 of the IRC and Section 109.2 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
R108.2 (IRC) 109.2 (IBC) Permit Fees and Valuations. The fee for any permit shall be as set forth in the permit fee schedule as established by
resolution of the City Council. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by the Building Official.
The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the
permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, site grading, paving, landscaping, elevators, and other permanent equipment. The value
to be used in computing the value of construction for reports shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as
all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, site grading, paving, landscaping, elevators, fire extinguisher systems
and other permanent equipment.
Section R108.3 of the IRC and Section 109.3 of the IBC. Delete Section R108.3 of the IRC and Section 109.3 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
R108.3 (IRC) 109.3 (IBC) Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required to be submitted by Section 106 and the value of the proposed
building or work exceeds fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), a plan review fee shall be paid before the permit may be issued. Should the project be
abandoned and the permit not issued after the plan review has been started, the plan review fee shall still be due and payable. The plan review fee
shall be as set forth by resolution of City Council. Plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fee specified in Section R108.2 and 109.2 and
are in addition to permit fees.
Section R108.5 of the IRC and Section 109.6 of the IBC: Delete Section R108.5 in the IRC and Section 109.6 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
R108.5 (IRC) 109.6 IBC Refunds: The Building Official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or
collected. The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of fee payment.
Section R108.6 of the IRC and Section 109.4 of the IBC. Delete Section R108.6 of the IRC and Section 109.4 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
R108.6 (IRC) 109.4 (IBC) Work commencing before permit issuance: Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee equal to the amount of the permit fee if a permit
were issued. This fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is issued. The payment of such fee shall not exempt any person from compliance
with all other provisions of this Code or from any penalty prescribed by law. Only the Building Official may reduce this fee when it is demonstrated
that an emergency existed that required the work to be done without a permit.
Section R112 of the IRC and Section 113 of the IBC. Delete Section R112 of the IRC and Section 113 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section R112 of the IRC and Section 113 of the IBC Appeals: See Title 17 Chapter 12 Appeals in the City Code.
Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
Authority Having Jurisdiction. The organization, office, or individual responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a procedure.
Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
Chief Electrical Inspector. A building inspector who either is the authority having jurisdiction or is designated by the authority having jurisdiction and is
responsible for administering the requirements of this code.
Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
Electrical Inspector. A building inspector authorized to perform electrical inspections.
Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
Family: See Title 14 Chapter 9 Article A Zoning Definitions in the City Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 662/715
Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
Emergency Communications Center. Shall mean the Johnson County Emergency Communications Center.
Section 202 of the IBC and IRC. Modify definitions as follows:
Habitable space: Add a sentence to the end of the definition of habitable space or room to read as follows: Basement areas finished to a degree to
encourage their use as anything other than storage or mechanical rooms shall be considered habitable space.
Section R202 of the IRC. Delete definition of Accessory Structure and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Accessory Structure. See Title 14 Chapter 9 Article A Zoning Definitions in the City Code.
Table R301.2(1) of the IRC Modify by inserting data in the table as follows:
Ground
Snow Load
Wind Design
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject To Damage From
Speed
(mph)
Topographic Effects,
Special Wind
Region, Or Wind-Borne Debris Zone Weathering
Frost
Line Depth Termite
25 115 No
A Severe 42" Moderate
Heavy
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice-Barrier
Underlayment
Required
Flood Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
NFIP Temp
FIRM
Maps
-5°F Yes 5/22/1977 2/16/2007 2000 50°F
MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA
Elevation Latitude
Winter
Heating
Summer
Cooling
Altitude
Correction
Factor
Indoor
Design
Temperature
Design
Temperature
Cooling
Heating
Temperature
Difference
661' 41° -6° 89° N/A 72° 75° 78°
Cooling
Temperature
Difference
Wind
Velocity
Heating
Wind
Velocity
Cooling
Coincident
Wet Bulb Daily Range
Winter
Humidity
Summer
Humidity
14° 25° 10° 76° M 39 gr/lb diff. 53 gr/lb diff.
Section R302.5.1 of the IRC. Delete Section R302.5.1 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core
steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
Section R302.13 of the IRC. Delete Section R302.13 of the IRC entirely.
Section R310.6 of the IRC. Delete Section R310.6 in the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
R310.6 Alterations or repairs of basements in structures built after May 10, 1989. An emergency escape and rescue opening is not required where
existing basements undergo alterations or repairs. Alterations or repairs in structures built prior to May 10, 1989 shall conform to Appendix J Section
AJ102.4 Replacement windows.
Exception: New sleeping rooms created in an existing basement shall be provided with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with
Section R310.1.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 663/715
Section R312.2 of the IRC and 1015.8 of the IBC. Delete Section R312.2 of the IRC and 1015.8 of the IBC entirely.
Section R313 of the IRC: Delete Section R313 of the IRC entirely.
Section R314.4 of the IRC. Amend Section R314.4 in the IRC by adding an exception as follows:
Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where alterations or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall
or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that could provide access for interconnection
with removal of the interior finish.
Section R320.2 of the IRC. Add Section R320.2 in the IRC as follows:
R320.2 Accessibility for projects other than those mentioned in Section R320.1.
R320.2.1 Scope. The provisions of this section are enacted to implement universal design features that provide accessibility, usability and visit-ability
for all.
R320.2.2 Definition. Public funds shall mean funding or assistance from the City of Iowa City or any agent thereof through any of the following
means:
1. a building contract or similar contractual agreement involving a City-funded program or fund;
2. any real estate received by the owner through a subsidy, lease, or donation by the City or its agents;
3. preferential tax treatment, bond assistance, mortgage assistance, or similar financial advantages from the City or its agents;
4. disbursement of federal or state construction funds including a Community Development Block Grant; or
5. a City contract to provide funding or a financial benefit for housing.
R320.2.3 Applicability. The amendment applies to new one- and two-family dwellings and is not required for new townhouses, accessory apartments
or existing structures for repairs, alterations, change of occupancy or additions unless the square footage of the addition is more than 25% of the
existing structure, then, the addition must comply.
Exception: Applies to new townhouses constructed using public funds.
The minimum usability requirements are as follows:
1. Step-less entrance: At least one building entrance must be designed, without encroaching into any required parking space, that complies
with the Iowa City Building Code standard for an accessible entrance on an accessible route served by a ramp in accordance with section
R311.8 or a no-step entrance. The accessible route must extend from a vehicular drop-off, or parking to a building entrance. The entry door
must have a minimum net clear opening of thirty-two inches (32").
Exception:
1. If public funds are used the step-less entrance must be provided.
2. The building official may waive this requirement based upon the determination that strict compliance is financially or environmentally
impractical. Split-level and townhouse style homes may be exempted.
Note: Iowa City code only requires one parking space for single family dwellings.
2. Interior doors: At least one bedroom and one bathroom (if either are provided) and all other passage doorway header widths, on the level
served by the designed step-less entrance, must be framed to accommodate a minimum 38" clear rough opening. The framing for the
doorway width opening may be reduced to accommodate any door size.
Exception:
1. If public funds are used the minimum door clear opening shall be thirty-two inches (32") when the door is open ninety degrees (90),
measured between the face of the door and the opposite stop.
2. Doors serving closets twenty-four inches (24") or less in depth need not be framed to 38" clear opening width.
Note: A 34" door hung in the standard manner provides an acceptable 32" opening.
3. Sanitation facilities: There must be at least one bathroom containing a water closet (toilet) and lavatory (sink) on the level of the dwelling
to be accessed by the designed step-less entrance. The room shall have a minimum thirty inches (30") by forty-eight inches (48") clear floor
space at the water closet and lavatory. The clear floor space can be shared by both fixtures. The clear floor space shall not be obstructed by a
doorway swing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 664/715
The plans must show a shower, bathtub or combination tub/shower can be provided within the room or an adjoining room without removing
part of the concrete floor to provide necessary plumbing to the future plumbing fixture(s).
Exception:
1. If public funds are used a shower, bathtub or combination tub/shower shall be provided within the room.
2. Doors may swing into the clear floor space provided at any fixture if sufficient maneuvering space is provided within the room for a person
using a wheelchair or other mobility aid to enter and close the door, use the fixtures, reopen the door and exit. Maneuvering space may
include any knee space or toe space available below bathroom fixtures.
3. The building official may waive this requirement based on the determination that strict compliance is financially impractical.
4. Wall reinforcement: A bathroom must be provided with wood blocking installed within wall framing to support grab bars as needed. The
wood blocking, when measured to the center, will be located between thirty-three inches (33") and thirty-six inches (36") above the finished
floor. The wood blocking must be located in all walls adjacent to and behind a toilet.
Exception: Backing is not required behind pre-manufactured showers and bathtubs.
5. Decks: All exterior decks and patios surfaces adjacent to the level served by the designed step-less entrance must be built within four
inches (4") of the dwellings finish floor level. Decks shall be a minimum 50% the size of a patio that is served by level served by the
designed step-less entrance.
6. Switch and outlet requirements: All wall switches, controlling light fixtures, fans, all temperature control devices and all receptacles
shall be located in an area between fifteen (15) and forty-eight (48) inches above finished floor. The height will be determined by measuring
from the finished floor to the center of the device. When the control or receptacle placement is prohibited by the height of the window or
design feature, alternative locations may be approved by the building official.
7. Electrical panel requirements: Electrical panels on the level of the dwelling to be accessed by the designed step-less entrance shall be
located so that the individual circuit breakers are located between 15" and 54" above the floor.
8. Garages: Must be wired for power operated overhead.
Section R322 of the IRC. Delete section R322 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
R322. See Title 14 Chapter 5 Article J Floodplain Management Standards in the City Code.
R322.1 Flood Resistive Materials. Building materials and installation methods used for flooring and interior and exterior walls and wall coverings
below the elevation required in Title 14 Chapter 5 Article J Floodplain Management Standards in the City Code shall be flood damage-resistant
materials that conform to the provisions of FEMA TB-2.
Section R326 of the IRC. Delete Section R326 of the IRC entirely.
Section R403.1.4.1 of the IRC. Modify by deleting all exceptions and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
Exceptions:
1. One story detached accessory buildings of wood or steel frame construction not used for human occupancy and not exceeding one thousand
(1,000) square feet in floor area may be constructed using slab on grade construction as follows. The slab shall be three and one-half inches thick,
poured monolithically with thickened perimeter footings extending twelve inches (12") below finish grade and be twelve inches (12") wide at the base.
The top of the foundation shall not be less than six inches (6") above finish grade. Reinforcement of the slab, including the thickened portion, shall be
minimum 6x6 - 10/10 welded wire mesh, #4 deformed reinforcing bars at twenty-four inches (24") on center each way or fiber mesh reinforced
concrete.
2. One-story wood or metal frame building not used for human occupancy and not over 200 square feet in floor area may be constructed with walls
supported on a wood foundation plate or "skids" when approved by the building official.
3. Decks not supported by the structure need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
Section R404.1.1 of the IRC: Amend Section R404.1.1 of the IRC by adding an Exception after number 2 as follows:
Exception: Foundation walls with unbalanced lateral forces created by finish grade, i.e. walkout basements which are exempt from the Iowa
Architectural Act shall be designed by a licensed structural engineer or constructed in accordance with the Table R404.1.1(5) and diagram as follows:
TABLE R401.1.1(5)
CB = Corner bars
S = Span of wall
T = Thickness
D = 4' offset
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 665/715
Notes:
1. Corner bars are required in addition to horizontal reinforcing.
2. All corner bar reinforcing splices shall be lapped a minimum of 24".
3. If span (S) is greater than 16', the minimum dimension of (D) shall be 6'.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 666/715
Section R404.1.3 of the IRC. Modify Section R404.1.3 by adding a second paragraph as follows:
Wall thickness may be reduced to eight inches (8") if a minimum of three (3) one-half inch diameter deformed ASTM A615 grade 40 steel bars are
placed horizontally at the center of the wall thickness with one bar located within 14" of the top, one bar within 14" of the bottom and one bar located
within 14" of the mid-height of the wall provided the wall height does not exceed eight feet (8').
Section 423.4 of the IBC. Delete Section 423.4 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 MPH in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all
new Group E occupancies shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500. The shelter shall be capable of housing the total
occupant load of the Group E occupancy or as required by 661-301 of the Iowa State Building Code, whichever is more restrictive.
Exceptions:
1. Group E day care facilities.
2. Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
4. Portable buildings.
Section 502.1 of the IBC (F). Modify by inserting the following after the second sentence:
From 100-199 feet from the street the number shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inches. From 200-299 feet from the
street the numbers shall be a minimum 8 inches high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inches. For each additional 100 feet from the street, the number
shall increase by an additional 2 inches in height. Measurements to determine the minimum number size shall be measured from the approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 667/715
address location to the center line of the street for which the premises is addressed.
Section R807.1 of the IRC. Modify by adding a sentence at the end of the second paragraph as follows:
The opening shall not be located in a closet, bathroom, mechanical room, laundry room, or similar room or location.
Section 903.2.1.2 of the IBC (F). Modify section 903.2.1.2 by adding a second paragraph as follows:
Group A-2 Occupancies that existed prior to August 1, 2007:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the A-2 occupancy with an occupancy load of 100 or more that have an ABDL and there
is a change in business ownership, defined as the sale, transfer, or assignment of any legal or equitable ownership interest, except that the owner
may show to the building official's satisfaction that said change in ownership is one of form and not substance.
Section 903.2.1.8 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 903.2.1.8 as follows:
Section 903.2.1.8. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used as new Group B occupancies with
an ABDL or existing group B occupancy with a new (not a renewal) ABDL located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. The automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the floor area where the new Group B occupancy with an ABDL or where the group B occupancy with
a new ABDL is located, and in all floors between the Group B occupancy and the level of exit discharge.
Section 903.2.2 of the IBC (F). Delete Section 903.2.2 of the IBC and replace with:
903.2.2 Group B ambulatory health care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all fire areas containing a Group B
ambulatory health care facility occupancy.
Section 903.3.5.3 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 903.3.5.3 in the IBC to read as follows:
903.3.5.3 Water supply safety margin. Provide a minimum 10%, or 5 psi safety margin (whichever is greater) above static pressure in the fire
protection system hydraulic calculations.
Section 903.4.2 of the IBC (F). Delete Section 903.4.2 of the IBC and replace with:
903.4.2. Alarms. An approved weatherproof horn/strobe device shall be mounted directly above the fire department connection between seven (7)
and ten (10) feet in height above grade. The water-flow alarm device shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Approved and supervised audible visual notification appliances shall be installed on each level of the
interior of the building as required by the fire code official and NFPA 72.
Section 903.6 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 903.6 to the IBC to read as follows:
903.6 Zones. Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and shall provide a sprinkler control
valve and water flow device for each normally occupied floor.
Section 905.1.1 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 905.1.1 to the IBC to read as follows:
905.1.1 Delete all references to Class II standpipe systems and replace with Class III standpipe systems.
Section 905.4 of the IBC (F). Amend section 905.4 by deleting #1 and replace with:
1. In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall
be located at intermediate landings between stories, unless otherwise approved by; the fire code official.
Exception: A single hose connection shall be permitted to be installed in the open corridor or open breezeway between open stairs that are not
greater than 75 feet apart.
Section 906.1 of the IBC (F). Delete the exceptions 1 and 2 without substitution.
Section 906.3 of the IBC (F). Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The minimum rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class A, Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 2-10 B C.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 668/715
Section 907.2 of the IBC (F). Delete the section and replace with:
907.2 Where required-new buildings and structures. An approved and addressable manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system
installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections
907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of
this code or fire code official.
A minimum of one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing
automatic fire detectors or water-flow detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a
single fire alarm box shall be installed.
EXCEPTION:
1. The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.
2. The manual fire alarm box is required for Group R-2 occupancies to provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a
sprinkler system impairment event. The manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that is accessible to the public.
3. Multi-tenant buildings required to have a manual/automatic fire alarm system shall install a minimum of one manual pull station per tenant
space.
Section 907.2.1 of the IBC (F). Delete the "exception" in Section 907.2.1 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following exceptions:
EXCEPTION:
1) Except for Group A-2 occupancies with occupant loads of 200 or more, manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system and the alarm notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow.
2) Group A-2. An automatic/manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group A-2 occupancies with an occupant load of 200 or more. Activation of
the fire alarm shall additionally cause:
a. Illumination of the protected premises to not less than 10 foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches above the floor; and
b. All conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distraction to automatically stop.
Section 907.2.3 of the IBC (F). Modify by adding a sentence to the end of the first paragraph as follows:
New and existing educational occupancies shall have a monitored fire alarm system.
Section 907.2.3 of the IBC (F). Modify by adding a 5th exception as follows:
5. Day care occupancies classified as Group E Occupancy shall not require a monitored fire alarm system unless required elsewhere in the code.
Section 907.2.10.2 of the IBC. Modify by adding a fourth location requirement as follows:
4. Supervised smoke alarms shall be installed in all common corridors and at the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in Groups R-2, R-4 and I-
1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of the end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is located
for each thirty (30) feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by the code.
Section 907.2.12.2 of the IBC. Delete without substitution.
Section 907.4.2 of the IBC. Modify by adding a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Where, in the opinion of the code official, manual fire alarm boxes may be used to cause false fire alarms, the code official is authorized to modify the
requirements for manual fire alarm boxes.
Section 907.6.4 of the IBC (F). Modify by deleting the exception and inserting in lieu thereof the following exception:
Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and
waterflow device for each normally occupied floor.
Section 907.6.4.3 of the IBC (F). Add a section to read as follows:
Section 907.6.4.3 Zone and address location labeling. Fire alarm and/or annunciator panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and
permanently labeled as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building, if no display is present.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 669/715
Section 907.6.6 of the IBC (F). Modify Section 907.6.6 by adding two sentences to the end as follows:
Each address point identification, shall have an alpha/numeric descriptor location. Alpha/numeric descriptor locations are required to be reported to
the Emergency Communications Center upon activation of supervisory and/or alarm conditions as specified by the fire code official.
Section 907.9 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 907.9 as follows:
907.9 Approved hold open devices. When installed in buildings that have a fire alarm system and/or sprinkler system, all approved hold open devices
shall release upon activation of the fire alarm and/or sprinkler water-flow activation.
Section 912.4.1 of the IBC (F). Delete Section 912.4.1 and replace with the following:
Section 912.4.1 Locking fire department connection caps. Locking fire department connection caps approved by the fire department are required for
all new construction that have a water-based fire protection system and existing structures that have a water-based fire protection system shall be
required immediately after conducting the five-year obstruction and maintenance testing, or if one or more of the fire department caps are missing.
Section 912.7 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 912.7 to the IBC to read as follows:
912.7 Size. Minimum fire department connection size shall be 21/2 inch National Standard Thread.
Section 912.8 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 912.8 to the IBC to read as follows:
912.8 Water supply. Fire department connections shall be located not more than 100 feet from a hydrant or as approved by the fire code official.
Section 1011.3 of the IBC. Modify by adding a third exception as follows:
Exception:
3. Stairs within individual dwelling units of residential Group R occupancies that existed prior to 8/28/02 (adoption of the 2000 IRC) are permitted a
78-inch (6'-6") headroom clearance.
Section 1015.8 of the IBC. Delete Section 1015.8 of the IBC entirely.
Section 1023.4 of the IBC. Modify Section 1023.4 by adding a fourth unnumbered paragraph as follows:
Fire door assemblies that provide access to a non-pressurized interior exit of R-2 occupancies shall also be automatic closing by actuation of a
smoke detector.
Section 1029.2 of the IBC (F). Modify by adding a new exception as follows:
EXCEPTION:
1) The main entrance/exit of A-2 occupancies shall be of a width that accommodates not less than two-thirds of the total occupant load.
Section 1030.1 of the IBC. Modify by deleting the exceptions and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
EXCEPTIONS:
1. The emergency escape and rescue opening is permitted to open onto a balcony within an atrium in accordance with the requirements of Section
404 provided the balcony provides access to an exit and the dwelling unit or sleeping room has a means of egress that is not open to the atrium.
2. Regardless of what Tables 1006.3.3(1) and 1006.3.3(2) allow, all group R-2 occupancies other than hotels and motels must be provided with
emergency escape & rescue openings.
3. Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that opens
directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior exit balcony that opens to a public way.
Section 1030.6 of the IBC. Add a new Section 1030.6 to the IBC to read as follows:
Section 1030.6. Emergency escape windows under decks and porches. Emergency escape windows are allowed to be installed under decks and
porches provided the location of the deck allows the emergency escape window to be fully opened and provides a path not less than 36 inches in
height to a yard or court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 670/715
Chapter 11 of the IRC. Delete Chapter 11 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency, Section N1101. Energy efficiency for the design and construction of building regulated by this code shall be as required
by 661-303 of the Iowa State Administrative Code.
Chapter 11 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 11 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Chapter 11 Accessibility, Section 1101. Buildings or portions of buildings shall be accessible to persons with disabilities as required by 661-302 of the
Iowa State Administrative Code.
Section 1208.2 of the IBC. Modify by adding a second unnumbered paragraph as follows:
1208.2 Attic spaces. The opening shall be located in a corridor, hallway, or other readily accessible location. The opening shall not be located in a
closet, bathroom, mechanical room, laundry room, or similar room or location. Attics with a maximum vertical height of less than thirty inches need
not be provided with access openings.
Chapter 13 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 13 in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency, Section 1301. Energy efficiency for the design and construction of building regulated by this code shall be as required
by 661-303 of the Iowa State Administrative Code.
Section 1402.6 and 1402.7 of the IBC. Delete Sections 1402.6 and 1402.7 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section 1402.6. See Title 14, Chapter 5, Article J Floodplain Management Standards in the City Code.
Section 1612 of the IBC. Delete Section 1612 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section 1612. See Title 14, Chapter 5 Article J Floodplain Management Standards in the City Code.
Section G2406.2 (303.3) of the IRC. Prohibited locations of the IRC. Modify by deleting exceptions 3 and 4.
Section G2415.3 (404.3) of the IRC. Prohibited locations of the IRC. Modify by deleting the last sentence.
Part VII Plumbing, Chapters 25 through 33 inclusive of the IRC. Delete Part VII Plumbing Chapters 25 through 33 inclusive of the IRC and insert the
following:
Part VII Plumbing, Chapter 25
Section P2501 GENERAL
P2501.1 Scope. Plumbing systems shall comply with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
Administrative Provisions. The Plumbing Code shall be administered in accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as
amended.
Chapter 27 of the IBC. Delete Section 2701 General of the IBC and insert the following:
Section 2701 GENERAL
Section 2701.1 Scope. Electrical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Electrical Code.
Section 2701.2 Administrative Provisions. The Electrical Code shall be administered in accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this
code as amended and Appendix K as amended.
Chapter 28 of the IBC. Delete chapter 28 of the IBC and insert the following:
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems
Section 2801.1 Scope. Mechanical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Mechanical Code with the following amendments:
Administrative Provisions. The Mechanical Code shall be administered in accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as
amended.
Commercial Kitchen Hood Exhaust Termination:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 671/715
In addition to the code requirements for commercial kitchen hood exhaust terminations locations, the following shall apply:
For new construction, change in occupancy or change in use, that requires a new commercial kitchen hood or revisions to an existing commercial
kitchen hood, the new or existing commercial kitchen hood exhaust duct shall terminate as follows:
1. Above the roof level without passing through an exterior wall; or
2. Through an alley facing exterior wall provided the termination is above the roof level; or
3. To an alley right of way per 3202.3.2 of the International Building Code.
Chapter 29 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 29 of the IBC and insert the following:
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
Section 2901.1 Scope. Plumbing systems shall comply with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
Administrative Provisions. The Plumbing Code shall be administered in accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as
amended.
Section 422.2.1 of the UPC. Delete Section 422.2.1 and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section 422.2.1 Single Use Toilet Facilities. Single use toilet facilities and family or assisted use toilet facilities shall be identified with signage
indicating use by either sex.
Section 3002.4 of the IBC. Delete Section 3002.4 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher.
In buildings four or more stories above, or four or more stories below, grade plane, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department
emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84
inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the
international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) high and shall be placed inside
on both sides of the hoistway door frame.
Part VIII Electrical, Chapters 34 through 43 inclusive of the IRC. Delete Part VIII Electrical Chapters 34 through 43 inclusive of the IRC and insert the
following:
Part VIII Electrical, Chapter 34
Section E3401 GENERAL
E3401.1 Applicability. Electrical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Electrical Code.
Appendix K of the IBC.
Section K103.2 of the IBC. Work exempt from permit. Delete Section K103.2 in the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
Section K103.2 Work exempt from permit. See section 105.2 in both the IRC and IBC.
Section K106.5 of the IBC. Add a new Section K106.5 as follows:
Section K106.5 Energy Connections; An electrical system or equipment regulated by this code for which a permit is required shall not be
connected to a source of energy or power until approved by the building official.
Section K106.6 of the IBC. Add a new Section K106.6 as follows:
Section K106.6 Temporary Energy Connections. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the electrical system or equipment
to the source of energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
Appendix J of the IRC.
Section AJ102.4 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ102.4 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 672/715
AJ102.4 Replacement windows and doors. Regardless of the category of work, where an existing window or door, including the sash and glazed
portion, or safety glazing is replaced, the replacement window, door or safety glazing shall comply with the requirements of Sections AJ102.4.1
through AJ102.4.3, as applicable.
Section AJ102.4.1 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ102.4.1 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ102.4.1 Energy efficiency. Replacement windows or doors shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 11.
Section AJ102.4.4 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ102.4.4 of the IRC entirely.
Section AJ501.7 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ501.7 and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ501.7 Ceiling height. Habitable spaces created in existing basements or attics shall have ceiling heights of not less than 6 feet, 8 inches
(2032 mm), except that the ceiling height at obstructions shall be not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm) from the basement or attic floor. Existing
finished ceiling heights in nonhabitable spaces in basements or attics shall not be reduced.
Section AJ501.8.1 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ501.8.1 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ501.8.1 Stair width. Existing basement and attic stairs and handrails not otherwise being altered or modified shall be permitted to maintain their
current clear width at, above and below existing handrails.
Section AJ501.8.2 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ501.8.2 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ501.8.2 Stair headroom. Headroom height on existing basement or attic stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing
stairway or attic finished headroom. Existing basement or attic stairs not otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current finished
headroom.
Section AJ501.8.3 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ501.8.3 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ501.8.3 Stair landing. Landings serving existing basement or attic stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing
stairway landing depth and width. Existing basement or attic stairs not otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current landing
depth and width.
Section AJ601.4 of the IRC. Delete Section AJ601.4 of the IRC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
AJ601.4 Ceiling height. Habitable spaces created in existing basements and attics shall have ceiling heights of not less than 6 feet, 8 inches
(2032 mm), except that the ceiling height at obstructions shall be not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm) from the basement or attic floor. Existing
finished ceiling heights in nonhabitable spaces in basements or attics shall not be reduced.
(Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019)
17-1-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Violation of this chapter shall be a Municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this Code. (Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 673/715
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 5
HOUSING CODE
17-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and designated as the IOWA CITY HOUSING CODE, hereinafter referred to as "the Housing Code". (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-2: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to ensure that housing facilities and conditions are of the quality necessary to protect and promote
the health, safety and welfare of not only those persons utilizing the housing, but the general public as well. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of
this chapter is to determine the responsibilities of owners, operators, occupants and the City necessary to maintain and administer the standards of this
chapter. (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", "type III
dwelling unit" or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". Whenever
the term "dwelling unit(s)" is used in this chapter, it shall include type III dwelling unit(s).
ACCEPTABLE OR APPROVED: In substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
ACCESSORY BUILDING/USE/STRUCTURE: A building, structure, or use which:
A. Is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees
of the principal use; and
B. Is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the property; and
C. Does not include structures, structural features, or activities inconsistent with the uses to which they are accessory; and
D. Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved through a special exception, is located on the same lot as the principal use or
uses to which it is accessory.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A temporary dwelling unit that is accessory to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling.
ADJOINING GRADE: The elevation of the ground which extends five feet (5') from the perimeter of the dwelling.
APPROVED: See definition of acceptable or approved.
APPURTENANCE: That which is directly or indirectly connected or accessory to a thing.
ATTIC: Any story situated, wholly or partly, within the roof and so designed, arranged or built to be used for business, storage or habitation.
BASEMENT: A portion or story of a building, next below the first or main floor, which may or may not be considered habitable space.
BATH: A bathtub or shower stall installed in compliance with the Iowa City Plumbing Code.
BEDROOM/SLEEPING ROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling used or intended to be used for sleeping. Minimum size requirements for bedrooms are
set forth in sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter.
CELLAR: A space below the first or main floor, used or intended to be used for storage and location for heating equipment and shall not be considered
habitable space.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM: A single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.
CERTIFICATE OF STRUCTURE COMPLIANCE: A permanent document showing that the structure for which it is issued was in compliance with the
provisions of sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter at the time of issuance.
CHIEF: The administrative head of the Fire Department.
CODE COMPLIANCE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT: A written agreement that shall include a list of specific actions and a specific schedule of deadlines
for actions to abate the current violation and avoid further Code violations. It may also include provisions for periodic reassessment of the agreement or
any written modification of the agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 674/715
COMMUNAL: Used or shared by or intended to be used or shared by the occupants of two (2) or more rooming units or two (2) or more dwelling units.
CONDOMINIUM: A dwelling unit in compliance or conformance with the requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
COOPERATIVE: A dwelling unit in compliance or conformance with the requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a dwelling. A court not extending to the street or front or rear yard is an inner
court. A court extending to the street or front yard or rear yard is an outer court.
DESIGNATED AGENT: The person designated by owner(s) of rental property who are not residents of Johnson County, as well as condominium
associations, who has authority to act on the owners' behalf to accept service of legal processes and notices and to authorize repairs as required.
DINING ROOM: A habitable room used or intended to be used for the purpose of eating but not for cooking or the preparation of meals.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Housing and Inspection Services.
DUPLEX: A structure in which there are two (2) dwelling units within a single building, and both dwelling units are located on the same lot.
DWELLING: Any building, structure or manufactured housing, except temporary housing, wholly or partly, used or intended to be used for living or sleeping
by human occupants and includes any appurtenances attached thereto.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: See definition of multiple dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: See definition of single-family dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating of meals and sanitation.
EGRESS: An arrangement of exit routes to provide a means of exit from buildings and/or premises.
EXIT: A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, exterior exit balconies,
ramps, stairways, smokeproof enclosures, horizontal exit, exit passageway, exit court, walkways, sidewalks and yards.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the inspector.
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE: A building used as a residence by a chapter of a fraternal or sororal nonprofit organization recognized by the
University of Iowa. For purposes of this Code, a fraternity/sorority house shall be considered a rooming house. Occupancy classification for State of Iowa
Fire Code is "dormitory".
GUEST: An individual who shares a dwelling on a temporary basis for not more than thirty (30) days in any given calendar year; or a person who stays in a
hospitality oriented retail use.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling having a minimum of seventy (70) square feet of total floor area with not less than
seven feet (7') in any horizontal dimension, used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms,
pantries, laundries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets, storage spaces, stairways and recreation rooms in basements (see definition of recreation
room in basement). Notwithstanding the foregoing, bedrooms must meet the dimensional requirements as set forth in sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this
chapter.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests in such quantities as would be considered unsanitary.
INSPECTOR: The official or officials of the City who administer the provisions of the Housing, Building, Nuisance and Zoning Codes, together with duly
authorized representative(s) and/or agent(s).
KITCHEN: A room used or intended to be used for cooking or the preparation of meals.
KITCHEN SINK: A basin for washing utensils used for cooking, eating and drinking, located in a kitchen and connected to both hot and cold water lines.
KITCHENETTE: A food preparation area not less than forty (40) square feet in area.
LAVATORY: A hand washing basin connected to both hot and cold water lines and separate and distinct from a kitchen sink.
LIVING ROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling unit used or intended to be used primarily for general living purposes.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance
upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation
by one or more persons.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
OCCUPANT: A person who is physically present in the dwelling and is engaged in activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, sleeping, cooking,
eating, and sanitation, for at least thirty one (31) days in any calendar year or who is a tenant.
OPERATOR: Any person who rents to another or who has custody or control of a building or parts thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let
or who has custody or control of the premises.
OWNER: Any person who has custody and/or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit by virtue of a contractual interest in or legal or equitable
title to said dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit as guardian or conservator.
OWNER OCCUPANT: An owner who is physically present in the dwelling and is engaged in activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, sleeping,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 675/715
cooking, eating, and sanitation, for at least ninety (90) days in any calendar year.
PERMIT: See definition of rental permit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust or estate.
PLACARD: A display document showing that the unit for which it is issued has been determined to be unfit for human habitation.
PLUMBING: Means and includes any or all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, solid waste
disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, water heating devices, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar
supplied fixture, together with all connections to water, sanitary sewer or gas services.
PORCH: A platform completely covered by a roof located and attached to a building.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, including a building(s) and/or accessory structure(s) thereon.
PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference by
unwanted persons.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN: The property management action plan shall be a detailed written response from the property owner or
owner's designated agent describing the manner in which the property owner will, within their legal authority, make a good faith effort to prevent nuisance
activities from continuing. The plan shall be filed with the Department of Housing and Inspection Services for approval within ten (10) working days from
the date of the notice of violation sent to the owner or owner's designated agent.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: A cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable standby letter of credit in the amount of the
estimated cost of the enforcement costs, to be determined by the City Manager or designee.
PUBLIC WAY: Any parcel of land, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, more than ten feet (10') in width, dedicated to the free passage of the general
public.
RECREATION ROOM IN BASEMENT: A room located in a basement used for general recreation purposes and not used, nor intended to be used, for
sleeping. This room shall be in addition to the minimum space and facility requirements for a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
REGULATIONS: See definition of rules and regulations.
RENTAL PERMIT: A document, issued periodically, which grants the owner or operator the option of letting a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or type
III dwelling unit for rental purposes and showing that the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or type III dwelling unit for which it is issued was in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter at the time of issuance.
RENTAL PROPERTY: Any dwelling not owner occupied, regardless whether rent is paid.
ROOMER: An occupant of a rooming unit who is not an owner occupant.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling containing two (2) or more rooming units or type III dwelling units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to four
(4) or more roomers. Occupants of units specifically designated as type III dwelling units within a rooming house shall be included in the roomer count. Any
dwelling with a combination of dwelling units, rooming units, and type III dwelling units is considered a nonconforming rooming house. A rooming house is
classified as an independent group living use in title 14 of this Code.
ROOMING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a group living use, as defined in title 14 of this Code, and
forming a single private unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used by a roomer or roomers for living and sleeping, but not cooking.
RUBBISH: Inorganic waste material consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible materials.
RULES AND REGULATIONS: Those administrative procedures adopted by the Director for the efficient internal management of the Department of
Housing and Inspection Services. All rules and regulations shall be limited to departmental administrative and procedural matters, rather than substantive
matters and shall not be inconsistent with this chapter.
SHARED LIVING SPACE: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms, not including bedrooms, located within a household living use, as
defined in title 14 of this Code.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure containing one dwelling unit.
SOLID WASTE: Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food and shall also mean combustible
waste material. The term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings and other
combustible materials.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A watertight container that is constructed of metal or other durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being
serviced without creating unsanitary conditions.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, motor home or other structure used for human shelter and designed to be transportable and not attached to the
ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises. Such temporary housing may occur for no more than twenty one (21)
consecutive days nor exceed a total of forty five (45) days in any calendar year.
TENANT: Any occupant of a dwelling unit who is not an owner or operator of said dwelling unit or who is entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a
dwelling unit to the exclusion of another.
TO LET: The granting, either in writing or orally, by the owner or operator to another the right to possess a dwelling, a dwelling unit, a rooming unit, or a
type III dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 676/715
TOILET: A water closet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, of such shape and form and holding a sufficient quantity of water so that no fecal matter
will collect on the surface of the bowl and equipped with a flushing rim or flushing rims.
TYPE III DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating of meals but does not have a toilet or bath available for the exclusive use of
the occupants thereof. (1978 Code §17-2; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 02-4052, 11-5-2002; Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003; Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; Ord. 17-4734,
12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
17-5-4: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dwellings within the jurisdiction of the City used or intended to be used for human occupancy, except said
provisions shall not be applicable to "temporary housing", as defined herein. (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The City, in compliance with the requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended, hereby adopts the December 17, 1979, version of the "Housing Quality
Standards" promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (24 CFR section 882.109[a] through [l]) as the adopted
Model Housing Code for the City, as amended. The City has integrated the housing quality standard in sections 17-5-1 through 17-5-20 of this chapter,
which provisions, to be enforced by the City, are as stringent as, or more stringent than, those in the Model Housing Code as adopted. (1978 Code §17-1;
amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The inspector is hereby authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of the housing code and to make inspections to determine the condition of all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, structures and premises located within the city, in order that the inspector may perform the duty of safeguarding
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public under the provisions of the housing code. (1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-7: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inspection Of Owner Occupied, Single-Family Dwellings: Inspections of owner occupied, single-family dwellings shall occur only upon request or
complaint to the inspector, and only the standards of sections 17-5-17, 17-5-19 and 17-5-20 of this chapter shall be applicable.
B. Inspections Of Structure Items: The provisions of sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter in effect at the time of issuance of a certificate of
structure compliance shall be the only structure standards applicable to a dwelling. Upon the issuance of a certificate of structure compliance, there
shall be no further inspection and enforcement of the structure items under sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter.
C. Maintenance Inspections: Inspections of the provisions of section 17-5-19 of this chapter shall be conducted upon request, on a complaint basis and/or
through a program of regular rental inspections. Regular inspections shall be conducted as determined by resolution of the city council.
D. Right To Access By Inspector:
1. The inspector is hereby authorized to conduct consensual inspections of any dwelling within Iowa City in order to perform the duty of safeguarding
the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants or the public. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
the housing code or whenever the inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises
any condition which makes such unit or premises in violation of any provision of the housing code or in response to a complaint that an alleged
violation of a provision of the housing code may exist, the inspector may enter such unit or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon the inspector by the housing code, provided if such unit or premises be occupied, the inspector shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. The inspector and/or
authorized representative shall, at such time: a) identify themselves and their positions; and b) explain why entry is sought.
2. If entry is refused, the inspector shall request that the inspection be conducted at a reasonable time, suitable to the owner or occupant. If the request
for future entry is refused, the inspector shall, at that time or at a later time, explain to the owner and/or occupant that: a) the occupant may refuse,
without penalty, entry without a search warrant; and b) the inspector may apply to the magistrate for a search warrant.
E. Search Warrant: If consent to inspect a building is withheld by any person having the lawful right to exclude, the inspector may apply to a magistrate of
the Iowa district court in and for county for a search warrant of the building. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of
any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to properly permit entry
therein by the inspector or authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the housing code. (1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-8: ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR FOR MAINTENANCE:
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall, upon proper notice, give access to the owner, operator or agent or employee to any part
of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of effecting such maintenance, making such repairs or
making such alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with, or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of the housing code.
(1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-9: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 677/715
Whenever the inspector, in the enforcement of the housing code, finds that a condition exists which requires immediate action to protect the health or
safety of the occupants and/or the general public, the inspector may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such a condition
and requiring that action be taken such as the inspector deems necessary to abate the condition. If necessary, the director may order that the premises be
vacated forthwith, and said premises shall not be reoccupied until the order to make repairs has been complied with. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately or in the time and manner prescribed by the order itself. (1978 Code §17-3)
Notwithstanding section 17-5-11 of this chapter, rent shall be abated if the inspector issues an emergency order for failure to comply with this chapter and
the owner fails to repair the condition giving rise to the order within five (5) days. Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the
tenant. The effective date of the abatement is the date the inspector issues the emergency order. Notice to the owner and tenant of the rent abatement
shall be given in the same manner as in section 17-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
17-5-10: PLACARDING OF STRUCTURES; CONDEMNATION REFERRALS:
A. Placarding Procedures: Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit found to be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested
that it creates a hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public shall be determined to be unfit for human habitation and shall be so
designated and placarded by the Director.
B. Order To Vacate Placarded Dwelling: Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or any portion thereof placarded as being unfit for human habitation by
the Director shall be vacated immediately or as ordered by the Director. (1978 Code §17-3)
C. Approval Required To Reoccupy Placarded Dwelling: No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or portion thereof which has been placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall be used for human habitation again until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Director. The
Director shall remove such placard whenever the defect(s) for which the dwelling was placarded has been eliminated.
D. Removal Of Placard Prohibited: No person shall deface or remove a placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which has been deemed
unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in subsection C of this section. (1978 Code §17-3; amd. 1994 Code)
E. Condemnation Referral: After a reasonable period of time after a property has been placarded and no remedial action begun, the City may pursue
condemnation consistent with this Code and the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
F. Rent Abatement: Notwithstanding section 17-5-11 of this chapter, rent shall be abated if the Director placards the dwelling unit for violation of this
chapter for more than five (5) consecutive days. Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the tenant. The effective date of the
abatement is the date the dwelling unit was placarded. Notice to the owner and tenant of the rent abatement shall be given in the same manner as in
section 17-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
17-5-11: RENT ABATEMENT:
A. The building official may order rent abated when the building official determines that the owner has, after issuance of a notice of violation of this chapter:
1. Failed to provide an essential service (water, sewer, electricity, heat);
2. Failed to remedy a condition that poses a substantial risk to the health or safety of the tenant; or
3. Rented a dwelling unit without a rental permit.
B. Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the tenant. Rent shall be abated until the condition for which rent abatement was
ordered has, in the judgment of the building official, been remedied.
C. The building official shall provide a copy of the rent abatement order to the owner at the address on the rental permit and to the tenant by U.S. mail and
by posting the entrance door to dwelling unit. Notice of termination of the rent abatement order will be given in the same manner. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-
2017)
17-5-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The inspector shall make all rules and regulations available to the general public. Standard forms and blank notices shall also be available upon request.
(1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-13: APPEALS BOARD; VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
A. Jurisdiction Of Appeals Board:
1. Appeals to the Appeals Board may be taken by any person affected by any decision of the Director or designee or by any written notice. Any person
wishing to seek a variance to this chapter may petition the Appeals Board for relief. (Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003)
2. If the Appeals Board sustains or modifies a decision or a notice, it shall be deemed to be an order, and the owner, operator or occupant, as the case
may require, shall comply with all provisions of such order within a reasonable period of time which shall be determined by the Appeals Board. (1978
Code §17-3; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 678/715
B. Appeals Board Procedures:
1. The Appeals Board, upon receipt of an appeal request and payment of the filing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, shall set a time
and a place for the hearing. The applicant shall be advised, in writing, of such time and place at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the
hearing.
2. At such a hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard and to show cause as to why such notice or order should be modified,
extended, revoked or why a variance should be granted.
3. The Appeals Board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify, extend or revoke a notice to grant or deny a variance.
4. The appeals board may grant variances or extensions of time to make repairs. In the event that an extension and/or variance is granted, the appeals
board shall observe the following conditions:
a. In lieu of or in addition to administrative extensions, the appeals board may grant an extension or extensions of time for the compliance of any
order or notice, provided the appeals board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following:
(1) There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order; and
(2) Such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
b. Except under extraordinary circumstances, the extension or sum of extensions shall not exceed eighteen (18) months.
c. The appeals board may grant a variance in a specific case and from a specific provision of this chapter, subject to appropriate conditions, and
provided the appeals board makes specific findings of fact based on the evidence presented on the record as a whole and relate to the following:
(1) There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out a strict letter of any notice or order; and
(2) Due to the particular circumstances presented, the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
(3) An extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in this arbitrary effect; and
(4) Such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
d. Upon appeal or by petition, the appeals board shall consider the adoption of a general variance. The appeals board, by a majority vote, may
establish a general variance for existing structures which cannot practicably meet the standards of the code. Prior to considering any general
variance, public notice shall be given. A general variance, if granted, shall:
(1) State in what manner the variance from the specific provision(s) is to be allowed; and
(2) State the conditions under which the variance is to be made; and
(3) Be based upon specific findings of fact based on evidence related to the following:
(A) There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of the specific provision, common to dwellings,
dwelling units or rooming units to which the variance will apply; and
(B) Such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
e. The effective date of the variance shall be thirty (30) calendar days after notification to the city council unless vetoed by an extraordinary majority
of the city council during said thirty (30) day period. (1978 Code §17-3; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-14: INFORMATIONAL DISCLOSURE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM:
Beginning with written or oral rental agreements entered into after the effective date hereof, the owner or operator and all tenants, excluding minor
dependents of a tenant under the lease, shall execute an informational disclosure and acknowledgement form, which is prepared by the city department of
housing inspection services, that provides the following:
A. The maximum occupancy limit of the dwelling unit as established by the city if said limit is available. The maximum occupancy limit is available for
purposes of this section if it is on the housing and inspection services web page on the city web site at the link entitled "rental permit". Owners,
operators, and tenants may access said limit via the internet or by telephoning the housing and inspection services department or by visiting housing
and inspection services department personally. Owners, operators, and tenants have the affirmative duty to determine whether the maximum
occupancy limit is available.
B. The names of the tenants, pursuant to the rental agreement, who may occupy said unit.
C. Acknowledgment that the owner, operator, and tenant are responsible for complying with the maximum occupancy limits prescribed by this Code and
that violation of the maximum occupancy limits can result in a fine to the owner, operator, and/or tenant. The informational disclosure and
acknowledgment form shall further contain a statement that nothing in the document shall prevent an owner or operator from limiting the number of
tenants in a dwelling unit to less than the maximum allowable occupancy permitted by this Code.
D. Identification of specific nonhabitable spaces and rooms that cannot be used for sleeping purposes.
E. Acknowledgment of allowed parking, if any, and acknowledgment that there is no parking on the grass or on the public sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 679/715
F. Trash and recycling requirements, but only if the rental property is four (4) dwelling units or less.
G. A recitation of the language of section 8-5-5 of this Code, the crime of disorderly house.
H. City website address.
I. Contact information for the City of Iowa City Neighborhood Services Coordinator.
J. Information on where to locate the Iowa Residential Landlord Tenant Law1 including a website.
K. Who is responsible for snow removal and lawn mowing. (Ord. 02-4052, 11-5-2002)
L. Information concerning the Iowa law on rental deposits as follows: 1) the right of the landlord to withhold from the rental deposit such amounts as are
reasonably necessary to restore the premises to the condition at the commencement of the tenancy, including the university off campus website or
another website that provides a checklist for documenting the condition of the premises; and 2) the requirement that the tenant provide the landlord
with the tenant's mailing address or delivery instructions for return of the rental deposit. (Ord. 11-4430, 5-17-2011)
M. Notification of the availability of a map showing whether the unit is in a floodplain and a link to the map. (Ord. 16-4670, 7-19-2016)
The owner or operator shall provide a photocopy of the executed informational disclosure and acknowledgment to the inspector upon request. (Ord.
02-4052, 11-5-2002)
17-5-15: DESIGNATION AND REGISTRATION OF DESIGNATED AGENT:
Owners of rental property not residing in the County and/or condominium associations shall designate and register with the City in the Office of the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services a "designated agent" located in the County and empowered to represent a property owner(s) in matters
concerning compliance with the Iowa City Housing Code and as defined in section 17-5-3 of this chapter. Failure to designate and register a designated
agent is a violation of this chapter and may result in revocation of a rental permit. (1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-16: CERTIFICATE OF STRUCTURE COMPLIANCE AND RENTAL PERMIT:
A. Certificate And Permit Required For Rental Property: It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to let to another any dwelling, dwelling unit,
duplex, multiple dwelling, rooming unit, type III dwelling unit, or rooming house, except the owner occupant who lets to no more than one tenant,
unless:
1. The owner or operator holds a valid certificate of structure compliance, issued by the City, applicable to those portions of the specific structure used
for residential rental purposes.
2. The owner or operator holds a valid rental permit, issued by the City in the name of the owner or operator, applicable to those portions of the specific
structure used for residential rental purposes.
The one tenant exception provided herein is limited to one tenant per dwelling unit regardless of the number of owner occupants. By way of
illustration, if there are two (2) owner occupants in a single-family dwelling, a rental permit is required if there are two (2) or more tenants. (Ord. 17-
4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
B. Certificate Of Structure Compliance:
1. Scope Of Certificate; Transfers; Contents: The certificate of structure compliance shall be a permanent document, except as noted below, which,
when issued, shall satisfy the requirements of sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter. The certificate shall be transferable at the time of a
change in ownership and shall remain a part of the Iowa City property file as a matter of public record. The certificate, in and of itself, shall not be
interpreted as granting the owner or operator the privilege of letting the structure for residential occupancy but must be accompanied by a valid rental
permit. The certificate of structure compliance shall state the date of issuance, type of structure for which the certificate is being issued and street
address of the structure to which it is applicable. All dwelling units and rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid certificate of
structure compliance or application for the same on file with the City and fees paid may be ordered vacated.
2. Application For Certificate: The owner or operator shall file, in duplicate, an application for a certificate of structure compliance with the Department
of Housing and Inspection Services on application forms provided by the inspector.
3. Issuance Of Certificate: When the provisions of sections 17-5-17 and 17-5-18 of this chapter have been complied with by the owner or operator, the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services shall issue a certificate of structure compliance upon payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be
set by resolution of the City Council.
4. Revocation Of Certificate: The certificate of structure compliance shall be permanent, except when there has been fraud, collusion or illegality in the
inspection process applicable to this certificate of structure compliance or when there exists a material and substantial noncompliance with section
17-5-17 or 17-5-18 of this chapter which directly affects the health and/or safety of the occupants therein. The inspector or any other individual who
believes that there exists grounds for revocation may petition the Appeals Board to revoke the certificate of structure compliance. The burden of
proof shall be upon the party seeking the revocation. The owner or operator of the affected property shall be properly notified of the petition for
revocation and shall be notified of the date, place and time of the Appeals Board's consideration of the petition and may appear and defend. Upon
final determination by the Appeals Board, a certificate of structure compliance may be modified to reflect the compliance of each dwelling unit and/or
rooming unit with sections 17-5-17 and/or 17-5-18 of this chapter or may be revoked in whole or in part. (1978 Code §17-4; amd. 1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 680/715
C. Rental Permit:
1. Scope Of Permit; Transfers; Contents: A rental permit shall be a document indicating compliance with section 17-5-19 of this chapter at the time of
issuance and shall be valid for a specified period of time. The document shall be transferable from one owner or operator to another at any time prior
to its expiration, termination or revocation. The owner or operator shall notify the Department of Housing and Inspection Services of any change of
interest or ownership in the property within thirty (30) calendar days of any conveyance or transfer of interest affecting the property and provide the
name and address of all persons who have acquired an interest therein. In the event that the Department of Housing and Inspection Services has not
been notified of such conveyance or transfer within the designated period of time, the rental permit shall be transferred from one owner or operator to
another only upon payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the City Council which shall be assessed to the new
owner or operator. The rental permit shall state the date of issuance, the address of the structure to which it is applicable, the name of the new owner
or operator to which it is applicable, and its new expiration date. The rental permit shall also state the maximum occupancy and the telephone
number for the property owner or designated agent. All dwelling units and rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid rental permit
may be ordered vacated. (1978 Code §17-4; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003)
2. Application For Permit: The owner or operator shall file, in duplicate, an application for rental permit with the Department of Housing and Inspection
Services on application forms provided by the inspector. (1978 Code §17-4; amd. 1994 Code)
3. Issuance Of Permit:
a. When all provisions of section 17-5-19 of this chapter have been complied with by the owner or operator, the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services shall issue a rental permit upon payment of all permit and reinspection fees, the amounts of which shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. However, unless the Director determines there is good cause, the rental permit shall not be issued if there are any
open building permits on the property, if there are any unpaid judgments entered against the owner in a Municipal infraction for a Code violation on
the property or on any other rental property of the owner, or if the owner has failed to cure a violation on the property or on any other rental
property of the owner as ordered by the court. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 18-4769, 9-18-2018)
b. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter:
(1) The City shall not issue a rental permit for any single-family dwelling or duplex to an owner occupant unless said owner has provided written
documentation showing a bona fide intent, as reasonably determined by the Director, to vacate the dwelling for a minimum period of one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
(2) Such documentation shall include, but is not limited to: transfer of employment, acceptance of new employment, military orders, acceptance to
an educational institution, executed purchase agreement for a single-family or other residential unit, executed lease for a single-family or other
residential unit, and marriage license.
(3) The rental permit shall be revoked if the owner fails to vacate the dwelling within one hundred eighty (180) days of its issuance.
(4) No rental permit issued to an owner occupant between January 1, 2018 and the effective date of this subsection C3b shall be renewed unless
the owner occupant meets the requirements set forth herein.
(5) With respect to this provision, the Board of Appeals does not have authority to hear an appeal of a decision to deny or revoke a rental permit,
grant a variance, or grant any other relief. (Ord. 18-4769, 9-18-2018)
4. Expiration Of Permit; Extensions: Rental permits shall be valid through the expiration date contained thereon. However, extensions shall be granted
to cover any time period between the stated expiration date and the period of time permitted by the inspector to remedy any violations cited
subsequent to a maintenance inspection, provided a rental application is on file with fees paid, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 17-
4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
5. Required Procedures Prior To Commencement Of Rental Permit Sanctions:
a. Following a violation that serves as a basis for rental permit sanctions, written notice shall be given by the City to the owner or owner's designated
agent of the premises at which the Code violations occurred. The notice is to be sent by regular mail.
b. Following a second violation that serves as a basis for rental permit sanctions within a twelve (12) month period, the City shall schedule a Code
compliance settlement meeting involving landlords, tenants, and others whose corrective action is considered necessary by the City to abate and
avoid further Code violations. The notice of the meeting is to be sent by regular mail within ten (10) working days of the City providing notice to the
owner or owner's agent as required above.
(1) The desired outcome of the Code compliance settlement meeting will be to obtain a Code compliance settlement agreement in which relevant
parties, including the owner or owner's designated agent and the tenant(s), agree to take corrective action to abate and avoid further Code
violations.
(2) The owner, owner's designated agent, and/or tenant is in violation of this provision under the following circumstances:
(A) Does not attend a Code compliance settlement meeting.
(B) Fails or refuses to sign a Code compliance settlement agreement within forty eight (48) hours of receiving the proposed agreement from the
City.
(C) Subsequently fails or refuses to comply with any conditions or requirements set forth in a Code compliance settlement agreement.
(3) Violation of this provision authorizes the City to impose rental permit sanctions. The City in its determination may consider, without limitation,
the following factors:
(A) Level of cooperation of the parties in attempting to resolve issues.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 681/715
(B) Level of disturbance associated with the violations.
(C) Impact of violations upon neighbors or other victims.
(D) Degree to which parties have taken reasonable steps to try and resolve problems.
(E) History of City and State Code violations. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-20-2003)
(4) Violation of this provision authorizes the City to issue Municipal infraction citations to any tenant, whose corrective action is considered
necessary by the City to abate and avoid further Code violations, who fails to attend, refuses to sign or subsequently fails or refuses to comply
with conditions or requirements set forth in a Code compliance settlement agreement. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
c. Effective July 1, 2018, the twelve (12) month period of time in subsection C5b of this section shall be twenty four (24) months. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-
19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6. Defenses To An Enforcement Action Of The Provisions Of This Section: It shall be a defense to an enforcement action pursuant to the provisions of
this section if an owner or owner's designated agent has:
a. Reported the violation to law enforcement;
b. Evicted or attempted to evict by commencing and pursuing with due diligence all legal remedies to evict those tenants charged with one of the
specified violations. It is not the intention of this provision to apply to tenants who have not been charged with one of the specified violations;
c. Undertaken and pursued with due diligence, reasonable means to avoid a recurrence of Code violations on the premises by the present and future
tenants or occupants of the premises; or
d. Executed a property management action plan.
The defenses set forth in this section shall not be available to any person who fails to attend a Code compliance settlement meeting.
7. Rental Permit Sanctions:
Comment: Sanctions may be applied to an individual dwelling unit, the entire rental dwelling, or the premises. Each separate violation shall count as
a basis for a rental permit sanction unless the owner qualifies for a defense to enforcement under subsection C6 of this section. The following
sanctions may be imposed upon a rental permit:
a. Reduced term rental permit (1 year rental permit);
b. Suspension of rental permit; and
c. Revocation of rental permit.
8. Reduced Term Rental Permits: The Director may issue a reduced term rental permit with conditions for any of the following reasons:
a. The owner, any occupant, and/or any of their guests on two (2) or more separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period of time have been
issued criminal complaints for violations of the following provisions of the Iowa Code, this Code or United States Code on the premises of a rental
property:
(1) Iowa Code chapter 124, sections 401 and 403 (controlled substance).
(2) Iowa Code chapter 708, sections 708.1 (assault), 708.3 (assault while participating in a felony), 708.4 (wilful injury), 708.6 (terrorism), 708.11
(stalking).
(3) Iowa Code chapter 724, sections 724.3 (unauthorized possession of offensive weapons), 724.16 (trafficking in stolen weapons), 724.30
(reckless use of a firearm).
(4) Iowa Code chapter 123, sections 123.46 (consumption or intoxication in public places), 123.47 (possession of alcohol under legal age).
(5) Iowa Code chapter 716, sections 716.3 (criminal mischief in the first degree), 716.4 (criminal mischief in the second degree), 716.5 (criminal
mischief in the third degree), 716.6 (criminal mischief in the fourth degree), 716.6A (criminal mischief in violation of individual rights), 716.7
(trespass).
(6) Iowa Code chapter 719, section 719.1 (interference with official acts).
(7) Iowa Code chapter 723, sections 723.1 (riot), 723.4 (disorderly conduct).
(8) Title 13, United States Code, sections 841, 842, 843, 844, 846, 856, and 861 (controlled substances).
(9) Section 4-5-3, "Consumption Or Possession In Public Places And City Buildings", of this Code.
(10) Section 4-5-4, "Regulation Of Persons Under Legal Age", of this Code.
(11) Title 6, chapter 4, "Noise Control", of this Code.
(12) Section 8-5-1, "Disorderly Conduct", of this Code.
(13) Subsection 8-5-3C, "Obstructing Officers", of this Code.
(14) Section 8-5-4, "Damaging, Defacing Property", of this Code.
(15) Section 8-5-5, "Keeping Disorderly House", of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 682/715
(16) Section 8-5-6, "Indecent Exposure", of this Code. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-20-2003)
(17) Section 8-5-13, "Public Urination And Defecation", of this Code. (Ord. 12-4468, 3-20-2012)
b. The owner, any occupant, and/or any of their guests on three (3) or more separate occasions within a period of twelve (12) months have been
issued Municipal citations or written notices of violations for the following provisions of this Code on the premises of a rental property:
(1) This title, "Building And Housing".
(2) Title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code.
(3) Title 6, chapter 1, "Nuisances", of this Code.
(4) Title 6, chapter 3, "Weed Control", of this Code.
(5) Title 6, chapter 9, "Graffiti", of this Code. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-20-2003)
c. On two (2) or more separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period of time, there is a founded complaint against a tenant. "Founded
complaint" means the issuance of a Municipal infraction against a tenant for violation of subsection 8-5-5C, "Civil Sanction", of this Code or
evidence sufficient to issue a criminal complaint for violation of subsection 8-5-5A, "Simple Misdemeanor", of this Code had a police officer been
able to identify a tenant who was present. (Ord. 12-4496, 9-18-2012)
The reduced term rental permit will be a one year rental permit required to be renewed annually. This sanction shall be in effect for a period of not
less than four (4) years and annual licensing inspections and fees are required. The Director may require any of the following with the issuance of
a reduced term rental permit: compliance with Iowa Code and/or City codes; submittal of a copy of the current lease agreement; payment of all
City fees; payment of all court costs and fines; execution of a property management action plan; provision of a property management performance
guarantee; and any other information the City deems necessary for enforcement of any provision of the Iowa Code or this Code. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-
20-2003)
d. Effective July 1, 2018, the twelve (12) month period of time in subsections C8a, C8b, and C8c of this section shall be twenty four (24) months.
(Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9. Basis For Suspension Of Rental Permit: The Director may suspend a rental permit for any of the following reasons:
a. Failure to comply with the conditions of the reduced term rental permit.
b. Failure to comply with a court decision concerning the violation of any provision of section 17-5-19 of this chapter.
c. Adjudication by the court that the owner, owner's designated agent, or persons acting on behalf of the owner has: 1) violated the maximum
occupancy provisions of this Code; 2) illegally used or allowed the illegal use of nonhabitable or nonoccupiable space; or 3) illegally converted
space to habitable use.
d. Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
e. Failure to comply with any emergency order or placarding of a structure.
f. Additional violations by the tenants or owner of the Iowa Code, this Code, or United States Code occur within one year of the conditions imposed
pursuant to the reduced term rental permit. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-20-2003)
g. Failure by the owner to pay a judgment or to cure a violation as ordered by the court in a Municipal infraction for a Code violation on the property
or on any other rental property of the owner. The rental permit shall be reinstated upon payment of the judgment or abatement of the violation.
(Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
A rental permit shall be suspended for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days beginning from the date of the Director's decision or a court
ruling on a Municipal infraction and no later than at the end of the current lease period unless a property management plan is executed.
10. Basis For Revocation Of Rental Permit: The Director may revoke a rental permit for any of the following reasons:
a. Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
b. Failure to comply with an emergency order or placarding of a structure.
c. Failure to comply with suspension of rental permit.
d. More than one basis for rental permit suspension within two (2) years of the reinstated permit previously having been suspended.
e. The owner or owner's designated agent convicted for making false statements on a rental permit application, and/or informational disclosure and
acknowledgment form.
A rental permit shall be revoked for not less than one year beginning from the date of the Director's decision or a court ruling on a Municipal
infraction.
11. Reinstatement Of Rental Permit:
a. Suspended Permit: A suspended permit shall be reinstated upon completion of the suspension period and execution of a property management
action plan.
b. Revoked Permit: An application for a new permit may be made after one year from the date revocation was effective. The application shall be
processed in the same manner as an initial rental permit application, and requires execution of a property management action plan.
c. Transfer Of Ownership: Transfer of ownership does not modify or alter any sanction imposed unless approved by the City or unless the transfer is
an arm's length transaction between disinterested parties as determined by the City. (Ord. 03-4082, 4-20-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 683/715
12. Exemption: Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the rental permit sanctions are inapplicable to victims of abuse or crime as provided in HF
493 (2016) to be codified at section 562A.27B of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 16-4669, 7-19-2016)
13. Temporary Rental Permits: The City may issue a temporary rental permit for a maximum of twenty four (24) months if the owner is an individual: a)
1) who has been occupying the dwelling; 2) who intends to return to the dwelling; and 3) whose absence is due to a sabbatical, an extended
vacation, spending winter months in a warmer climate, military service, a volunteer commitment, employment, or substantially similar reason; or b)
who occupied the dwelling at the time of death and the owner's heir(s) occupies or intends to occupy the dwelling. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-
1-2018)
D. Hearing Upon Denial Of Certificate Or Permit: Any person whose application for a certificate of structure compliance or rental permit has been denied
may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board. Application for the appeal hearing must be made within ten (10)
calendar days of receipt of the written notice of denial. (1978 Code §17-4; amd. 1994 Code)
E. Rental Permit Cap:
1. Definitions:
RENTAL IMPACT AREA: Means the geographic area delineated as such on the Rental Impact Area Map in figure 17-1 of this section.
RENTAL PERMIT DISTRICT: Means the geographic districts labelled and delineated on the Rental Impact Area Map in figure 17-1 of this section.
FIGURE 17-1
RENTAL IMPACT AREA MAP
2. Permits Limited: Within the rental impact area, the City shall not issue a rental permit for any single-family dwelling or duplex in a rental permit district
where the percentage of single-family dwellings and duplex units that have rental permits exceeds thirty percent (30%) of the total number of singlefamily
and duplex units within said rental permit district, except as provided herein. This limit shall be known as the rental permit cap.
3. Exceptions To The Rental Permit Cap:
a. Dwelling with a rental permit on the effective date of this subsection E.
b. Dwelling with a rental permit that expired after December 13, 2015 if a renewed rental permit is issued before July 1, 2018.
c. Existing legally nonconforming single-family dwellings and duplex units located within a zoning district where single-family dwellings and duplex
units are not an allowed use.
d. Accessory dwelling units.
e. Owner-occupied duplexes, where the owner occupies one unit and leases out the second unit.
f. Approved bed and breakfast homestays and inns.
g. Dwelling with a temporary rental permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 684/715
h. Group household as defined in title 14 of this Code.
i. A new single-family dwelling or duplex if a building permit was issued before June 13, 2017.
j. An existing single-family dwelling or duplex if a building permit was issued after December 13, 2015 and before June 13, 2017.
4. Board Of Appeals: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Board of Appeals does not have the authority to grant an exception,
variance, or any other relief to the rental permit cap. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
17-5-17: MINIMUM STRUCTURE STANDARDS FOR ALL DWELLINGS:
A. Safety Of Supplied Facility: Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or required utility shall be constructed and/or installed so that it will function
safely.
B. Kitchens: Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen room or kitchenette equipped with the following:
1. An approved kitchen sink.
2. Space capable of properly accommodating a refrigerator and a stove or range.
3. Proper access terminals to utilities necessary to properly operate a refrigerator and stove or range.
4. Adequate space for the storage and preparation of food.
C. Toilets, Baths And Lavatories:
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain the following:
a. A toilet.
b. A bath.
c. A lavatory basin within or adjacent to the room containing the toilet.
2. Every toilet and every bath shall be contained within a room or within separate rooms which afford privacy for a person within said rooms. (1978
Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Water Heating Facilities: Every kitchen sink, bath and lavatory basin required in accordance with the provisions of the housing code shall be properly
connected with supplied water heating facilities. Every supplied water heating facility shall be properly connected and shall be capable of heating water
to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every kitchen sink and lavatory basin required under the provisions of
the housing code at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) (43°C). Such supplied water heating facilities shall be
capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the required space heating facilities are not in operation. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
E. Connection Of Sanitary Facilities To Water And Sanitary Sewer Systems: Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin, bath and clothes washer shall be
properly connected to an approved water and sanitary sewer system.
F. Exits:
1. Every structure containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units or structure containing a rooming unit or rooming units or a combination thereof shall
comply with the following exit requirements:
a. Every structure or usable portion thereof shall have at least one exit.
b. Single-family and duplex structures over three thousand (3,000) square feet in gross floor area shall have access to two (2) exits.
c. Multiple dwellings and rooming houses with an occupant load of ten (10) or more shall have access to two (2) exits.
d. Where only one exit is required, it shall be a continuous and unobstructed means of egress which discharges directly or via corridors or stairways
to a public way. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
e. Where at least two (2) exits are required, they shall be independent, unobstructed means of egress remote from each other, and both shall
discharge directly or via corridors or stairways or both to a public way or yard. If both means of egress are designated to a common corridor, they
shall be in opposite directions immediately upon exiting the dwelling unit or rooming unit, except a common path of travel may be permitted for the
first twenty feet (20'). Dead end corridors shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length. Any existing fire escape shall not be deemed a sufficient
means of egress unless it is in compliance with appendix A of this chapter. Any new fire escape must meet the requirements of the city building
and fire codes. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
f. Basements and floors above the second story shall have not less than two (2) exits, except when such floors or basements are used exclusively for
the service of the building. Dwelling units and/or rooming units in a basement may have access to only one common exit when the occupant load
served by that exit does not exceed ten (10). Escape and rescue window(s) must be supplied for each sleeping room. Such window(s) shall
comply with the building code specifications. Existing third floor and attic areas less than five hundred (500) square feet may be used as habitable
rooms if the following conditions are met: 1) one exit fully meets building code requirements to the outside of the building; 2) the other exit can be
an attic fire escape2. If access to the attic fire escape is through a window, such window must meet the building code requirements for escape and
rescue windows.
g. Every doorway providing ingress or egress from any dwelling unit, rooming unit or habitable room shall be at least six feet, four inches high and
two feet, four inches wide (6'4" x 2'4").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 685/715
2. Every means of egress shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Stairways: All stairways comprised of four (4) or more risers shall be provided with a substantial and safe handrail. New construction or remodeling
shall comply with the city building code.
b. Guardrails: All unenclosed floor and roof openings, open and glazed sides of landings and ramps, balconies or porches which are more than thirty
inches (30") above grade or above the floor below and any roof used for other than service of the building shall be protected by a substantial and
safe guardrail. New construction or remodeling shall comply with the city building code.
c. Riser And Tread: Every stairway shall have a uniform riser height and uniform tread width which shall be adequate for safe use. (1978 Code §17-
5; amd. 1994 Code)
d. Exits: Doors and windows readily accessible from outside the unit shall be lockable from inside the unit. Double cylinder deadbolts may not be
used on doors located in habitable areas or on any exit door. Exit doors shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special
knowledge or effort. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
e. Escape Window: In basement units where one means of egress is a window, such window shall have an unobstructed opening no less in area
than that required in the building and/or fire codes. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
G. Natural Light:
1. Every habitable room, except a kitchen, shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total glazed window
or skylight area, for every habitable room, except the kitchen, shall be at least eight percent (8%) of the floor area of such room.
2. For the purpose of determining natural light and natural ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room
when one-half (1/2) of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the floor
area of the interior room or twenty five (25) square feet, whichever is greater.
H. Ventilation:
1. Interior Air Quality: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sanitary sewer
gas, fuel gas, dust and other harmful air pollutants.
2. Natural Ventilation:
a. Every window or other device with openings to the outdoor space, used for ventilation, shall be supplied with screens of not less than sixteen (16)
mesh per inch. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
b. The total openable window area, as measured between stops, in every habitable room shall be equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor area
of such room. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
c. Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to outdoor space, the use of which is necessary to meet the minimum ventilation
requirements of this code, shall have a supplied screen or screens and a self-closing device.
d. Every cellar window, soffit or roof vent used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a cellar, crawl space or interior roof
area which might provide an entry for rodents or birds shall be supplied with a heavy wire screen of not larger than one-fourth inch (1/4") mesh or
such device as will effectively prevent entrance.
e. For natural ventilation, every bathroom or toilet compartment shall have at least one openable window facing directly to the outdoors and at least
forty five percent (45%) of the window must be openable.
3. Mechanical Ventilation:
a. In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation, adequate ventilation may be a system of mechanical ventilation which provides not less than
two (2) air changes per hour in all habitable rooms and/or bathrooms or toilet compartments.
b. No mechanical exhaust system, exhausting vapors, gases or odors shall be discharged into an attic, crawl space or cellar unless such attic, crawl
space or cellar is adequately vented to the outside.
c. Any kitchen or kitchenette lacking natural ventilation shall be equipped with a system of mechanical ventilation which provides at least two (2) air
changes per hour in said room. The system shall exhaust and discharge directly to outside air.
I. Heating:
1. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°) (20°C) and shall be capable of
maintaining in all said locations a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°) (18°C) at a distance of three feet (3') above the floor
level at all times. Such heating facilities shall be so designed and equipped that heat, as herein specified, is available for all dwelling units and
rooming units.
2. Every central heating unit, space heater, water heater and cooking appliance shall be located and installed in such a manner so as to afford
reasonable protection against involvement of egress facilities or egress routes in the event of uncontrolled fire in the structure.
3. Every fuel burning heating unit or water heater shall be effectively vented in a safe manner to a chimney or duct leading to the exterior of the
building. The chimney, duct and vent shall be of such design as to assure proper draft and shall be adequately supported. (1978 Code §17-5; amd.
1994 Code)
4. No fuel burning appliance shall be located within any sleeping room or bathroom unless provided with adequate ducting for air supply from the
exterior, and the combustion chamber for such heating unit shall be sealed from the room in an airtight manner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 686/715
5. Every steam or hot water boiler and every water heater shall be protected against overheating by appropriate pressure and temperature limit
controls. Such controls shall have a properly installed extension pipe on the pressure relief valve. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
6. Every fuel burning space heating unit and water heater shall be equipped with an electronic ignition or with a pilot light and an automatic control to
interrupt the flow of fuel to the unit in the event of a failure of the ignition device. All such heating units shall have a limit control to prevent
overheating.
J. Electrical Requirements:
1. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate floor type or wall type electric double convenience outlets which shall be situated a
distance apart equivalent to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the perimeter of the room. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed.
2. Every habitable room, toilet room, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, basement and cellar shall contain at least one supplied ceiling type or wall
type electric light fixture or switched outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed.
3. Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
K. Minimum Space, Use And Location Requirements:
1. Floor Area Per Occupant:
a. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least
one hundred (100) additional square feet of habitable floor space for every additional occupant thereof.
b. The floor area of that part of a room where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered when computing the total floor area
of the room. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
2. Maximum Occupancy: (Rep. by Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
3. Sleeping Rooms: In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms and every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant
shall contain at least forty (40) square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof, except two (2) bedroom manufactured housing shall
be required to have only one bedroom in compliance with this section.
4. Ceiling Height: The ceiling height of every habitable room shall be at least seven feet (7').
a. In any habitable room where the ceiling is a part of a sloping roof, at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of at least
seven feet (7'). "Floor area", as stated above, shall mean the area of the floor where the vertical measurement from floor to ceiling is five feet (5')
or more.
b. Obstructions of space by such items as water and gas pipes and cabinetry shall be permitted when such obstructions are located within two feet
(2') of a partition or wall, do not interfere with normal ingress and egress, would not interfere with an emergency ingress or egress and are
approved by the inspector. Obstruction of ceiling space shall be permitted when such obstruction is located at a height of not less than six feet four
inches (6'4") from the floor and which does not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the cubic area of the space within a room further
than six feet four inches (6'4") from the floor. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
L. Fire Protection Equipment: All fire extinguishers and early warning fire protection systems shall be properly installed according to the City Fire, Building
and Housing Codes. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
17-5-18: MINIMUM STRUCTURE STANDARDS FOR ALL RENTAL HOUSING:
A. Direct Access: Access to each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not require first entering any other dwelling unit or rooming unit, except access to
rooming units may be through a living room or kitchen of a unit occupied by the owner-operator of the structure. No dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended
for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room or type III dwelling unit is available only by going through another sleeping room or type III
dwelling unit, nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room or type III dwelling unit is available only by going through another
sleeping room or type III dwelling unit. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as the only passageway to any habitable room,
hallway, basement, cellar or to the exterior of the dwelling unit or rooming unit. (1978 Code §17-6; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Lighting Of Public Halls And Stairways:
1. Public passageways and stairways in dwellings accommodating two (2) dwelling units or rooming units shall be provided with a convenient wall
mounted light switch(es) which activates an adequate lighting system.
2. Public passageways and stairways in buildings accommodating three (3) or more dwelling units or rooming units shall be lighted at all times with an
artificial lighting system, in accordance with the City Building Code.
C. Fire Extinguishers: Fire extinguishers which are approved by the Fire Marshal shall be provided within every single-family dwelling, dwelling unit within
a duplex and dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. Multiple dwellings shall have fire extinguishers located within each laundry room and central
mechanical room; except where these rooms are contiguous, they may be served by one fire extinguisher. Laundry rooms and central mechanical
rooms which are equipped with an automatic sprinkler system are exempt. The minimum size fire extinguisher is a five (5) pound 2A 10BC. Fire
extinguishers must be properly mounted and in an area of easy access. Rooming houses are required to have a five (5) pound 2A 10BC rated fire
extinguisher supplied on each floor level, including habitable basement areas, and in each kitchen. Fire extinguishers supplied in areas of public
access shall be contained within an approved tamperproof cabinet. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 687/715
D. Early Warning Fire Protection System:
1. All dwelling units and rooming units shall be provided with smoke detectors as approved by the Fire Marshal. Smoke detectors shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Dwelling units shall have smoke detectors located on each floor level, including basements, in each
bedroom, and hallways serving bedrooms. Multi-family and rooming houses shall have smoke detectors in common corridors, stair towers and
stairways constructed prior to 1978. Smoke detectors shall be operable at all times, and when actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm for the
dwelling unit(s) or rooming unit(s). An owner or owner's agent of a multiple unit residential building, rooming house, duplex or single-family dwelling
shall supply light emitting smoke detectors, upon request, for a tenant with a hearing impairment. New construction and remodeling shall be in
accordance with the City Building Code. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
2. Newly constructed dwellings with four (4) or more bedrooms shall have interconnected smoke alarms (hardwired or wireless). Existing dwellings that
add one or more bedrooms shall have interconnected smoke alarms (hardwired or wireless). (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
E. Toilets, Lavatory Basins And Baths:
1. At least one toilet and one lavatory basin shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a
rooming unit or units and/or type III dwelling unit or units, including members of the operator's family whenever they share the said facilities, provided
in a rooming house or where rooms or type III dwelling units are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) of
the number of required toilets.
2. At least one bath shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit or units and/or
type III dwelling unit or units, including members of the operator's family whenever they share the use of said facilities.
3. Communal toilets and baths shall be located on the same floor or the floor immediately above or below the rooming unit or type III dwelling unit.
(1978 Code §17-6; amd. 1994 Code)
F. Lead Based Paint: Every owner or operator of a dwelling unit or rooming unit being let for rent and/or occupancy shall certify that the dwelling is in
accordance with HUD lead based paint regulations, 24 CFR, part 35, issued pursuant to the Lead Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, as amended.
(Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
G. Communal Kitchens: If a communal kitchen is supplied, it shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen shall be sixty (60) square feet.
2. The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen in which roomers are permitted to prepare and eat meals shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
3. It shall contain a refrigerator with an adequate food storage capacity.
4. It shall contain an approved kitchen sink.
5. It shall contain a stove or range.
6. It shall include at least one cabinet of adequate size suitable for the storage of food and eating and cooking utensils.
7. It shall contain at least six (6) square feet of surface area easily cleanable and suitable for the preparation of food.
8. It shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the facilities if a communal dining room is not supplied.
9. Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen, without
going outside the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant.
H. Communal Dining Rooms: Every dwelling or rooming house, within which the occupant of any rooming unit is permitted to prepare meals or cook within
a communal kitchen containing less than one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, as provided in subsection G of this section, shall contain a
communal dining room which complies with all of the following requirements:
1. Every communal dining room shall be located on the same floor of the rooming house as the communal kitchen, and such dining room shall be as
nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable.
2. Every communal dining room shall be located within a room accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing such dining room, without
going outside the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant.
3. It shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the facilities.
4. Every communal dining room shall contain not less than seventy (70) square feet of floor area.
I. Shades, Draperies And Window Coverings:
1. Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in rooming units and furnished dwelling units shall be supplied with shades, draperies or other
devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupants.
2. Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in unfurnished dwelling units shall be supplied with hardware necessary to support shades,
draperies or other devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupants.
J. Kitchen Stoves And Refrigerators: Kitchens or kitchenettes in multiple dwellings, rooming houses and duplexes shall be supplied with a stove or range
and a refrigerator by the owner or operator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 688/715
K. Tie Downs: In the case of manufactured housing, the housing shall be securely anchored by a tie down device which distributes and transfers the load
posed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. (1978 Code §17-6; amd. 1994 Code)
L. Bedrooms; Maximum Allowed: Bedrooms cannot exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the finished floor area of a single-family dwelling or duplex unit, not
including floor area of a recreation room in the basement. Any existing single family or duplex unit that contained lawful bedroom space that exceeded
this percentage cap prior to January 1, 2018 may continue to be used as bedroom space. However, additional bedroom space may not be added
unless the unit is brought into full compliance with this standard. This dimensional standard is subject to administrative review. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-
2018)
M. Bedrooms; Minimum Size: Bedrooms shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area. The floor area of that bedroom where
the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered when computing the total floor area of the bedroom. These dimensional requirements
are subject to administrative review. Any lawful bedroom/sleeping room greater than or equal to seventy (70) square feet in existence prior to January
1, 2018 may continue to be used as a bedroom/sleeping room. However, if and when it is brought into compliance with the current minimum
dimensional requirements, it may not be converted back to a substandard size.
N. Dimensional Requirements: Within household living uses, as defined in title 14 of this Code, a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of shared
living space shall be provided for every bedroom within the dwelling unit. By way of illustration, for a two-bedroom single-family dwelling, there must be
at least two hundred (200) square feet of shared living space within the dwelling. Any lawful dwelling unit in existence prior to January 1, 2018 that is
not in compliance with this provision may continue as currently configured. However, if and when the shared living space is brought into compliance
with the current minimum dimensional requirements, it may not be converted back to a substandard size. Any change that would increase the
noncompliance with this provision is not allowed. This dimensional requirement is subject to administrative review.
O. Duplex; Units To Be Separated: The two (2) dwelling units of a duplex must be physically and permanently separated, and the separation must be
continually maintained. By way of illustration, a duplex shall not have a door that opens from one duplex unit directly into the other duplex unit.
P. Deadbolt Locks Required: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have a deadbolt lock that can be operated from inside and locked from the outside.
"Deadbolt" means a locking mechanism where the bolt cannot be moved to an open position except by rotating the locked cylinder.
Q. Improved Surface In Rear Yard; Restrictions: After November 21, 2017, an improved surface shall not be constructed, installed, or established on the
rear yard of a single-family dwelling or a duplex, except within the first twenty feet (20') of lot depth as measured from the rear lot line and setback at
least five feet (5') from abutting properties. The remainder of the rear yard shall remain landscaped open space, free of impervious surface. This
provision shall not apply to allowed accessory structures. Rear yard shall have the meaning as defined in title 14 of this Code. Improved surface means
asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, manufactured paving materials (such as brick), or similar hard surface.
R. Administrative Review: In an administrative review, the Director or designee may grant a minor adjustment to the dimensional requirement if in
conformance with the purposes of this chapter. Minor adjustments shall be noted in the property file maintained by the Neighborhood and Development
Services Department. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
S. Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations:
1. Existing single family dwellings and duplex units that are noncompliant with the open space requirement set forth in sections 14-2A-4 and 14-2B-4 of
this Code, may not be enlarged unless the subject property is brought into compliance with said standard.
2. Existing single family dwellings and duplex units that are noncompliant with the number of required parking spaces are allowed an occupancy of no
less than three (3) adults or in the case of a one-bedroom unit, two (2) adults.
3. Prior to issuance of a new rental permit for a single family dwelling or two-family dwelling unit, the property must be brought into compliance with the
open space requirement and the required number of parking spaces. If it is not feasible to fully meet the parking standards due to existing buildings
on the property, occupancy will be limited according to subsection S2 of this section. In cases where it is not feasible to fully meet the open space
standard due to existing buildings on the property, occupancy is limited to one adult per one hundred (100) square feet of usable open space
provided, but may be further limited based on other factors, such as available parking. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
17-5-19: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF PREMISES:
A. Maintenance Of Structure:
1. Structure:
a. Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair, step, elevator, handrail, guardrail, porch, sidewalk and appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in
a safe and sound condition and shall be capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
b. Every structure shall be maintained in compliance with section 661 chapter 5 of the Iowa Administrative Code ("State Fire Code"), as amended,
and the Building Codes in effect at the time the building was constructed. If the use or occupancy is changed compliance with currently adopted
codes is required. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
c. The required occupancy separations shall be provided and maintained in all structures having mixed or multiple occupancies. The one hour
occupancy separation between dwellings and garages shall be provided regardless of the date of construction and may be limited to the
installation of materials approved for one hour fire resistive construction on the garage side and a tightfitting, twenty (20) minute rated door or
approved equivalent opening protection as required by the City Building Code. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
2. Exterior:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 689/715
a. Condition: Every foundation, floor, exterior wall, exterior door, window and roof shall be maintained in a weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and
insectproof condition. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
b. Exterior Screening: In Historic and Conservation Districts, porches and decks less than five feet (5') above grade and visible from the right-of-way
shall have under porch and under deck screening. The screening shall be required to be complementary to the dwelling as approved by the City.
(Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
3. Doors: Every door, door hinge, door latch, door lock or any associated door hardware shall be maintained in good and functional condition, and
every door, when closed, shall fit well within its frame.
4. Windows: Every window, existing storm window, window latch, window lock, aperture covering and any associated hardware shall be maintained in
good and functional condition and shall fit well with its frame.
5. Interior: Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling and other interior surface shall be maintained so as to permit it to be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. All building interior public and service areas shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
B. Accessory Structure: Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window, exterior door and appurtenance of every accessory structure shall be so maintained
as to prevent the structure from becoming a harborage for vermin and shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
C. Rainwater Drainage System: All gutters, downspouts and associated or other roof drainage equipment on the premises shall be maintained in a good
state of repair and so installed as to direct water away from the structure(s). All cisterns or similar water storage facilities shall be securely covered or
protected.
D. Grading, Drainage And Landscaping Of Premises: Every premises shall be graded and maintained so as no stagnant water will accumulate or stand
thereon3. Every premises shall be graded and drained in a manner to cause the flow of rainwater or other surface water away from the structure(s).
Every premises shall be continuously maintained by suitable landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs, planted ground cover or other landscaping
materials. Landscaping shall be designed and maintained to prevent erosion and control dust. This chapter shall not affect the existence of approved
stormwater detention systems4.
E. Chimneys And Flue Piping: Every chimney and all flue piping shall be adequately supported, maintained clean and in a good state of repair. (1978 Code
§17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
F. Exterior Surfaces:
1. All exterior painted surfaces of a dwelling and its accessory structures, fences, porches and similar appurtenances shall be painted in a uniform,
color consistent, and complete fashion. All painted surfaces shall be properly prepped to allow for paint to adhere and remain painted regardless if
items are subject to decay or deterioration. (Guidelines for the removal of lead based paint are located in section 17-5-23, appendix B of this
chapter.)
2. All exterior surfaces, regardless of material composition, shall be maintained in a good, safe, and sanitary condition.
3. In historic and conservation districts, bare treated lumber is a prohibited finish for wood surfaces visible from the street. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
G. Exits:
1. Every means of egress shall be maintained in good condition and shall be free of obstruction at all times. Fire escapes, exit corridors, exit stairways
and escape and rescue windows and any other means of egress shall be maintained in a good state of repair at all times. Exit signs, emergency
lighting, early warning systems and sprinkler systems shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Required fire doors shall be maintained selfclosing
and self-latching as required by the city building code. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
2. Fire drills shall be conducted once per academic semester for all fraternities and sororities as approved by the fire department5.
H. Screens And Storm Windows: On structures having interchangeable storm windows and screens, the owner or operator of the premises shall be
responsible for hanging all screens and storm windows, except when written agreement between the owner and the occupant provides otherwise.
Screens shall be provided no later than May 1 of each year, and storm windows shall be provided no later than November 1 of each year. All windows
manufactured to be operable for ventilation shall be provided with screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per square inch. However, windows in
areas not accessible to tenants or areas which are exclusively service areas shall be exempted from screen requirements. All single pane windows
which serve habitable rooms and bathrooms shall be provided with storm windows. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
I. Electrical System: The electrical system of every dwelling or accessory structure shall not, by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of insulation,
improper fusing or for any other cause, expose the occupants to hazards of electrical shock or fire, and every electrical receptacle, switch and fixture
shall be complete as manufactured and maintained in a good and safe working condition. Only approved extension cords and multiplug adapters or
other devices approved by the inspector shall be allowed. All electrical wiring newly installed or replaced shall be in compliance with the city electrical
code. All receptacles in kitchens and bathrooms shall have ground fault circuit interrupter for personnel. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 15-4648,
11-10-2015)
J. Plumbing System: Every supplied plumbing fixture, water piping and waste piping shall be maintained in a good and sanitary condition. All plumbing
installed or replaced shall be so designed as to prevent contamination of the water supply through backflow, back siphonage or cross connection. All
plumbing newly installed or replaced shall be in compliance with the city plumbing code. A minimum water pressure of fifteen (15) pounds shall be
maintained to all open outlets at all times.
K. Gas Piping And Appliances: All gas piping shall be properly installed, properly supported and shall be maintained free of leaks, corrosion or obstruction
so as to reduce gas pressure or volume. Every gas appliance shall be connected to a gas line with solid metal piping or approved listed metal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 690/715
appliance connector preceded by an approved listed shutoff valve. Gas pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open gas
valves at all times. All gas piping shall be in compliance with the city plumbing code. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
L. Heating And Cooling Equipment: The heating equipment of each dwelling shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be capable
of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to the minimum temperature required by this code. Supplied cooling
equipment shall be maintained in a good and safe working condition. However, heating and supplied cooling equipment shall not be required to be
maintained in operational condition during that time of the year when said equipment is not normally used. No combustible material shall be stored
within three feet (3') of a fuel burning furnace and/or fuel burning hot water heater. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in dwelling units which
contain fuel fired appliances or have an attached garage with an opening that communicates with the dwelling unit. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994
Code; Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
M. Kitchen And Bathroom Flooring: Every toilet room, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition.
N. Supplied Facilities:
1. Every facility, utility and piece of equipment required by this code and/or present in the unit and/or designated for the exclusive use of the occupants
of said unit, at the time that either the rental agreement is signed or possession is given, shall function safely and shall be maintained in proper
working condition. Maintenance of facilities, utilities and equipment not required by this code shall be the owner's responsibility unless stated to the
contrary in the rental agreement.
2. No supplied facility shall be removed, shut off or disconnected from any occupied dwelling unit or rooming unit except for such temporary
interruption(s) as may be necessary while actual repairs, replacements or alterations are being made.
O. Equipment Rooms: Boiler rooms, mechanical rooms and electrical panel rooms shall not be used for the storage of combustible material or equipment.
A minimum three foot (3') clearance shall be maintained in front of electrical panels and disconnects.
P. Pest Extermination: Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more dwelling units or rooming units of any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units or more than one rooming unit, the extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
Q. Fire Protection:
1. All fire extinguishing devices and all early warning fire protection systems shall be maintained in good working condition at all times. All fire
protection equipment and early warning equipment shall be maintained in compliance with the city fire code and subsections 17-5-18C and D of this
chapter. Buildings which are required to have an automatic fire alarm system shall have that alarm system tested annually by a qualified alarm
technician to certify that the alarm system is in compliance with the current standard of NFPA 72, as amended. Buildings which are required to have
an automatic sprinkling system shall have that system tested biennially by a qualified sprinkler system technician to certify that the system is in
compliance with the current standard of NFPA chapter 25, as amended. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
2. Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the public way fronting the
property, and from the vehicle access area if vehicle access is from other than the front of the building. Said numbers and letters shall contrast with
their background and shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height. Where access to or within a multi-family structure or any area is unduly difficult
because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving and firefighting purposes, a key box shall be installed in an
approved location. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire chief and shall contain keys and/or access code(s) necessary to gain access. If
applicable, a key switch may be installed in an approved location. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
R. Guardrails And Handrails: All guardrails and handrails shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition at all times. Guardrails shall be provided where
there is an abrupt elevation change exceeding thirty inches (30") adjacent to pedestrian areas. Guardrails and handrails which are newly installed or
replaced shall comply with the city building code. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
S. Sealed Passages: All pipe passages, chutes and similar openings through walls, floors or ceilings shall be adequately closed or sealed to prevent the
spread of fire or the passage of vermin.
T. Trees And Plant Materials: All trees and plant materials shall be maintained in a manner which prevents damage or decay to a structure(s). Trees
required by the Iowa City tree ordinance shall be maintained6.
U. Clean Units: No owner or operator shall permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean, safe, sanitary and fit for human
occupancy. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
V. Exterior Area Maintenance:
1. a. Maintenance Responsibility: Every owner or operator shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior areas in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
b. Outdoor Storage: The storage of trash bags, landscaping, construction, or compost material or any other similar materials determined by the city
to create a substantial interference with the use of enjoyment of the property shall not be permitted in areas visible from the street facing right of
way.
2. Fences, screening, and retaining walls shall be maintained in a safe, structurally sound manner and shall comply with the Iowa City zoning
ordinance. All wood or painted surfaces shall be painted and/or stained in a uniform, color consistent, and complete fashion. All other surfaces shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 691/715
be maintained in a uniform, color consistent, and complete fashion. At the discretion of the director of neighborhood and development services or
designee, landscaping timbers and other related items may be exempt from this provision. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
3. No owner or operator shall keep, store or maintain outdoors any indoor upholstered furniture, household furniture or household furnishing not
manufactured for outdoor use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and couches. "Upholstered furniture" means any furniture constructed
with stuffing or cushions or springs, not intended for outdoor use. The term "outdoor" includes a porch. However, the use, storage or placement of
household appliances, household furniture or household furnishings on a porch is not prohibited if the porch is completely enclosed by fully intact
glass or fully intact screens. The following shall constitute an affirmative defense to any alleged violation of this provision: a) that the furniture was
temporarily placed outside during the move of a resident; or b) that the furniture was temporarily placed outside during the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage sale and that a sign visible from the right of way is placed on or
near the furniture indicating that it is for sale. The second defense is not available if the furniture is located outside for more than two (2) days in any
six (6) month period. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
4. The storage and use of furniture on surfaces thirty inches (30") above grade, which include, but are not limited to, decks and roofs, without guardrails
is prohibited. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
W. Solid Waste Facilities:
1. Every owner of a dwelling or rental structure shall supply adequate facilities for the disposal of solid waste which are approved by the inspector
and/or are in compliance with the Iowa City solid waste ordinance7. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
2. All solid waste facilities located at multi-family dwellings shall be screened with materials that are complementary to the dwelling as approved by the
city. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015)
X. Occupancy Requirements:
1. A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by a number of persons greater than allowed by the Iowa City zoning ordinance. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994
Code)
2. No room shall be used as a habitable room unless certified as a habitable room at the time the certificate of structure compliance is issued or
amended. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
Y. Cooking In Rooming Units: No owner or operator shall knowingly allow the use of cooking equipment within any rooming unit. (1978 Code §17-7; amd.
1994 Code)
Z. Duplex; Units To Be Separated: The two (2) dwelling units of a duplex must be physically and permanently separated, and the separation must be
continually maintained. By way of illustration, a duplex shall not have a door that opens from one duplex unit directly into the other duplex unit.
AA. Deadbolt Locks Required: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have a deadbolt lock that can be operated from inside and locked from the
outside. "Deadbolt" means a locking mechanism where the bolt cannot be moved to an open position except by rotating the locked cylinder. (Ord. 18-
4761, 7-17-2018)
17-5-20: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF PREMISES:
A. Controlled Area:
1. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall keep in a clean, safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises thereof which the occupant occupies and controls.
2. Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and sanitary.
3. Every wall and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean and free of dirt or greasy film.
4. No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or handling of solid waste.
5. No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or handling of dangerous or hazardous materials. (1978 Code §17-8; amd. 1994
Code)
6. No occupant shall keep, store or maintain outdoors any indoor upholstered furniture, household furniture or household furnishing not manufactured
for outdoor use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and couches. "Upholstered furniture" means any furniture constructed with stuffing or
cushions or springs, not intended for outdoor use. The term "outdoor" includes a porch. However, the use, storage or placement of household
appliances, household furniture or household furnishings on a porch is not prohibited if the porch is completely enclosed by fully intact glass or fully
intact screens. The following shall constitute an affirmative defense to any alleged violation of this provision: a) that the furniture was temporarily
placed outside during the move of a resident; or b) that the furniture was temporarily placed outside during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage sale and that a sign visible from the right-of-way is placed on or near the
furniture indicating that it is for sale. The second defense is not available if the furniture is located outside for more than two (2) days in any six (6)
month period. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
B. Plumbing Fixtures: The occupants of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper operation thereof.
C. Extermination Of Pests: Every occupant of a single-family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; every occupant of a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for such
extermination within the unit occupied whenever said unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 692/715
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
D. Storage And Disposal Of Solid Waste: Every occupant of a dwelling shall dispose of solid waste and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in the supplied disposal facilities or storage containers required by this Code8.
E. Use And Operation Of Supplied Heating Facilities: Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable
care, proper use and proper operation of supplied heating facilities. No combustible material shall be stored within three feet (3') of a fuel burning
furnace and/or fuel burning water heater.
F. Electrical Wiring: No temporary wiring shall be used. Approved extension cords may be used but shall not lie beneath floor coverings or extend through
doorways, transoms or similar apertures and structural elements or attached thereto. The occupant shall not overload the circuitry of the dwelling unit
or rooming unit.
G. Supplied Facilities: Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible
for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper operation thereof.
H. Cooking Or Eating In Rooming Units: No occupant of a rooming unit shall prepare or eat meals or store cooking utensils in the rooming unit unless an
approved kitchen or dining room is contained within the rooming unit. The cooking and eating of meals may take place in dwellings containing a
rooming unit or units if the provisions of subsections 17-5-18G and H of this chapter are complied with.
I. Occupancy Control:
1. A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by a number of persons greater than allowed by the city zoning ordinance.
2. No room shall be used as a habitable room unless certified as a habitable room at the time the certificate of structure compliance is issued or
amended.
J. Fire Protection Equipment: All fire extinguishers and early warning fire protection systems shall be maintained in good working condition at all times. fire
extinguishers shall be mounted and meet the requirements of the city fire code. (1978 Code §17-8; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-21: TITLE 24 OF THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS; SECTIONS 882.109(a) THROUGH (l); "HOUSING QUALITY
STANDARDS":
Housing used in this program shall meet the performance requirements set forth in this section. In addition, the housing shall meet the acceptability criteria
set forth in this section except for such variations as are proposed by the PHA and approved by HUD. Local climatic or geological conditions or local codes
are examples which may justify such variations. The term "this program" shall be interpreted to mean the section VIII housing assistance payments
program. Further, in accordance with the code of Iowa, as amended, this section has provided the basis for provisions of the Iowa City housing code.
A. Sanitary Facilities:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall include its own facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy and are
adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
2. Acceptability Criteria: A flush toilet in a separate, private room, a fixed basin with hot and cold running water shall be present in the dwelling unit, all
in proper operating condition. These facilities shall utilize an approved public or private disposal system.
B. Food Preparation And Solid Waste Disposal:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner.
There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and solid waste, including facilities for temporary storage
where necessary.
2. Acceptability Criteria: The unit shall contain the following equipment in proper operating condition: Cooking stove or range and a refrigerator of
appropriate size for the unit, supplied by either the owner or the family, and a kitchen sink with hot and cold running water. The sink shall drain into
an approved public or private system. Adequate space for the storage, preparation and serving of food shall be provided. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and solid waste, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary, e.g.,
garbage cans.
C. Space And Security:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall afford the family adequate space and security.
2. Acceptability Criteria: A living room, kitchen area and bathroom shall be present, and the dwelling unit shall contain at least one sleeping or
living/sleeping room of appropriate size for each two (2) persons. Exterior doors and windows accessible from outside the unit shall be lockable.
D. Thermal Environment:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall have and be capable of maintaining a thermal environment healthy for the human body.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 693/715
2. Acceptability Criteria: The dwelling unit shall contain safe heating and/or cooling facilities which are in proper operating condition and can provide
adequate heat and/or cooling to each room in the dwelling unit appropriate for the climate to assure a healthy living environment. Unvented room
heaters which burn gas, oil or kerosene are unacceptable.
E. Illumination And Electricity:
1. Performance Requirement: Each room shall have adequate natural or artificial illumination to permit normal indoor activities and to support the
health and safety of occupants. Sufficient electrical sources shall be provided to permit use of essential electrical appliances while assuring safety
from fire.
2. Acceptability Criteria: Living and sleeping rooms shall include at least one window. A ceiling type or wall type light fixture shall be present and
working in the bathroom and kitchen area. At least two (2) electrical outlets, one of which may be an overhead light, shall be present and operable in
the living area, kitchen area and each bedroom area.
F. Structure And Materials:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be structurally sound so as not to pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants and
so as to protect the occupants from the environment.
2. Acceptability Criteria: Ceilings, walls and floors shall not have any serious defects, such as severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface
materials, severe buckling or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts or other serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm, and
the roof shall be weathertight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall surface shall not have any serious defects, such as serious leaning,
buckling, sagging, cracks or holes, loose siding or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior and exterior stairways, halls,
porches and walkways shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators shall be maintained in safe and operating condition. In
the case of a manufactured housing, the housing shall be securely anchored by a tiedown device which distributes and transfers the load posed by
the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding.
G. Interior Air Quality:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be free of pollutants in the air at levels which threaten the health of the occupants.
2. Acceptability Criteria: Dwelling units shall be free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sanitary sewer gas, fuel gas, dust and
other harmful air pollutants. Air circulation shall be adequate throughout the unit. Bathroom areas shall have at least one openable window or other
adequate exhaust ventilation.
H. Water Supply:
1. Performance Requirement: The water supply shall be free from contamination.
2. Acceptability Criteria: The unit shall be served by an approved public or private potable water supply.
I. Lead Based Paint:
1. Performance Requirement:
a. The dwelling unit shall be in compliance with HUD lead based paint regulations, 24 CFR, part 35, issued pursuant to the lead based paint
poisoning prevention act, 42 USC 4801, as amended, and the owner shall provide a certification that the dwelling is in accordance with such HUD
regulations.
b. If the property was constructed prior to 1950, the family, upon occupancy, shall have been furnished the notice required by HUD lead based paint
regulations and procedures regarding the hazards of lead based paint poisoning, the symptoms and treatment of lead poisoning and the
precautions to be taken against lead poisoning.
2. Acceptability Criteria: Same as performance requirement.
J. Access:
1. Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be usable and capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private properties,
and the building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case of fire.
2. Acceptability Criteria: The dwelling unit shall be usable and capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private properties. The
building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case of fire, such as fire stairs or egress through windows.
K. Site And Neighborhood:
1. Performance Requirement: The site and neighborhood shall be reasonably free from disturbing noises and reverberations and other hazards to the
health, safety and general welfare of the occupants.
2. Acceptability Criteria: The site and neighborhood shall not be subject to serious adverse environmental conditions, natural or human made, such as
dangerous walks, steps, instability, flooding, poor drainage, septic tank backups, sanitary sewage hazards or mudslides; abnormal air pollution,
smoke or dust; excessive noise, vibrations or vehicular traffic; excessive accumulation of trash; vermin or rodent infestations; or fire hazards.
L. Sanitary Condition:
1. Performance Requirement: The unit and its equipment shall be in sanitary condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 694/715
2. Acceptability Criteria: The unit and its equipment shall be free of vermin and rodent infestation. (1978 Code §17-9; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-22: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-
2002)
17-5-23: APPENDICES:
APPENDIX A
ATTIC FIRE ESCAPE
Balconies.
Material. All balconies for ladder fire escapes installed must be of wrought iron or mild steel, not less than 28 inches deep and 6 feet long.
Frame. The balcony frame shall be made continuous of not less than 11/4 x 11/4 x 1/4-inch angle iron securely riveted or welded together, with crossbars
every 2 feet, said bars to be punched 1/2-inch square every 11/4 inches center to center, and 1/2-inch square iron with corners upward forced through the
same, leaving a manhole of not less than 24 x 24 inches located to clear side of exit to balcony by at least 6 inches. The crossbars to be securely riveted,
welded or bolted to the angle iron frame. Said crossbars must be not less than 13/4 x 3/3-inch iron. Balconies over 30 inches wide must have at least one
11/4 x 1/4-inch T-iron lengthwise through the balcony.
Posts. Said balconies shall have a 11/4 x 11/4 x 1/4-inch angle iron post every 3 feet, bolted to the balcony.
Rails. Balconies to be equipped with 3 rails of angle iron or pipe. Angle iron to be 13/4 x 13/4 x 1/4-inch. Pipe rail to be 3/4-inch inside diameter pipe. Top rail
to be not less than 3 feet and bottom rail not more than 8 inches above balcony with intermediate rail space equally between the two. All railing to be
continuous, except the space occupied by ladder, where railings shall be securely bolted to sides of ladder.
Rails shall enter the wall at each end at least 4 inches and top rail to be securely braced to balcony with 11/2 x 1/4-inch bar.
Brackets for balconies of ladder escapes.
Material. There shall be not less than 3, 1-inch square or 1-inch diameter round mild steel brackets to every 6-foot balcony, brackets to be spaced not to
exceed 3 feet apart.
Fastenings. Top bar of said bracket must pass through the wall of the building and be bolted on the inside with a nut and 4 x 4 x 3/8-inch plate iron washer
back of nut. Where walls are of frame construction or veneered, said brackets must be secured by a 4 x 3/8-inch plate, or 2, 2 x 5/16-inch iron bars securely
spiked to each studding on inside of wall and running the full length of balcony.
Angle. The angle of brackets to be about 45 degrees and not less than 30 degrees and pass into the wall at least 4 inches at bottom.
Ladders.
Material. Rungs of ladders to be 1/2-inch square iron, with the corners upward. Every rung to be welded and to be 14-inch centers. All ladders must be 18
inches between side guards, which shall be not less than 2 x 5/16-inch iron.
Location. All such ladders, when installed on buildings, to be placed to the side of the windows, opposite the wall or pier, securely fastened with hook bolts,
on the inside of each side bar, to the balconies and not less than 24 inches away from the wall, and to start 61/2 feet from the ground.
General requirements.
Use of other materials. Materials of the following types and meeting the following specifications may be used.
Balconies may be constructed of serrated or antiskid open type steel grating. The material from which the sections are made shall not be less than 12-
gauge thickness.
Openings in the surface shall not be more than 7/8-inch wide and 11/2 inches long or less than 1/2-inch wide and 11/2 inches long. All sections shall be
capable of supporting a uniform superimposed load of 100 pounds per square foot without causing a deflection in excess of 1/240 of the span.
Bolts. All bolts used in general construction shall be not less than 1/2-inch diameter.
Material. The use of secondhand material will not be permitted and will be condemned if found in fire escape construction.
Fittings. No cast iron fittings shall be used.
Holes in masonry. All holes in masonry must be filled with Portland cement mortar.
Painting. All work must be painted with not less than 2 coats of paint, one of iron oxide and linseed oil in shop, and one of graphite and linseed oil after
installation. The field coat shall be different color than shop coat.
Factor of safety. Balconies and stairways shall be capable of sustaining a live load of 100 pounds to the square foot. Fire escapes shall have a factor of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 695/715
safety of not less than 4.
Maintenance and painting. All outside fire escapes shall be scraped and painted as often as necessary to maintain them in proper condition at all times.
All outside fire escapes shall be kept clear of obstructions.
All outside fire escapes shall be promptly cleaned after snow or ice has accumulated thereon.
No obstructions, such as telephone or lighting wires, shall be permitted on or near outside fire escapes. Electric light or power wires shall not be directly
over or within 3 feet of outside fire escapes or balconies unless such wires are enclosed in rigid conduit. (1994 Code)
APPENDIX B
GUIDELINES FOR ELIMINATING
LEAD BASED PAINT HAZARDS
These guidelines are derived from documents published by the Iowa department of public health childhood lead poisoning prevention program entitled
"eliminating lead based paint hazards".
1. Remove lead based paint carefully! You should never dry scrape or dry sand lead based paint on the inside or outside of your home. Always mist
surfaces with water before scraping or sanding them. Use a tarp or piece of plastic to catch paint chips when you are working on the outside of your
house. This will keep paint chips from falling on the soil. If you are working outside, close windows to prevent lead dust from entering the home.
2. Do not sandblast or waterblast lead based paint on the outside of your home. You do not want the paint chips to end up all over your yard or the
neighbor's yard. Sandblasting and waterblasting is safe only if you have a special machine that will catch the paint chips.
3. Remove furniture, drapes, and if possible, carpet from the room you will work in before starting work. Cover the floor and furniture that cannot be
removed from the room with a sheet of six (6) mil plastic. Seal each room from the rest of the house with plastic while working in it. Be careful not to
track dust and paint chips into other areas of the home.
4. Wear a negative pressure, half mask respirator with a magenta (purple) HEPA filtration canister. You can buy these respirators at auto parts stores
(used for brake and clutch work). The respirator will say "HEPA Filters - Asbestos Approved". Be sure to read the instructions for positive and
negative face fit tests and for cleaning the respirator. If the respirator does not fit properly, it will not protect you. It will also not protect you if it is dirty.
These masks do not protect against organic vapors from heat guns or paint strippers. So, use heat guns and paint strippers only where there is good
ventilation. This will help disperse any organic vapors from the strippers or from heating the paint.
5. Replace the filters on the respirator if they are damaged. You should also replace them if it gets hard to breathe. This means that the filters are
plugging. Wash the face piece (without the filters) with mild soap. Store the respirator in a bag outside of the work area.
6. If you have asthma, emphysema, or heart problems, do not try to wear a respirator. Take off the respirator immediately if you feel short of breath. If
you have a perforated eardrum that has not been repaired, this respirator will not protect you from inhaling lead dust.
7. If you will be using a heat gun, make sure it is a low temperature heat gun that operates below one thousand one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,100°F).
8. Do not eat, drink, or smoke until you have left the work area and thoroughly washed your hands and face. Take a shower, wash your hair, and
change clothes before coming in contact with others.
9. Keep pregnant women and children out of the room if you are working on a small project. A small project would be working on only a few surfaces in
one room at a time. For larger projects, keep pregnant women and children out of the home until you complete the job.
10. After you complete the job, wash all surfaces thoroughly with any household detergent. Vacuum with a HEPA vacuum or a regular vacuum with
microfilter bags. Shampoo carpets using a machine that pumps liquid into the carpet and pulls it back out.
11. Place paint chips, dust, and pieces of wood in a plastic bag at the end of each day. Put this with your garbage that will go to the landfill.
After you complete work to eliminate lead based paint hazards, you must maintain the remaining lead based paint in good condition. You should also
frequently clean the house. Wash floors, window sills, areas between the windows, and other places where dust and dirt accumulate at least once a
week. Check the condition of lead based paint frequently. You need to repair paint when it begins to deteriorate. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
17-5-24: FEES:
The Department of Housing and Inspection Services is authorized to assess permit and reinspection fees, the amounts of which shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §17-3; amd. Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
Chapter 6
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 7
MOVING BUILDINGS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 696/715
17-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy which, when loaded on any carrier of any kind, has a loaded
height exceeding thirteen feet (13') and a loaded width exceeding twelve feet (12').
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The official designated by the city manager to enforce this title. (1978 Code §8-58)
17-7-2: BUILDING MOVER'S LICENSE:
Before engaging in the operation of moving buildings, every person shall obtain a license therefor. Such persons shall pay a license fee as set by
resolution of the city council. Upon payment of a license fee, the building official shall issue such license as is covered by the fee. (1978 Code §8-77)
17-7-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No licensee under this chapter shall move or prepare for moving any building over, along or across any public highway, street, alley or
other public place in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official. (1978 Code §8-78; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Application For Permit:
1. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application for such permit with the building official upon forms provided by the building official.
2. The application shall set forth:
a. A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street address, construction materials and dimensions.
b. The public highways, streets, alleys or other public places over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved.
c. A description of the location and destination, including street address, to which the building is proposed to be moved.
d. The moving date and hours.
e. Any additional information which the city shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. (1978 Code §8-79;
amd. 1994 Code)
C. Fee: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code §8-80)
D. Building Permit Prerequisite To Issuance; Time Limit On Permanent Installation:
1. No permit for moving a building to a lot in the city shall be granted by the building official if a building permit has not been issued for such building on
such lot.
2. No building shall be moved to a lot in the city for the purpose of storing such building on the lot. A building moved to a lot shall be permanently
installed on its new foundation within sixty (60) calendar days of the date moved onto the lot. (1978 Code §8-81; amd. 1994 Code)
E. Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city shall refuse to issue a permit required by this chapter if:
1. Any application requirements or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with.
2. The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons
and property in the city.
3. The building in its new location would not comply with the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, zoning ordinance, state energy code and
state handicapped accessibility code or other ordinances in effect at the time of the application in the governmental jurisdiction where the building is
to be located, all as amended. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the moving of a building for which an applicant has obtained a
building permit which provides for construction or alterations to the building which will bring it to code standards.
4. For any other reasons, persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. (1978 Code §8-82; amd. 1994 Code)
F. Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be issued until forty eight (48) hours after the time of filing of the completed application, and all fees, deposits and
certificates or certificates of insurance are completed. This time period shall not commence running until filing of all information, fees, deposits and
certificates of insurance set forth in this chapter are on file with the city. (1978 Code §8-83; amd. 1994 Code)
G. Expiration Of Permit: Any permit granted under this chapter shall expire if the move is not commenced on the moving date set forth in the application.
(1978 Code §8-84)
17-7-4: LIMITATIONS ON BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED:
A. No building shall be prepared for a move or shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city if the building exceeds thirty four feet (34'), loaded
width, including overhang, or which exceeds thirty feet (30') loaded height. Said size limitations may be waived by the building official, with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 697/715
concurrence of the city forester and the city manager, or designee, if, in their opinions, the oversized building may be safely moved on the proposed
route without danger to property or public improvements.
B. No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city to a lot in the city if the value of such building before moving is less than forty percent
(40%) of the value of a new building of the same type.
C. No building shall be moved in or through the streets of the city to a lot in the city if such building is in such deteriorated condition that, in the opinion of
the building official, it is unsafe and constitutes a safety hazard. (1978 Code §8-59; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
17-7-5: BUILDING PERMIT PREREQUISITE TO MOVING BUILDING:
No person shall prepare any building for a move nor move any building to any lot within the city unless said person shall have first obtained a building
permit for such building on such lot. (1978 Code §8-60)
17-7-6: DEPOSIT AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Deposit: Upon receipt of an application for a permit under section 17-7-3 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the applicant to procure from all
appropriate city departments or other governmental bodies, and the utility companies involved, an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in
removing, trimming, cutting or replacing any property on the route of the move, including trees on public property above the height of thirteen feet (13'),
by reason of the moving of the building through the city, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and
replacements and expenses of city personnel and the utility companies occasioned by the moving. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant
shall deposit with the city finance director a sum of money equal to twice the amount of these estimated city related expenses. Such deposit shall be in
cash or by certified check, cashier's check or such other form as the city finance director may require. (1978 Code §8-61; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Insurance: Any person filing an application for a permit under section 17-7-3 of this chapter shall file with the department of housing and inspection
services a liability certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in Iowa, protecting the applicant and the city and
its officials, providing for coverage as established by the finance department. The insurance coverage may be a blanket insurance policy covering any
building moving by the applicant. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of the city, and the city shall be named insured herein for the use and benefit
of any person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment
for any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance or negligence on the part of the mover in connection with any of
the activities or conditions of the permit. (1978 Code §8-62; amd. 1994 Code)
17-7-7: DISPOSITION OF FEES AND DEPOSITS:
A. Receipt Of Deposits And Fees: The city finance director shall receive all fees and deposits required by this chapter.
B. Return Upon Nonissuance: Upon refusal to issue or nonissuance of a permit, the building official shall inform the city finance director who, after being
so informed, shall return all deposits to the applicant. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned.
C. Return Upon Allowance For Expense: After the building has been moved, the building official shall prepare a written statement of all expenses incurred
in removing, trimming, cutting or replacing all public property and of all material used in the making of the removal and the replacement together with a
statement of all damages and costs caused to or inflicted upon the city. Upon receipt of the building official's statement, the city finance director shall
return to the applicant all deposits after deducting a sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs, damages and expenses incurred by the city by reason of
the removal of the building. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. (1978 Code §8-63)
17-7-8: BUILDING MOVING OPERATIONS:
A. Designation Of Route: In conjunction with the application for a permit under section 17-7-3 of this chapter, the applicant shall develop and submit a list
of designated streets over which a building is proposed to be moved, which list must be approved, in writing, by the city manager, or designee, chief of
police, the fire chief and the city forester. In making their determinations, said officials shall act to assure reasonable safety to persons and property in
the city, including trees on public property, and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. (1978 Code §8-64; amd. 1994 Code; Ord.
97-3765, 1-14-1997)
B. Time Of Moves: The time of all moves must be approved in advance by the building official and recorded on the permit. Generally, all building moves
may not commence from private property and enter public property before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and must be completed and placed on the
designated site off of public property or streets by four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of the same day; or may not commence before seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and
must be completed by six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day. The building official may make exceptions, for good cause, as to the time of move.
(1978 Code §8-65; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Nighttime Moving; Lighting Requirements: Building moves during the nighttime, including one hour or sooner before sunrise and one hour or later
before sunset, must be floodlighted such that the structure being moved is illuminated sufficiently to permit ready visibility of the top and side clearance
of the structure and any obstruction that may be in the path of travel. The building official shall approve all lighting in advance of any move. (1978 Code
§8-66)
D. Parking Prohibited On Streets: Parking shall be prohibited on streets included in the routing for the moving of a building. At least forty eight (48) hours in
advance of the time of the moving, the permittee shall post signs provided by the city, designating the area as a no parking area. The building official
shall ensure that such signs are posted by the permittee in a timely manner. Such signs shall be removed by the city after the move is completed. If any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 698/715
vehicle is parked illegally in violation of the provisions of this subsection, the permittee shall be responsible for the expenses of towing the vehicle away
but may recover said expenses from the violator. The permittee shall assume all risk of damage to any vehicle either towed away or parked in such
route. (1978 Code §8-69)
E. Storage On Public Property Restricted: No building being moved pursuant to this chapter shall be stored on any public street, highway, place, alley,
park, square, plaza, any city owned right of way or any other public property owned or controlled by the city. (1978 Code §8-67)
17-7-9: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under section 17-7-3 of this chapter shall:
A. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the approved, written permit.
B. Conduct the move on the date and time stated on the approved permit. Failure to move on the date and time shall require the applicant to reapply for a
moving permit and receive new signatures of approval as required in subsection 17-7-8A of this chapter.
C. Notify the building official, in writing, of any and all damage done to public or private property within twenty four (24) hours after the damage or injury
has occurred.
D. Comply with the building code, the electrical code, the plumbing code, the zoning ordinance, the state energy code, the state handicapped accessibility
code and all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended.
E. Pay the cost and expenses of the city occasioned by the movement of the building.
F. Remove all debris and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition
within ten (10) calendar days of the moving date. The old basement or any excavation on the original site shall be fenced in immediately upon removal
of the building and shall remain fenced until the excavation can be filled.
G. Plug the sanitary sewer line with a concrete stopper unless otherwise directed by the city. The plugged sanitary sewer line shall be inspected by the city
before backfilling. The permittee shall arrange to have the water shut off at the property line and the meter returned to the city. The permittee shall
notify all utilities, including the city, to disconnect all services at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of said moving.
H. Notify telephone, electric and gas company, railroad companies, cable television and any other utility at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the
moving of any building that will interfere with the pole, wires, conduit, cables or other property of the utility, specifying in such notice the highest part of
the building above the surface of the street and the proposed route and time of moving. The utility shall furnish, at the expense of the permittee, a
competent person to superintend the removal and replacement of such wires, poles, conduit, cables and other property. The permittee shall, at its own
expense, furnish all the labor, materials and equipment necessary and shall remove and replace the property as directed by the appropriate utility
company. Only authorized personnel of the utility company shall remove or replace any wires, poles, conduit, cables and other property. (1978 Code
§8-68; amd. 1994 Code)
17-7-10: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcing Officers:
1. The department of housing and inspection services and the police department and any other appropriate city officers or employees shall enforce and
carry out the requirements of this chapter. Once the structure to be moved has reached public property, the police department and, specifically, the
officer assigned to provide escort to the move shall be the enforcement officer of the building move.
2. The building official shall assume enforcement responsibilities when the building is being prepared for the move, while the move is in progress on the
original site and at such time when the structure being moved leaves public property and is being placed upon a lot within iowa city as set forth in the
moving permit.
B. Liability Of Permittee For Expenses: The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amount or securities, and
the city attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such amounts, if appropriate.
C. Original Premises Left Unsafe: The city shall proceed to do any work necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition where
the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this title, and the costs thereof shall be charged against the permittee's deposit. (1978 Code §8-
70; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 8
GRADING ORDINANCE
17-8-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 699/715
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and safeguard human life, property and the public welfare and to protect environmentally sensitive areas by
regulating grading on private and public property. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-2: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, establishes the
administrative procedure for issuance of permits and provides for approval of plans and specifications and inspection of grading. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Terms not defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned them in "Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary", as amended.
APPROVAL: That, in the opinion of the building official, the proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter.
AS GRADED: The extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.
BEDROCK: In place solid rock.
BENCH: A relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.
BORROW: Earth material acquired from an off site location for use in grading a site.
CIVIL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Iowa to practice in the field of civil engineering.
CIVIL ENGINEERING: The application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation,
design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of humankind.
COMPACTION: The densification of a fill by mechanical means.
CUT: The portion of land surface or area from which earth material has been removed or will be removed by excavation.
EARTH MATERIAL: Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.
ENGINEERED GRADING: Grading of five hundred (500) cubic yards or more and requires the services of a civil engineer to prepare and certify a grading
plan and to inspect and certify the work completed.
EROSION: The wearing away of earth material as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice or any combination thereof.
EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of earth material.
EXISTING GRADE: The grade prior to grading.
FILL: A deposit of earth material placed by mechanical, human made or other artificial means.
FINISHED GRADE: The final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.
GEOLOGIC FACTORS: Factors pertaining to rocks or rock formations as they might affect the stability of slopes.
GRADE: The vertical elevation of the ground surface.
GRADING: Any excavating or filling or a combination thereof and includes compaction.
OWNER: Any person, entity, business, firm, corporation, organization, association, partnership, venture or any combination thereof and any agent,
fiduciary or representative thereof, who owns or purports to own land or real property located within Iowa City.
PERSON: Includes individual persons, user, operator, responsible party, entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture or any
combination thereof and any agent, representative or fiduciary thereof.
PROPERTY: Land and real property, whether public or private, and includes any and all interests in real property, whether legal, equitable or any
combination thereof.
PUBLIC WAY: Any area dedicated to the public, including but not limited to street right of way, sidewalks, alleys and utility easements.
REGULAR GRADING: Grading involving less than five hundred cubic yards (500 cu yd) which does not require the services of a civil engineer.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any user, possessor, operator, permittee or person who operates, possesses, occupies, manages or owns real property located
within Iowa City. Responsible party shall also include the person responsible for assuring compliance with this chapter if notice of violation or
noncompliance has been issued to that person by the building official.
ROUGH GRADE: The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.
SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
SOIL: Naturally occurring superficial deposits overlaying bedrock.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 700/715
STEEP SLOPE: Property on which the natural terrain is at a slope of twenty five percent (25%) (4 horizontal to 1 vertical) or steeper.
TERRACE: A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface of drainage and maintenance purposes. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord.
95-3703, 12-19-1995)
17-8-4: GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas described below without first having obtained a grading permit from the building
official: (1978 Code §8-17)
A. Property on which the natural terrain is at a horizontal to vertical slope of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) (25 percent) or steeper and having a
vertical height exceeding ten feet (10'); or (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 95-3703, 12-19-1995)
B. Flood hazard areas subject to title 14, chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this code; or
C. "Wetlands" as defined in the code of federal regulations (33 CFR 328.3), as amended, and regulated by the U.S. army corps of engineers; or
D. Property traversed by a drainageway as shown in blue on the U.S. geological survey quadrangle maps, 1983, as updated. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-5: GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permits Required: As provided in section 17-8-4 of this chapter, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the building
official. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
B. Application For Permit: The provisions of section 105.5 of the building code, as amended, are applicable to grading and shall state an estimate of the
cubic yards of earth material to be graded. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
C. Plans And Specifications: Each application for a grading permit, whether regular grading or engineered grading, shall be accompanied by two (2) sets
of plans and specifications. Supporting data consisting of a soils report and geology report shall be submitted when required by the building official.
When engineered grading is required pursuant to subsection D of this section, the plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil
engineer. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
D. Grading Designation: All grading of five hundred cubic yards (500 cu yd) or more shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan
prepared by a civil engineer and shall be designated as "engineered grading". Grading involving less than five hundred cubic yards (500 cu yd) shall be
designated "regular grading" unless the permittee, with the approval of the building official, chooses to have the grading performed as "engineered
grading" or the building official requires "engineered grading" pursuant to subsection G of this section. (Ord. 95-3703, 12-19-1995)
E. Information On Plans And Specifications:
1. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon stable, reproducible media and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work
proposed. The plans shall also show, in detail, that the grading activities will conform to the provisions of the building code, as amended, and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the proposed grading work, the name
and address of the person by whom they were prepared and the name and address of the property owner or of the responsible party for the property.
2. The plans shall include the following information:
a. General vicinity of the proposed site.
b. Names and addresses of adjacent property owners.
c. Property limits and accurate topographic map of the existing terrain with contour intervals of five feet (5') or less and details of area drainage.
d. Limiting dimensions, elevations of finish contours to be achieved by the grading and proposed drainage channels and related construction.
e. Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, including walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with,
or as part of, the proposed grading work, together with a map showing the drainage areas and the estimated runoff for a 5-year return and a 100-
year flood event of the area served by any drains to be installed.
f. Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the proposed grading is to be performed, together with any buildings or structures on
property adjacent to the proposed grading to the extent the buildings or structures are within fifteen feet (15') of the proposed grading. In addition,
location of any property which may be substantially and materially affected by the proposed grading shall also be noted and shown on the plans.
g. Existing trees that are to be retained pursuant to section 17-8-10 of this chapter. Specifications shall contain information covering construction and
material requirements.
h. Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil erosion for the proposed work.
F. Engineered Grading Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 701/715
1. For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer to design the grading plan using sound engineering practices and to
incorporate all recommendations from the soils and geology reports into the grading plan. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the
professional inspection during the grading process and final approval of the grading when completed. This responsibility includes, but need not be
limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the grading area. The civil engineer is the coordinating
agent between any responsible party doing the actual grading work and the building official. Further, the civil engineer shall be responsible for the
preparation of revised plans and the submission of an updated grading plan upon completion of the work. Finally, the civil engineer shall submit a
statement of compliance pursuant to subsection 17-8-14A of this chapter.
2. Soils and geology reports shall be required as specified in subsections H and I of this section. During grading, the civil engineer shall submit all
necessary reports, compaction data and soils and geology recommendations to the building official.
3. The civil engineer's inspection and approval concerning the adequacy and preparation of ground for the proposed grading operations shall include,
but need not be limited to, the adequacy of the ground to receive fill, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, the design of
buttress fills, where required, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for subdrains or other ground water drainage
devices.
4. The building official shall review the grading project at the various stages of the work in order to monitor compliance with the approved plans.
G. Regular Grading Requirements:
1. The building official may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency of any proposed or approved grading operation. Any such
required inspection or testing shall be carried out at the building official's direction.
2. When the building official has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved in the proposed or regular grading activities, the grading
operation will be required to conform to "engineered grading" requirements as defined in this chapter.
H. Soils Report:
1. The soils report required by subsection C of this section shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils,
conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, if needed.
2. Recommendations included in the report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications unless the building official has waived all or
some of the recommendations or has approved revised recommendations.
I. Geology Report:
1. The geology report required by subsection C of this section shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions and
recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.
2. Recommendations included in the report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications unless the building official has waived all or
some of the recommendations or has approved revised recommendations. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
J. Issuance: The provisions of section 105.3.1 of the building code, as amended, are applicable to grading permits. The building official may require that
the grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which result from weather generated problems not considered at the time the
permit was issued. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
K. Fees: All fees associated with each required permit shall be paid to the city as established by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code §8-17; amd.
1994 Code)
17-8-6: ASSURANCE OF PERFORMANCE:
A. When the grading permit is issued, the building official may require cash escrow, certificate of deposit, performance bonds or an irrevocable letter of
credit in order to assure that the work will be completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and to assure all hazardous
conditions are eliminated. Said cash escrows, certificate of deposit, performance bonds or letters of credit shall be in an amount equal to one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the grading project, but in no event shall the required amount exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or the cash equivalent.
B. It is the intent of this section that cash escrow, certificate of deposit, performance bonds or irrevocable letters of credit shall not be deemed as a
substitution for performance of the work, but that such instruments shall stand solely as security to assure compliance with the grading requirements
herein. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
17-8-7: CUTS:
A. Compliance Required: Unless otherwise recommended in the approved engineering, soils and/or geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of
this section.
B. Slope: The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than the ratio of three and five-tenths
horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1) unless the owner or responsible party furnishes a soils or a geology report or both, stating that an investigation of the
site reveals that a cut at a steeper slope will nonetheless be stable and will not create a hazard to life or to property.
C. Drainage And Terracing: Drainage and terracing shall be provided as required by section 17-8-11 of this chapter. (1978 Code §8-17)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 702/715
17-8-8: FILLS:
A. Compliance Required: Unless otherwise recommended in the approved engineering, soils and/or geology report, fills shall conform to the provisions of
this section.
B. Fill Location: Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than three and five-tenths horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1), except where the
civil engineer determines the slope to be stable.
C. Preparation Of Ground: The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable
materials and by scarifying the surface to provide a bond with the new fill. Where slopes are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) and the
height of the fill location is greater than ten feet (10'), the ground surface shall be prepared by benching into material deemed competent for such
benching by a civil engineer. The bench under the top of fill on a slope steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) shall be at least ten feet (10')
wide. The area beyond the top of fill shall either be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench
under the top of fill shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. However, in such event, the cut shall be approved by a civil engineer as a suitable foundation for
fill.
D. Fill Material: Vegetative materials shall not be permitted in fills except in the top one foot (1') of fill. Except as permitted by the building official, no rock or
similar irreducible material shall be placed within two feet (2') of the finished grade. Where an excessive amount of irreducible material is found, it may
be placed in the fill in horizontal layers not exceeding four feet (4') in thickness. Each layer shall be leveled and smoothed by choking the surface of the
irreducible material with soil or fine fragments of rock. (1978 Code §8-17)
E. Compaction: All fills on slopes of six horizontal to one vertical (6:1) or steeper shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of maximum
density as determined by section J107 of the building code or equivalent ASTM standards, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
F. Slope: The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than three and five-tenths horizontal
to one vertical (3.5:1) unless the owner or responsible party furnishes a soils or a geology report or both, stating that the site has been investigated and
that based on their best information, knowledge and belief, fill at a slope steeper than three and five-tenths horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1) will
nonetheless be stable and will not create a hazard to life or property.
G. Drainage And Terracing: Drainage and terracing shall be provided for all fills. Areas above fill slopes and all terrace surfaces shall be graded and
finished, as required by section 17-8-11 of this chapter. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-9: SETBACKS:
A. General Requirements: Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be
horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. Setback dimensions shall be as shown in figure J108.1 of the 2003 international
building code, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-15-2004)
B. Top Of Cut Slope: The top of cut slope shall be made no closer to a site boundary line than one-fifth (1/5) of the vertical height of cut, with a minimum of
two feet (2') and a maximum of ten feet (10'). The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.
C. Toe Of Fill Slope: The toe of fill slope shall be made no closer to the site boundary line than one-half (1/2) the height of slope, with a minimum of two
feet (2') and a maximum of twenty feet (20'). Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off site property is already
developed, special precautions may be required if, in the opinion of the building official, such precautions are necessary to protect the adjoining
property from damage. These precautions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Additional setbacks.
2. Provision for retaining walls or slough walls.
3. Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion.
4. Provisions for the control of surface waters.
D. Modification Of Slope Location: The building official may approve alternate setbacks. The building official may also require an investigation and
recommendation by a civil engineer if, in the opinion of the building official, such investigation is reasonably necessary to demonstrate the grading has
complied with the intent of this section. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-10: TREE PROTECTION:
Trees that are to be retained shall be protected from injury during any grading work. Woodland and tree protection measures shall be shown on the
grading plan and should comply with the Iowa City tree protection guidelines. (Ord. 95-3703, 12-19-1995)
17-8-11: DRAINAGE AND TERRACING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 703/715
A. Compliance Required: Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this
section for cut or fill slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical (6:1).
B. Terrace:
1. In order to control surface drainage and debris, terraces at least six feet (6') in width shall be established at not more than thirty foot (30') vertical
intervals on all cut or fill slopes. Where only one terrace is required, it shall be established at midheight. For cut or fill slopes greater than sixty feet
(60') and up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in vertical height, one terrace at approximately midheight shall be twelve feet (12') in width. Terrace
widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty feet (120') in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved
by the building official. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.
2. Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of three percent (3%) and must be stabilized with an approved erosion free channel.
Said swales or ditches shall also have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot (1') and a minimum width of five feet (5') unless a civil
engineer can demonstrate a smaller channel is appropriate. (1978 Code §8-17)
3. The capacity of a swale or ditch shall be adequate to convey the 100-year flood event for the tributary area. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
C. Subsurface Drainage: Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage, where such drainage is reasonably necessary to achieve stability.
D. Disposal:
1. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest approved drainageway. Erosion in the area of discharge shall be prevented by
installing nonerosive down drains or other devices, as needed.
2. Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent (2%) from the building pad toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the
building official.
3. The gradient from the building pad may be one percent (1%) if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:
a. Proposed fills are no greater than ten feet (10') in maximum depth.
b. Proposed finish cuts or fill slope faces have a vertical height no greater than ten feet (10').
c. Existing slope faces which have a slope face steeper than ten horizontally to one vertically (10:1) shall have a vertical height no greater than ten
feet (10').
E. Interceptor Drains: Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage has been channelized and there is a
potential for continued erosion. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-12: GRADING INSPECTION:
A. General Requirements: All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. When required by the
building official, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17 of the
international building code, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
B. Notification Of Noncompliance: If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibilities under this chapter, the civil engineer or the testing agency finds that the
grading work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or does not conform to the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be
reported to the owner of the property. If the discrepancies continue, the civil engineer or the testing agency is responsible for reporting said
discrepancies to the building official.
C. Transfer Of Responsibility For Approval: If the civil engineer or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of any grading work, the work
shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept responsibility for the work and the work is within the competence of the testing agency
and/or the civil engineer. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-13: COMPLETION OF WORK:
A. Final Reports: Upon completion of the rough grading work and at final completion of the grading work, the building official shall require the following
reports, drawings and supplements thereto to be filed in the building official's office:
1. Certification from the civil engineer that the grading work was completed in substantial compliance with the final approved grading plan, as updated
or revised.
2. An updated or revised grading plan prepared by the civil engineer, showing all revisions approved by the building official. This plan shall include
ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities installed.
B. Notification Of Completion: The owner, responsible party or person requesting the permit shall notify the building official when the grading operation is
ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all required reports have been submitted and until all grading work has been completed
in accordance with the final approved grading plans, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control
measures. Upon granting final approval, the building official shall authorize the release of any escrows to the depositor and issue a certificate of
compliance. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-14: HAZARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 704/715
Whenever the building official determines that any existing excavation, embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to human life,
endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the property owner or the responsible party for the
affected property shall, after receipt of notice, in writing, from the building official, take corrective action to repair or eliminate such excavation, fill or
embankment so as to eliminate the hazard or dangerous conditions. Said repairs or corrective actions shall, in all respects, be in compliance with the
requirements of the building code, as amended, and shall be satisfactorily completed within the time period specified in the notice. Failure to take
corrective actions shall be deemed a public offense and shall be subject to the remedies set out in applicable state and local law for abatement of
nuisances1. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-15: CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
A. Purpose And Intent:
1. The national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit program administered by the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR)
requires that agencies meeting certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of
storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The city of Iowa City has been issued such a permit. The city's MS4 permit is on
file at the office of the city clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office hours.
2. The NPDES program requires certain individuals engaged in earth disturbing activities related to construction on one acre of land or more to submit
an application to the IDNR for an NPDES general permit #2. The NPDES program and the city's MS4 require the city to adopt an ordinance requiring
proper soil erosion and sediment control on all sites less than one acre if the earth disturbing activities are part of a larger common plan of
development that would disturb one acre or more. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, every applicant bears final and complete
responsibility for compliance with a state NPDES general permit #2, a city construction site runoff (CSR) permit, and any other requirement of state
or federal law or administrative rule.
3. As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the NPDES
program by adopting a construction site runoff control ordinance designed to achieve the following objectives:
a. Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, state agency or political subdivision (applicant) required by law or administrative
rule to apply to the IDNR for an NPDES general permit #2 shall also be required to obtain from the city a permit in addition to and not in lieu of the
NPDES general permit #2; and
b. The city shall have primary responsibility for inspection, monitoring and enforcement procedures to promote applicants' compliance with state
NPDES general permits #2 and CSR permits.
4. No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city in administering and enforcing the NPDES program. The city shall fund its
application, inspection, monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to
the program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance.
B. Applicability:
1. All persons required by law or administrative rule to obtain an NPDES general permit #2 from the IDNR, and persons who will be conducting any
earth disturbing activity on a site less than one acre in size if the earth disturbing activities are part of a larger common plan of development that
would disturb one acre or more, are required to obtain a CSR permit. "Earth disturbing activity" means any activity that results in a movement of
earth or a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) or the existing topography. Earth disturbing activity includes, but is
not limited to, clearing, grading, filling, excavation or addition or replacement of impervious surface.
2. Applications for CSR permits shall be made on forms approved by the city which may be obtained from the city.
3. An applicant for a CSR permit shall pay fees as follows:
a. Prior to the issuance of a CSR permit in connection with a building permit on a platted lot, the applicant shall submit an application permit fee to
the housing and inspection services department in an amount established by resolution of the city council. If more than three (3) inspections are
required by the terms of this section with respect to said permit, the applicant shall bear the cost of such inspections, which shall be the actual cost
of the inspections by the city.
b. There shall be no permit fee required prior to the issuance of CSR permits other than those issued in connection with building permits on platted
lots, but the applicant shall bear the cost of reviews and inspections required by the terms of this section with respect to said permits, which shall
be the actual cost of the reviews and inspections by the city.
4. An applicant in possession of an NPDES general permit #2 issued by the IDNR shall immediately submit to the city full copies of the materials
described below as a basis for the city to determine whether to issue a CSR permit:
a. Applicant's NPDES general permit #2 notice of intent (NOI); and
b. Applicant's plans, specifications and materials in support of applicant's application for the NPDES general permit #2; and
c. A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with this section.
5. Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for a CSR permit shall:
a. Comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for SWPPPs promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of an NPDES
general permit #2; and
b. Comply with all mandatory minimum requirements pertaining to the joint application form, "Protecting Iowa Waters", filed with the IDNR and U.S.
army corps of engineers; and
c. Comply with all other applicable local, state or federal permit requirements in existence at the time of application; and
d. Include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of
this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 705/715
6. Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for a CSR permit shall contain the provisions of the general permit #2, plus the
following additional provisions:
a. All SWPPPs shall comply with Iowa statewide urban design and specifications (SUDAS) standard design criteria as amended; and
b. Address that stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to erosion by wind or water are covered, vegetated, or otherwise effectively protected
from erosion and sedimentation in accordance with the amount of time the material will be on site and the manner of its proposed use; no
stockpiling is allowed in the street; and
c. Assure that all temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be maintained until the city has determined that the site has been permanently
stabilized; and
d. Limit potential for damage to sensitive environmental areas such as water bodies, plant communities, rare, threatened and/or endangered species
habitat, wildlife corridors, greenways, etc.; and
e. Provide for design and construction methods to stabilize steep or long continuous slopes; and
f. Include measures to control sediment, and the quantity and quality of storm water, leaving a site during and after construction; and
g. Provide for stabilization of waterways and outlets directly impacted by permitted construction; and
h. Protect storm sewer inlets and infrastructure from sediment loading/plugging; and
i. Specify precautions to be taken to contain sediment when working in or crossing water bodies; and
j. Account for stabilization of disturbed areas, including utility construction areas, as soon as possible; and
k. Protect adjacent and outlying roads from sediment and mud from construction site activities, including tracking; and
l. Provide for disposal of collected sediment and floating debris.
7. Issuance by the city of a CSR permit shall be a condition precedent for the issuance of a city building permit or site plan approval.
8. For so long as a construction site is subject to an NPDES general permit #2 or a CSR permit, the applicant shall provide the city with current
information as follows:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the person on site designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the NPDES general permit #2 and the CSR permit;
b. The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contractor(s) and/or subcontractor(s) that will implement each erosion and sediment
control measure identified in the SWPPP.
c. An on site location for storage and retrieval of the current SWPPP.
d. Applicant's failure to provide current information shall constitute a violation of this section.
9. If the applicant for the NPDES general permit #2 and the CSR permit is not the same individual as the owner/builder on the site, then the applicant
has the option to include the owner/builder as a copermittee. Copermittees have the same obligations and responsibilities as the original applicant.
Absent written confirmation of transfer of responsibility signed by both the parties and provided to the city at the office of the enforcement official, the
original applicant remains obligated and responsible for permit compliance on any parcel of the site, whether the parcel has been sold or not.
10. Upon receipt of an application for a CSR permit, the city shall either find that the application complies with this section and issue a CSR permit in
accordance with this section, or that the application fails to comply with this section, in which case the city shall provide a written report identifying
noncompliant elements of the application.
C. Inspection:
1. All inspections required under this section shall be conducted by a designated person from the city, hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement
officer".
2. The applicant shall notify the city when all measures required by applicant's SWPPP have been accomplished on site, whereupon the city shall
conduct an inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with this section, and shall within a reasonable time thereafter report to the
applicant either that compliance appears to have been achieved, or that compliance has not been achieved, in which case the city shall provide a
written report identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such
corrective action within a time frame deemed reasonable by the city. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of
this section.
3. Unless otherwise approved by the city, construction shall not occur on the site at any time when the city has identified conditions of noncompliance.
4. Unless approved by the city, construction activities undertaken by an applicant prior to resolution of all discrepancies specified in the written report
shall constitute a violation of this section.
5. The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to third parties for noncompliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
D. Monitoring:
1. Upon issuance of a CSR permit, the applicant has an absolute duty to monitor site conditions and to report to the enforcement officer any change of
circumstances or site conditions which the applicant knows or should know pose a risk of storm water discharge in a manner inconsistent with
applicant's SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 706/715
2. Such report shall be made by the applicant to the enforcement officer immediately upon knowledge of site condition changes, but in any event within
twenty four (24) hours of the change of circumstances or site conditions.
3. Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of this section.
4. Any third party may also report to the city site conditions which the third party reasonably believes pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner
inconsistent with applicant's SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR permit.
5. Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections of this section, the enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon
as reasonably possible and thereafter may issue a written stop work order to the applicant, directing the applicant to take no further action with
respect to the SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR permit, other than corrective action provided for hereinafter. The enforcement officer
shall provide the applicant with a written report identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective
action and shall complete such corrective action within a time frame deemed reasonable by the city. Failure to take corrective action in a timely
manner shall constitute a violation of this section, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in
subsection E of this section.
6. The enforcement officer shall conduct at least one unannounced inspection during the course of construction to monitor compliance with the NPDES
general permit #2 and the CSR permit. If the inspection discloses any noncompliance, the enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a
written report identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such
corrective action within a time frame deemed reasonable by the city. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of
this section, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in subsection E of this section.
7. The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to third parties for noncompliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
E. Enforcement:
1. Violation of any provision of this section may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
2. Violation of any provision of this section may also be enforced as a municipal infraction or environmental infraction within the meaning of section
364.22, pursuant to the city's municipal infraction ordinance. A municipal infraction shall be punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection 1-
4-2D of this code. (Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
F. Appeals:
1. Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the board of appeals
pursuant to the procedure set forth in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-16: ENFORCEMENT:
In all cases, the ultimate responsibility for compliance with this chapter shall rest with the owner of the property, notwithstanding the participation of any
other responsible party. Any violation of this chapter or rules promulgated thereto shall constitute a nuisance and/or an environmental infraction under both
state and local laws. In such event, the city may, at its option, elect to carry out any one or all of the following remedies: prosecute environmental
infractions under title 1, chapter 4 of this code, deny or revoke any permit under this chapter, abate the nuisance in accordance with title 6, chapter 1 of
this code and/or pursue civil remedies in courts of law or equity. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
Chapter 9
BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 07-4290, 10-16-2007)
Chapter 10
CONDOMINIUM AND MULTIPLE HOUSING COOPERATIVE CONVERSION CODE
17-10-1: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION CODE:
A. All declarations to convert an existing structure, which is used for human habitation or intended for use for human habitation, to a horizontal property
regime shall be filed with the city clerk.
B. Upon filing, the city clerk will provide a copy of the declaration to the building official.
C. Before any inspection is conducted, the declarant must:
1. Submit "as built" plans for review by the building official that indicate compliance with the city building code requirements in effect on the date of the
conversion; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 707/715
2. Pay condominium conversion fee, which will be set by resolution.
D. After "as builts" are submitted and the fee paid, the building official shall conduct site and building inspections to determine whether the structure
complies with the city building code requirements in effect on the date of the conversion.
E. Within sixty (60) days of the declaration being filed with the city clerk, the building official shall issue a certificate of compliance if the structure meets the
city building code requirements in effect on the date of the conversion or provide written notification to the declarant stating why the structure does not
meet the city building code requirements in effect on the date of the conversion. (Ord. 01-3960, 3-5-2001)
17-10-2: MULTIPLE HOUSING COOPERATIVE CONVERSION CODE:
A. No conveyance of any residential building or portion thereof to a multiple housing cooperative shall take place without the building first conforming to the
city building code then in effect.
B. Unless a certificate of occupancy confirming compliance with the current building codes has been issued by the building official, no person shall file or
record an instrument in the office of the county recorder conveying an interest in real estate located in the city to a multiple housing cooperative.
C. At least sixty (60) days before an instrument of conveyance is filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder, the applicant shall electronically file a
copy of such instrument, together with the following documents, with the building official, and shall also pay a conversion fee in the amount set in the
schedule of fees adopted by the city council by resolution:
1. An as built plan for the entire structure.
2. A building code analysis prepared by an architect or professional engineer, licensed in the state of Iowa, demonstrating that the structure conforms
with then current building codes, or can be brought into conformance with then current building codes by planned improvements to be made to the
structure.
3. If the structure is not in conformance with then current building codes, the as built plan and building code analysis must be accompanied by
construction plans detailing planned improvements to bring the structure into conformance with then current building codes.
D. Upon receipt of the code analysis, as built plans, construction plans when necessary, and conversion fee, the building official shall review the
documents and conduct such inspections of the structure as s/he may deem appropriate to determine whether or not the structure conforms with the
requirements of this section, or can be made compliant with proposed construction plans. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the documents and the
conversion fee, as provided above, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy or provide written notification to the applicant regarding
existing structural deficiencies and/or the failure of construction plans to meet applicable codes. (Ord. 14-4601, 12-2-2014)
Chapter 11
LICENSING
17-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Master Electrician: No person shall perform unsupervised electrical work, within Iowa City, with or without compensation unless the person holds a
master electrician's class A license issued by the state of Iowa.
B. Journeyman Electrician: No person shall work as a journeyman electrician within the city unless the person holds a journeyman electrician's class A
license issued by the state of Iowa.
C. Fire Alarm: No person shall work as a fire alarm installer or perform maintenance on fire alarm systems unless the person holds a fire alarm license
issued by the state of Iowa.
D. Fire Sprinkler Installer: No person shall work as a fire sprinkler installer or perform maintenance on fire sprinkler systems unless the person holds a fire
sprinkler installer's license issued by the state of Iowa.
E. Fire Sprinkler Maintenance: No person shall perform maintenance on a fire sprinkler system unless the person holds a fire sprinkler maintenance
license or fire sprinkler installer's license issued by the state of Iowa.
F. Master HVAC: No person shall undertake the planning, layout, supervision, or perform heating, ventilation, and air conditioning within the city, with or
without compensation, unless the person holds an HVAC master license issued by the state of Iowa.
G. Journeyman HVAC: No person shall work as a journeyman HVAC installer within the city unless the person holds an HVAC journeyman license issued
by the state of Iowa.
H. Ducted Air Heating And Cooling Installer: No person shall install heat and cooling ducts as regulated by chapter 1 of this title with or without
compensation unless the person holds an HVAC master, HVAC journeyman or a ducted air heating and cooling installer's license issued by the state of
Iowa.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 708/715
I. Master Hydronics: No person shall plan for, lay out, supervise or perform hydronics work within the city, with or without compensation, unless the person
holds a master hydronics license or a master HVAC license issued by the state of Iowa.
J. Journeyman Hydronics: No person shall work as a journeyman hydronics installer unless the person holds a journeyman hydronics or a journeyman
HVAC license issued by the state of Iowa.
K. Master Plumber: No person shall plan for, lay out, supervise or perform plumbing work within the city, with or without compensation, unless the person
holds a master plumber's license issued by the state of Iowa.
L. Journeyman Plumber: No person shall work as a journeyman plumber within the city unless the person holds a journeyman plumber's license issued by
the state of Iowa.
M. Sanitary Sewer And Water Service Installer: No person shall work as a sanitary sewer and water service installer within the city unless the person holds
a sanitary sewer and water service installer's license issued by the city or holds a master or journeyman plumber's license issued by the state of Iowa.
N. Licensed Persons To Be On Site: There shall be a properly licensed person present at all locations and at all times where work requiring a license is
being performed. At least one licensed person shall be present for every three (3) laborers. Such licensed person must be an employee of the permit
holder.
O. Unlicensed Persons: No person shall knowingly employ or permit an unlicensed person to perform work within Iowa City if the work is required by this
code or the state of Iowa to be performed by a licensed person. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person required by this chapter to possess a license shall make application to the state of Iowa or for a sewer and water installer license make
application to the city. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-3: FEES:
The examination fee and license fee for persons applying for a sewer and water service installer license shall be established by resolution of city council
and shall not be refunded. The renewal fee, reinstatement fee, and fee for an inactive license shall be set by resolution of city council. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-
2015)
17-11-4: LICENSING STANDARDS:
A. A sanitary sewer and water service installer license shall be issued by the city to every person who successfully passes the examination approved by
the city.
B. Any person who fails the sanitary sewer and water service installer examination or the electrical homeowner's exam must wait a minimum of thirty (30)
calendar days before retesting. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-5: LICENSE RENEWALS:
A. License Expiration: Every sewer and water service installer license which has not previously been revoked shall expire on December 31 of each year.
Any license that has expired may be reinstated within sixty (60) calendar days after the expiration date upon payment of an additional reinstatement
fee. After the expiration of the sixty (60) calendar day period, no license obtained by municipal testing, shall be renewed except upon reexamination.
Licenses obtained by an approved third party testing agency, shall be renewed for a period of five (5) years with the submittal of all required
documentation and payment of all back renewal fees from the time of the license expiration. After the five (5) years, no license shall be renewed except
upon reexamination.
B. Employer Identification: At the time of renewal, each licensee shall identify the company the licensee is currently employed by. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-
2015)
17-11-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. The city, with consent of the board of appeals, may revoke any license issued by the city if the license holder shows incompetency or lack of knowledge,
if the license was obtained by fraud or for continual violation of any sections of this code.
B. Licenses are not transferable. The lending, selling, giving, or assigning of any license or the obtaining of permits thereunder for any other person shall
be deemed cause for revocation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 709/715
C. Revocation shall occur only after the city has given the licensee written notice and an opportunity for an administrative hearing before the board of
appeals.
D. If a license is revoked for any reason, another license shall not be issued for at least twelve (12) months after revocation. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-7: INACTIVE LICENSE:
Any current sewer and water service installer license may be classified as inactive upon written request of the licensee. Once so classified, the license
holder is permitted to maintain the license as current but will not be permitted to obtain a plumbing permit. The license may be reactivated by payment of
the full license fee for that year. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-8: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal infraction as provided for in subsection 1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 12
APPEALS
17-12-1: BOARD OF APPEALS:
A board of appeals is established. Members shall be appointed by the city council. The number of board members, the terms, and eligibility requirements
shall be set forth in bylaws, which are approved by city council. (Ord. 11-4455, 10-18-2011)
17-12-2: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
A. Jurisdiction: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official or the fire chief with regard to the building code or fire code may file an appeal to
the board of appeals within thirty (30) days of said decision. "Decision" means any decision, determination, direction, notice, finding, or order of the
building official or the fire chief. (Ord. 02-4038, 8-20-2002; amd. Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
B. Application: In order to file an appeal, the person must complete a form provided by the city department of housing and inspection services and pay a
filing fee. In said application, the person filing the appeal shall state all code provisions applicable to the appeal, attach relevant supporting
documentation, and explain the basis for the appeal. (Ord. 02-4038, 8-20-2002)
C. Authority: The board of appeals may by majority vote reverse a decision by the building official or the fire chief based on the building code or fire code
only if it finds that: (Ord. 02-4038, 8-20-2002; amd. Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
1. There are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code. "Practical difficulties" means that: a) the strict letter of this code is
impractical; b) the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code; and c) such modification does not lessen any fire
protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity; or
2. Any material, alternate design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code is appropriate. Any material, alternate design or
method of construction is appropriate if: a) the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provision of this code; and b) the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability, safety and sanitation; or
3. If the building official has incorrectly interpreted a provision of the code; or
4. If the provisions of the code do not fully apply.
D. Hearing: The person shall be advised in writing of the time and place at least three (3) calendar days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the person
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
E. Fees: Fees for filing an appeal shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 02-4038, 8-20-2002)
Chapter 13
FUEL GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
Chapter 14
PENALTIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 710/715
17-14-1: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (1994 Code)
Title 18
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
Chapter 1
INTENT AND APPLICABILITY
18-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to establish a procedure which will enable the City to review certain proposed improvements of property within the City in order
to ensure the orderly and harmonious development of property in a manner that will:
A. Promote the most beneficial relation between present and proposed uses of land.
B. Allow development of property commensurate with the present and foreseeable availability and capacity of City facilities and services. The following
factors shall be considered in arriving at a conclusion concerning proposed development of property:
1. The projected population of the proposed development or the proposed intensity of use and the effect the proposal will have on the capacity of
existing water and sanitary sewer lines to avoid overloading existing systems;
2. Zoning regulations at the time of the proposal; (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
3. The City's plans for future construction and provision for public facilities and services; and
4. The existing and planned City facilities and services for the area which will be affected by the proposed site use. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
C. Ensure compliance with this Code, as amended, including applicable zoning regulations, approved subdivision plats, public works standards, and public
safety standards.
D. Encourage adequate provision of surface and subsurface stormwater drainage in order to assure that future development and other properties in the
City will not be adversely affected.
E. Provide screening of parking, truck loading, solid waste disposal and outdoor storage areas from adjacent properties.
F. Provide for orderly, safe, and efficient circulation of traffic in the development and throughout the City.
G. Minimize adverse environmental impacts on the developing property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
H. Mitigate the impact of redevelopment on occupants of proposed projects involving the remodeling or reconstruction of existing multi-family residential
dwellings by fostering communication between the property owner and the occupants. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Site Plan Review Required:
1. The standards in this title are in addition to those required by the Building Code, as amended, and apply to commercial, industrial, and multi-unit
residential development.
2. Site plans must be submitted, reviewed, and approved by the City according to the provisions of this title prior to the issuance of a building permit for
any development on any "lot", "tract" or "parcel of land" as those terms are defined in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code, except as exempted in
subsection B of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 711/715
B. Exemptions: Site plan review is not required for the development of one single-family dwelling or one (1) two-family dwelling or related accessory
structures in any zoning district. However, such uses and structures are not exempt from other applicable provisions of this Code, including
requirements of the Building Code, as amended.
C. Major Site Plans: Major site plans are required for all of the following types of development:
1. Construction of over twelve (12) units residential development and any additions or alterations to existing development containing over twelve (12)
units residential; or
2. Over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of nonresidential floor area.
D. Minor Site Plans: Minor site plans are required for all development that does not require a major site plan, except as exempted in subsection B,
"Exemptions", of this section.
E. Sensitive Areas Development Plan: A sensitive areas development plan may be required for properties containing environmentally sensitive features as
set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this Code. The requirements and exemptions for regulated sensitive features
are set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this Code. Level I sensitive areas review shall be in accordance with the
all procedures and approval processes set forth in chapter 2 of this title, except for section 18-2-1, "Submittal Requirements", of this title. Submittal
requirements for Level I sensitive areas review are set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I of this Code, based on the type of regulated feature(s) that
exist on the subject property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Chapter 2
PROCEDURES AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
18-2-1: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: An application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the City with the required review fee, as established by resolution of the City Council.
The application shall be deemed complete upon filing the payment and all information required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
B. Minor Site Plans: Minor site plans submitted for approval must include the following information:
1. Date of preparation and north arrow.
2. A scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
3. Legal description or street address of the property.
4. Name and address of the owner of record of the property, the applicant and the person(s) preparing the site plan, and the name and address of the
applicant's attorney, if any.
5. Property lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth of a foot (1/10') and total square footage or acreage of the site.
6. Total number and types of dwelling units proposed, proposed uses for all building, total floor area of each building and any other information which
may be necessary to determine the number of off street parking and loading spaces required by title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code.
7. Location and exterior dimensions of all existing and proposed structures or additions, including setback distance from property boundary lines and
distance between structures.
8. Location, grade and dimension of all existing and proposed paved surfaces, including parking and loading areas, entrance and exit drives,
pedestrian walkways, bicycle storage areas, dividers, curbs, islands and other similar permanent improvements.
9. Location of all existing and proposed outdoor recycling, trash, solid waste, and dumpster areas and methods of screening such areas.
10. Location and type of all existing and proposed signs. Proposed signs may require a separate sign permit. (See title 14, chapter 5, article B, "Sign
Regulations", of this Code.)
11. Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil erosion for the development.
12. A landscaping plot plan is required indicating all existing trees eight inches (8") or larger in diameter measured at a point six inches (6") above the
ground level. In addition, the plot plan must distinguish the existing or proposed trees or landscaping intended to satisfy tree requirements or
screening requirements of this Code. (See subsection 14-5A-5I, "Landscaping And Tree Requirements Within Parking Areas", and title 14, chapter 5,
article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this Code, and any other applicable screening required according to title 14, "Zoning Code", of this
Code.)
13. Location of the following features of the site:
a. Streams and other water bodies, including wetlands.
b. Areas subject to flooding from a 100-year event.
14. Location, amount and type of proposed lighting, fences, walls or other screening.
15. A detailed lighting plan and photometrics layout which shows the location, type, height, and intensity of all existing and proposed exterior lighting on
the property. The photometrics layout must show the foot-candles generated by all lights on the property and provide the total outdoor light output as
measured in initial lumens from all bulbs used in outdoor light fixtures. The lighting plan and photometrics layout must comply with the standards
specified in title 14, chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 712/715
16. Location and specifications for any existing or proposed aboveground or belowground storage facilities for any chemical, salts, flammable materials
or hazardous materials.
17. Other data and information as may be reasonably required by the building official. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
C. Major Site Plans: Submittal information for major site plans must include all the information contained in subsections A and B of this section, plus the
following additional information: (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
1. Existing and proposed contours at intervals not to exceed five feet (5'), provided at least two (2) contours are shown. Contours of neighboring
properties must be provided when deemed necessary by the City.
2. When deemed necessary by the City, a complete stormwater runoff plan, including grades and/or elevations of storm sewer systems, direction of
surface flow, detention areas, outlet control structures and devices and stormwater calculations. (See title 16, chapter 3, article G, "Stormwater
Collection, Discharge And Runoff", of this Code.)
3. Location and size of existing and proposed utilities, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, electrical telephone, cable TV, plus all existing
or proposed fire hydrants.
4. A typical cross section of all proposed streets, alleys and parking areas showing roadway location, type of curb and gutter, paving and sidewalks to
be installed.
5. A complete traffic circulation and parking plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
6. Within twenty four (24) hours of submitting an application for major site plan approval, the applicant shall post notice on the subject property of intent
to develop on the site. The notice to be posted will be provided by the City and shall be posted as directed by the City. For major site plans involving
any additions or alterations to existing development containing over twelve (12) residential units, the applicant, within twenty four (24) hours of
submitting an application for major site plan approval, shall mail written notice to all current occupants of the development property informing them of
the application and intention to develop on the site, the anticipated construction timeline, and phasing of the project. The applicant shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the City that such notice requirements have been satisfied before the application will be considered complete.
7. For major site plans involving any additions or alterations to existing development containing over twelve (12) residential units, the applicant shall
submit an occupant transition plan if there are any occupants of the development on the date the application is submitted. Such a plan must include
the number of current occupants; a general description of current contractual obligations between the owner and the occupant(s); when any
leasehold interest expires; and a construction timeline and phasing plan. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-2-2: APPROVAL/DENIAL PROCESS:
A. Minor site plans shall be reviewed administratively. Major site plans shall be reviewed administratively unless a request for Planning and Zoning
Commission review is made in accordance with subsection B of this section.
1. Except for major site plans involving any additions or alterations to existing development containing over twelve (12) residential units, the building
official shall review and comment, approve, approve with conditions, or deny such site plans submitted within twenty one (21) working days after
application.
2. Where an occupant transition plan is required pursuant to subsection 18-2-1C7 of this chapter, in no event shall the site plan be approved until the
City Council has considered and approved said occupant transition plan. In approving the occupant transition plan, Council may impose conditions to
address the impact of the redevelopment on occupants of the property, but may not prevent either the landlord or the tenant from exercising its rights
under any lease and/or Iowa law, including but not limited to those of eviction, a decision not to renew existing leases or a challenge by a tenant
thereto, and may not alter the terms of the lease/right of possession by imposing requirements that relocation benefits or other assistance be
provided.
B. For major site plans, the Director of Neighborhood Development Services or those owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property located
within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed development site, may request review of the site plan by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The request must be in writing and must be filed with the building official within twenty (20) days of submission of the original
application or within twenty (20) days of the posting requirements set forth in section 18-2-1 of this chapter, whichever is later. When such a request is
received, the Planning and Zoning Commission may review and approve, review and approve with conditions, or review and deny said plan within
twenty (20) working days of receipt of the written request for Planning and Zoning Commission review. The commission's scope of review shall be the
same as that of the building official.
C. Upon site plan approval by the building official or the Planning and Zoning Commission, a building permit may be issued. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-2-3: EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PLAN APPROVAL:
The approval of any site plan shall remain valid for one year after the date of approval. The approved site plan shall be null and void if a building permit
has not been issued within one year of the site plan approval or if actual construction has not commenced within eighteen (18) months of the site plan
approval. "Actual construction" shall mean that the permanent placement of construction materials has started and is proceeding without undue delay.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-2-4: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS:
Any approved site plan may be amended in accordance with the standards and procedures established herein. However, the building official may waive
such procedures and fees in the event the building official determines that the proposed amendment involves only a minor change in the approved site
plan and is in compliance with the site plan review standards. For the purposes of this section, minor changes may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 713/715
A. A change to move building walls within the confines of the smallest rectangle that would have enclosed each originally approved building, to relocate
building entrances or exits or to shorten building canopies.
B. A change to a more restrictive use, provided there is no change in the amount of off street parking as originally approved.
C. A change in angle of parking or a parking aisle width, provided there is no reduction in the amount of off street parking as originally approved.
D. A change in location of the ingress and egress drives of not more than one hundred feet (100'), provided such change is approved by the City and is in
compliance with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this Code.
E. A substitution of plant species, provided the substituted species is similar in nature and in screening effects and is otherwise in compliance with
requirements of this Code.
F. A change in type and design of lighting fixture, provided there will be no change in the intensity of light at the property boundary and the proposed fixture
is in compliance with the applicable provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this Code.
G. A change to increase peripheral yards.
H. The replacement of paved areas with landscaping, provided adequate parking facilities are retained. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728,
10-3-2017)
Chapter 3
SITE PLAN DESIGN STANDARDS
18-3-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All site plans submitted for city approval must comply with the following design standards. These standards are the minimum standards necessary to
safeguard the public health, safety, aesthetics and general welfare of the city and are necessary to fulfill the intent of the zoning ordinance, the
comprehensive plan, as amended, and other specific community plans. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
18-3-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Drainage: The design of the proposed development shall make adequate provision for surface and subsurface drainage to limit the rate of increased
runoff of surface water to adjacent and downstream property so that the proposed development will not substantially and materially increase the natural
flow onto adjacent downstream property.
B. Utility Connections: The design of the proposed development shall make adequate provision for connection to water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
electrical and other public utility lines within the capacity limits of those utility lines.
C. Fire Safety: The design of the proposed development shall make adequate provision for fire protection and for building placement, acceptable location
of flammable materials and other measures to ensure fire safety.
D. Erosion And Sedimentation Control: The design of the proposed development shall comply with the standards for erosion and sedimentation control
established in the city design standards in order to protect adjoining or surrounding property. The development plan shall consider the topography and
soils of the site to achieve the lowest potential for erosion.
E. Landscape Preservation: So far as practical, the landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by minimizing tree and soil removal and by
topographic modifications which result in maximum harmony with adjacent areas. Structures and other site improvements shall be located in such a
manner that the maximum number of trees are preserved on the site. The development plan shall identify existing trees to be preserved and trees to be
removed and shall specify measures to be utilized to protect trees during construction. To the extent reasonably feasible, all wetlands shall be retained
in their natural state or consistent with their functions and values or be replaced with a wetland of equal or greater value.
F. Vehicle And Pedestrian Circulation: The design of vehicle and pedestrian circulation shall be provided for safe and convenient flow of vehicles and
movement of pedestrians and shall, to the greatest extent reasonably possible, prevent hazards to adjacent streets or property. The city may limit
entrances and exits upon adjacent streets in order to prevent congestion on adjacent or surrounding streets and in order to provide for safe and orderly
vehicle movement. The city may limit street access according to the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this
code.
G. Outdoor Dumpster Areas: Outdoor recycling, trash, solid waste, and dumpster areas shall be in compliance with the city's solid waste regulations and in
compliance with screening requirements contained in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. (See subsection 14-4C-2Q, "Outdoor Dumpster Areas", of
this code.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 714/715
H. Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall relate to the scale and location of the development in order to maintain adequate security while preventing a
nuisance or hardship to adjacent properties or streets. All exterior lighting must comply with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor
Lighting Standards", of this code.
I. Screening Of Equipment: All ground level mechanical and utility equipment shall be screened from public view according to the provisions of title 14,
"Zoning Code", of this code. (See subsection 14-4C-2N, "Mechanical Structures", of this code.)
J. Screening Of Storage And Loading Areas: If allowed, all outdoor storage areas must be located and screened according to the applicable base zone
provisions of title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. All outdoor storage areas and loading/unloading service areas with delivery facilities, including bay
doors or docks, which face or are visible from residential district and the Iowa River shall be screened to a height of no less than six feet (6') and must
meet all screening standards specified in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code, for outdoor storage and loading areas.
K. Parking Areas: Any parking areas or vehicle storage area designed or intended for use by more than four (4) vehicles located adjacent to any street
shall be separated and screened from such street by a curbed, planted area as specified in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code.
L. Sensitive Areas: All sensitive areas development plans must comply with the applicable provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And
Features", of this code.
M. Compliance With City, State, And Federal Regulations: Site plans shall comply with all applicable city, state, and federal regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
Chapter 4
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
18-4-1: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:
No person shall undertake or carry out any activity or use, including any building demolition, grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating or tree
removal, for which site plan approval is first required by this title, nor shall such activity proceed prior to obtaining the necessary permits, including local,
county, state and federal permits. Any violation of this section is subject to fines and penalties described in section 18-4-3 of this chapter for each day of
the violation, from the day of discovery of the incident until an approved restoration plan or an approved site plan is granted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
18-4-2: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
A. The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure completion of improvements connected with a proposed use as required by this title, including,
but not limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage, fences, screens, walls and landscaping.
B. "Performance guarantee" shall mean a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable standby letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of the
improvements, to be determined by the applicant and verified by the city.
C. Upon issuance of a building permit, the city may require a performance guarantee.
D. When a performance guarantee is required, there shall also be provided a prescribed period of time within which improvements must be completed.
E. Where a performance guarantee is not required upon issuance of a building permit and the improvements cannot be completed prior to occupancy or
commencement of a use, the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and require the applicant to deposit a performance
guarantee as set forth in this section.
F. Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements for which the performance guarantee is required, as determined by the city, the city shall return the
performance guarantee to the applicant.
G. In the event that the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which a performance guarantee is required or fails to complete the
improvements within the time prescribed by the city, the city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to use the performance guarantee deposited,
together with any interest earned thereon, to complete the improvements through contract or otherwise. This includes the specific right to enter upon
the subject property to make the improvements. If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the city to complete the improvements for which
the guarantee was posted, the applicant shall be required to pay the city the amount by which the cost of completing the improvements exceeds the
amount of the performance guarantee deposited. Should the city use the performance guarantee or a portion thereof to complete the required
improvements, any amounts remaining after completion shall be applied first to the city's administrative costs in completing the improvements, with any
balance remaining being refunded to the applicant. At the time the performance guarantee is deposited, the applicant shall enter into a written
agreement with the city, which incorporates the performance guarantee requirements set forth in this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
18-4-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=953 715/715